Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adoption of Code by Board of Health — See
Ch. 188.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Rochelle
Park of a general and permanent nature, adopted by the Township
Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park, as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp.
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 185, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Township of Rochelle Park,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall be in full force and effect
in accordance with the applicable provisions of law.
§ 1-4. Copy of the Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Rochelle Park by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as
provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office
of the Clerk of the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to
examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Rochelle
Park" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Rochelle Park, pursuant to law, shall cause
to be published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Township
Committee, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
Rochelle Park to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of
this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than
$500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
§ 1-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 1-11
1:4
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to May 20, 1985.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provisions, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
K. Any ordinance creating positions of employment with the Township
and/or establishing the amount and manner of payment of salaries or
compensation of officers and employees and providing for employee
vacations and leaves.
L. Any ordinance regulating traffic or parking in the Township.
M. Any ordinance amending the Zoning Map of the Township of Rochelle
Park.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Committee that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance
(chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code).1
1. Editor's Note: See Ord. No. 519 on file in the Clerk's office for an enumeration of the
changes, amendments and revisions.
§ 1-13 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
General Penalty
[Adopted 10-21-2009 by Ord. No. 1013-09]
§ 1-15. Maximum penalty. [Amended 3-21-2012 by Ord. No.
1048-12]
For violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, any other chapter
of this Code or any other ordinances of the Township of Rochelle Park,
where no specific penalties are otherwise provided regarding the section
violated, the maximum penalty, upon conviction, shall be a fine not to
exceed $2,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-16. Housing or Zoning Code violations.
Notwithstanding the increase in maximum penalty as set forth in § 1-15
above, for violations of Housing or Zoning Codes, a thirty-day period in
which the owner shall be afforded the opportunity to cure or abate the
condition shall be provided, and the owner shall also be provided an
opportunity for a hearing before the court concerning the violation. This
thirty-day period to cure or abate the violation shall be provided prior to
the imposition of a fine which exceeds $1,250. Subsequent to the expiration
of the thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be imposed if the
court has not determined otherwise or, upon reinspection of the property, it
is determined that the abatement has not been substantially completed.
§ 1-17. Separate violations.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of the Code of the Township of Rochelle Park or any other
ordinance of the Township exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-18. Applicability.
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state or
mandate an appropriate penalty for each and every violation. The exact
penalty to be imposed shall be established within the sound discretion of
the Court or other municipal agency.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-18
1:7
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel — See Ch. 27.
§ 4-1. Position created.
Pursuant to Chapter 367 of the Laws of 1968,2 there is hereby created the
position of Township Administrator.
§ 4-2. Appointment; service. [Amended 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 620]
The Township Administrator shall be appointed by and shall serve at the
pleasure of the Township Committee; and in all of his duties and
responsibilities hereinafter described, he shall serve under the direction of
the Township Committee. The Township Committee, in its discretion, shall
enter into a written agreement for a period not to exceed three years with
the Township Administrator.
§ 4-3. Removal; severance pay. [Amended 10-15-1991 by Ord. No.
620]
The Township Administrator may be removed, with or without cause, by
a two-thirds vote of the Township Committee, pursuant to state law. The
resolution of removal shall become effective three months after its adoption;
provided, however, that the Township Committee may provide that removal
shall have immediate effect. In such event, the Township Committee shall
cause to be paid to the Administrator, forthwith, any unpaid balances of his
salary and his salary for the next three calendar months following adoption
of the resolution. In the event that a resolution of removal is adopted prior
to April 1 of any calendar year, the Township Committee shall cause to be
paid to the Township Administrator the unpaid balance of his salary for an
additional six months following the adoption of the resolution.
§ 4-4. Qualifications.
The Township Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of his executive
and administrative abilities and qualifications, with special regard to
education, training and experience in governmental affairs.
§ 4-5. Residency not required.
The Township Administrator need not be a resident of the Township of
Rochelle Park.
2. Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136.
§ 1-18 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 4-6
4:8
§ 4-6. Chief administrative officer.
The Township Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of
the Township of Rochelle Park and shall be responsible to the Township
Committee for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the
township. The Township Administrator shall be responsible for the general
management of all township business, excepting therefrom those duties and
responsibilities conferred upon other officials by law.
§ 4-7. Supervision of departments.
The Township Administrator shall supervise and direct the affairs of all
departments, including centralized purchasing, insurance and other
services, and the employment and replacement of personnel as may be
required in all departments.
§ 4-8. Personnel officer.
The Township Administrator shall serve as personnel officer of the township
and shall be responsible for enforcement of the personnel policy of the
township.
§ 4-9. Preparation of budget.
The Township Administrator shall prepare and submit to the Township
Committee, on or about February 1 of each year, a proposed budget for the
next fiscal year, together with an explanatory budget message. In preparing
the proposed budget, the Administrator shall obtain from the head of each
department, agency, board or officer estimates of revenues and
expenditures and such other data as may be required for the preparation of
the budget.
§ 4-10. Administration of budget.
The Township Administrator shall be responsible for the administration
of the budget after its adoption by the Township Committee and
implementation of any work programs contained in the budget.
§ 4-11. Execution and enforcement of laws.
The Township Administrator shall execute and enforce the laws of the State
of New Jersey and ordinances and resolutions of the Township of Rochelle
Park in such manner as the Township Committee may prescribe.
§ 4-12. Attendance at meetings.
The Township Administrator shall attend all meetings of the Township
Committee and such other meetings as may be assigned, from time to time,
by the Township Committee.
§ 4-6 ADMINISTRATOR § 4-13
4:9
§ 4-13. Liaison between Township Committee and other bodies.
The Township Administrator shall keep the Township Committee fully
informed as to activities of all boards, commissions and committees.
§ 4-14. Reports and recommendations.
The Township Administrator shall keep the Township Committee informed
as to the conduct of township affairs and shall submit regular reports as
the Township Committee shall request. The Township Administrator shall
make such recommendations to the Township Committee as are deemed
necessary and advisable for the general welfare of the township.
§ 4-15. Supervision of consultants.
The Township Administrator shall supervise the work of consultants
retained by the Township Committee, such as the Township Engineer,
planning consultants and others, and shall keep the Township Committee
fully informed as to the work of such consultants.
§ 4-16. Supervision of contracts.
The Township Administrator shall attend to the letting of contracts and
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same, except
insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some other township
officer by statute.
§ 4-17. Collection of moneys owed to township.
The Township Administrator shall see that all moneys owed to the township
are promptly paid and that proper proceedings are taken for the security
and collection of all the township's claims, except for the collection of taxes
or other fees as required by law.
§ 4-18. Resident complaints.
All resident complaints regarding services or personnel of the township
shall ultimately be referred to the Township Administrator. The Township
Administrator, or an officer designated by the Township Administrator, shall
investigate and dispose of such complaints. A written record of any such
complaints and the action taken in response thereto shall be maintained,
and monthly reports shall be given to the Township Committee.
§ 4-19. Supervision of administrative functions.
The Township Administrator shall have the authority and responsibility to
supervise the administrative functions, but not the professional operation,
of all departments of the government of the township. The Township
Administrator shall report to the Commissioner of each such department
and to the Township Committee. The Commissioner of each department
§ 4-13 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 4-19
4:10
shall disseminate orders and/or policy decisions of the Township Committee
to the Township Administrator.
§ 4-20. Release of official information.
The Township Administrator shall be responsible for the compiling, editing,
dissemination and release of official information concerning the township.
§ 4-21. Liaison with other municipalities and agencies; advisor
regarding aid programs.
The Township Administrator shall act as a liaison with other municipalities
and county, state and federal agencies and shall advise the Township
Committee of all aid programs available and advantageous to the township.
§ 4-22. Role of Township Committee.
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Township Committee shall deal with
the administrative service solely through the Township Administrator, and
neither the Township Committee nor any of its committees shall give orders,
publicly or privately, to any subordinates of the Township Administrator.
§ 4-23. Outside employment prohibited. [Amended 10-15-1991 by
Ord. No. 620]
The Township Administrator shall devote his or her entire time and effort
to the performance of his or her duties and functions and shall not engage
in any other occupation or employment while employed by the Township of
Rochelle Park. Nothing herein shall prevent the Administrator from being
appointed Township Treasurer or Acting Treasurer. Outside occupations are
prohibited unless the Township Committee consents to allow such work
to be performed by the Administrator. It is understood that said outside
activities by the Administrator shall be outside the normal working hours
and shall not interfere with his or her obligations to the Township of
Rochelle Park.
Chapter 7
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 7-1. Court established.
A Municipal Court for the Township of Rochelle Park, Bergen County, New
Jersey, is established as of January 1, 1949, pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as amended and supplemented.3
3. Editor's Note: Said provisions, included in the statutes as N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq., were
repealed by L. 1993, c. 293, § 6, effective 2-15-1994. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 4-19 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 7-2
7:11
§ 7-2. Name of Court.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the
Township of Rochelle Park, Bergen County, New Jersey."
§ 7-3. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear the impress of the
name of the Court.
§ 7-4. Judge of the Municipal Court; term.
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall be appointed by the
governing body of the Township of Rochelle Park and who shall serve for a
term of three years from the date of his appointment and until his successor
is appointed and qualified.
§ 7-5. Compensation of Judge.
The Judge shall receive an annual salary to be fixed by ordinance4 and to
be paid in the same manner as the salaries of other municipal officers are
paid, and which shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and any other allowances
whatsoever.
§ 7-6. Powers, duties and jurisdiction of Court.
The said Municipal Court and the Judge thereof shall have, possess and
exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred by
the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as amended and
supplemented, or by any other law.5
§ 7-7. Administrator. [Amended 2-21-1996 by Ord. No. 714]
A. There may be an Administrator of the Municipal Court, who shall be
appointed by the governing body of the Township of Rochelle Park and
who shall serve for a term of three years from the date of appointment
and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The Administrator of
the Municipal Court shall receive an annual salary to be fixed by
ordinance6 and to be paid in the same manner as the salaries of other
municipal officers are paid and which shall be in lieu of all fees, costs
and any other allowances whatsoever. They shall perform such
functions and duties as shall be prescribed for them by law, the rules
applicable to municipal courts and by the Judge of the Municipal Court.
4. Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
5. Editor's Note: Said provisions, included in the statutes as N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq., were
repealed by L. 1993, c. 293, § 6, effective 2-15-1994. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 7-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 7-7
7:12
§ 7-8. Sessions of Court. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519;
2-21-1996 by Ord. No. 714]
The Municipal Court shall be held in the Township Hall. The Judge shall
designate days and sessions that Court will be held and the hour at which
the Court will be in session, in coordination with the Administrator of the
Municipal Court and subject to the approval of the Administrative Director
of the Courts.
§ 7-9. Application fee; waiver. [Added 4-19-1995 by Ord. No. 692]
Any person making application for representation by a municipal public
defender shall be required to pay an application fee of $50. The Municipal
Court may waive the required application fee, in whole or in part, if the
Court determines, in its discretion, that the application fee represents
an unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation. The Court
shall consider, but not be limited to, the financial ability of the defendant.
Financial ability shall be recognized to be a variable, depending on the
nature, extent and liquidity of assets and on the disposable net income of
the defendant on hand.
§ 7-10. Public Defender appointed; compensation; application fee.
[Added 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 762-97]
There is hereby appointed a Public Defender of the Municipal Court, who
shall be appointed by the governing body of the Township of Rochelle
Park, who shall serve on an annual basis at the pleasure of the Township
Committee. The Public Defender shall be compensated by ordinance as
established by the governing body. A person seeking representation by a
Public Defender in the Municipal Court shall pay an application fee of up
to $200, with the same being waived by the Municipal Court Judge in
his discretion. All funds collected pursuant to this section will be placed
in a dedicated fund to be used exclusively to meet the costs incurred in
providing a defense.
Chapter 8
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 8-1. Intent.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide for the indemnification
and defense of actions against certain public officials and employees as
described herein.
B. The Township Committee may appoint a Deputy Administrator and/or
other employees to assist the Administrator, as the Township
Committee deems necessary.
§ 7-7 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 8-2
7:13
§ 8-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, the following words and phrases shall be defined as set
forth:
INSURANCE — Coverage afforded by insurance of every kind, whether the
premium is paid by the Township, the municipal official or someone on their
behalf.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL — Any officer or official, employee, Council member,
Mayor, Board member or other individual appointed or hired by the
Township Committee, whether full- or part-time. The terms shall also
include any volunteer serving the Township on the Recreation Commission
or as a coach or assistant on a team organized under the auspices of
the Recreation Commission, member of the Volunteer Fire Department or
member of the Ambulance Corps. The term shall also include any person
elected by the voters to fill any position in the Township or any person
subsequently appointed to fill such position.[Amended 7-21-2004 by Ord.
No. 909-04; 12-16-2015 by Ord. No. 1092-15]
§ 8-3. Provision for defense.
§ 8-4. Exceptions.
The Township shall not be required to provide any defense when the
governing body determines that:
A. The Township shall provide for the defense of any action brought
against a municipal official on account of any act or omission arising out
of or incidental to performance of their duties, and this obligation shall
extend to any complaint, counterclaim, cross claim or cross complaint
against such municipal official, unless exempted by the terms of § 8-4
herein. Defense shall be provided in accordance with the terms of this
chapter so long as the incident which gives rise to the action arose out
of or incidental to performance of their duties regardless or whether
said incident occurred prior to or subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter.
B. The terms and provisions of this chapter shall be subject to any
insurance plan or policy in effect at the time that any claim shall apply
or be asserted. To the extent that any provision of this chapter shall be
at variance with rules, regulations and terms of any plan of insurance
maintained by the Township, said rules, regulations and provisions of
the Township's plan of insurance shall supersede this chapter and shall
be dispositive of any issue concerning the implementation of the
purpose of this chapter.
A. The act or omission was not within the scope or incidental to the duties
of the public official.
§ 8-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 8-4
7:14
§ 8-5. Methods of providing defense.
With exception to § 8-6 of this chapter, which specifically provides for the
appointment of attorneys on behalf of police officers, the Township may
provide any defense required of it under this chapter through the attorney
from its own staff or by employing other counsel. The Township shall in
no event be responsible for the cost of attorney's fees incurred by anyone
unless it shall agree, in writing, to the terms of the representation.
§ 8-6. Method of providing defense on behalf of police officers.
B. The act or failure to act was the result of actual fraud, actual malice,
willful misconduct or an intentional wrong.
C. The defense of the action or proceedings is provided for by an
insurance, whether obtained by the Township or by any other person or
entity.
D. Where the action has been brought by the municipality itself against the
public official or where the action is a criminal proceeding.
E. Where the public official has failed to provide to the Township, within
10 calendar days after the time the public official is served with any
summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading, the original
or a copy thereof.
F. Where the public official has failed to cooperate fully with the defense.
A. The purpose of this section is to provide any Township police officer or
member of the Township's police force named as a defendant in an
action or legal proceedings only if that action or legal proceedings
arises out of and is directly related to the lawful exercise of police
powers in the furtherance of official duties, with the policy adopted by
the Police Department and Township of Rochelle Park, for the provision
of necessary means for the officer's defense of such action or
proceeding.
(1) The Township of Rochelle Park will provide a member or officer of
the Police Department with the necessary means for the defense of
an action or legal proceedings arising out of and directly related to
the lawful exercise of police powers, in furtherance of official
duties.
(2) The Township will not provide the necessary means for defense in a
disciplinary proceeding instituted against the officer by the
municipality or in a criminal proceeding instituted as a result of a
complaint on behalf of the Township. Should such a disciplinary or
criminal proceeding instituted by or on complaint of the Township
be dismissed or finally determined in favor of the member or officer
of the Township's Police Department, that member or officer shall
be reimbursed for his attorney's reasonable fees.
§ 8-4 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 8-6
7:15
B. Procedures.
(1) The officer or member of the Township's Police Department, within
five days of being notified that he or she is a defendant in an action
or legal proceeding, shall advise the Chief of Police.
(2) Upon notification, the Chief of Police will evaluate, or cause an
evaluation to be made, of the complaint's circumstances. This
evaluation will be for the purpose of determining whether the
officer has met the following conditions:
(a) Whether the officer was acting in a manner directly related to
the exercise of police powers;
(b) Whether the officer was acting in the discharge of a duty
imposed or authorized by Law, ordinance or orders; and
(c) Whether the officer was acting in the lawful exercise of his
police powers.
(3) The Chief will advise the officer involved of the following:
(a) The evaluation purpose;
(b) That he may, subject to the limitations stated below, request
that an attorney be appointed to represent him in the action or
legal proceedings by the Township;
(c) That his attorney shall be paid a reasonable legal fee, to be
approved, prior to his appointment, by the Township
Committee;
(d) That the officer does not have an absolute right to counsel of
his own choosing at municipal expense and that the Township
present the officer with a choice of accepting assigned
counselor foregoing the benefit of having the Township provide
him with the necessary means for defense of the action or legal
proceedings;
(e) In the event of a disciplinary proceeding instituted against the
officer by the municipality or any criminal proceedings as a
result of a complaint on behalf of the Township, the Township
will not provide him with an attorney or necessary means for
defense of such disciplinary proceeding or complaint; except
that if the disciplinary proceeding or complaint is dismissed or
finally determined in favor of the officer, that he shall be
reimbursed for his reasonable defense expense;
(f) The officer, if entitled, shall advise the Chief of the name,
address and telephone number of the attorney whom the
officer would request to be appointed by the Township.
§ 8-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 8-6
7:16
§ 8-7. Control over litigation.
Whenever the Township provides any defense required of it under this
chapter, the Township, through counsel, may assume exclusive control over
representation of the municipal official, and such official shall cooperate
fully with the defense.
§ 8-8. Indemnification.
(4) Upon completion of the evaluation, the Chief of Police shall submit
a memorandum to the Township Committee, with a copy to the
Township Administrator and Township Clerk. The memorandum
shall be maintained as a confidential document. The purpose of this
memorandum shall be to report the Chief of Police's evaluation of
the circumstances of the complaint and a determination as to
whether the officer has satisfied the conditions prerequisite to the
Township's providing the necessary means for the officer's defense.
The memorandum shall also include the name and address of the
attorney whose appointment the officer, if entitled, would request
to defend him.
(5) The Township Committee shall reserve the right to accept the
Chief's evaluation, modify it or substitute a different means for
defense of the action or legal proceedings against the affected
officer. In the event that the officer's request for the appointment of
his choice of an attorney is denied, he shall be notified by the Chief
of Police. In that event, the officer shall be advised of the denial and
of the name, address and telephone number of the attorney who
will have been appointed to him by the Township Committee.
(6) For Township ordinance and traffic-related complaints, signed
against an officer, the Chief of Police, upon completion of his
evaluation to determine whether the above stated conditions are
satisfied, is empowered to refer the matter directly to the
Township's Prosecutor, whose duty shall be to provide a defense
against the charges. The Chief of Police will submit a memorandum
of his evaluation and referral to the Township Committee, with a
copy to the Township Administrator and the Township Clerk. The
memorandum will be considered a confidential document.
(7) In the event of any conflict with the terms of this section and any
other part of this chapter, § 8-6 shall be deemed dispositive and
controlling.
A. In any case where the Township is required to provide a defense under
this chapter, the Township shall pay or reimburse the municipal official
for the following:
(1) Any bona fide settlement agreement entered into by the Township
on behalf of the employee; or
§ 8-6 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 8-8
7:17
Chapter 9
EMERGENCY SERVICES VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS
EXEMPTION FROM FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 80. Fees and licenses — See Ch. 100.
§ 9-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this section:
ACTIVE MEMBER — Individuals in volunteer organizations set forth above
who meet the definition of either active member or life member as
established by the bylaws of the voluntary organization as are in effect
on the effective date of this chapter. Honorary members are specifically
excluded from this definition.
FAMILY — An active member, their spouse and all natural or adopted
children under 21 years of age who are unmarried and permanently
occupying the same residence in the Township of Rochelle Park.
FEES — Those charges established by the Township Committee which are
fully retained by the Township of Rochelle Park as revenue. Specifically
excluded is any portion of the fee which is collected by the township on
behalf of another entity, including but not limited to the State of New Jersey,
the County of Bergen or any outside vendor.
VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATION — The Rochelle Park Fire Department and
the Rochelle Park First Aid Squad.
(2) Any judgment entered against the employee.
B. In addition to Subsection A(1) of this section, in any case where the
Township would be required to provide a defense under this chapter,
except for the fact that such defense is provided for by insurance, either
through the Township or the individual, the Township shall provide
indemnification as aforesaid, but only to the extent that liability exists
which is not covered by insurance and is not excepted by the terms of
§ 8-4 of this chapter.
C. In addition to the above Subsection A(1) and (2), the Township shall
indemnify a public official, as defined herein, for exemplary or punitive
damages, provided that, in the opinion of the governing body, the acts
committed by the public official, upon which said damages are based,
did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an
intentional wrong.
§ 8-8 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 9-2
7:18
§ 9-2. Benefits for active members and families.
All active members of the volunteer organizations set forth above and their
families shall be entitled to the following benefits:
§ 9-3. Administration.
A. Exemption from registration fees for Recreation Commission summer
day camp program conducted within the Township of Rochelle Park.
B. Exemption from the municipal portion of the Uniform Construction
Code fees for the issuance of a building permit required in connection
with either the construction of an addition or completion of repairs to
an existing single-family dwelling owned and occupied by an active
member of a volunteer organization.
C. Partial exemption from the municipal portion of the Uniform
Construction Code fees not to exceed a maximum of $500 for the
issuance of a building permit required in connection with the
construction of a new single-family dwelling to be occupied by the
active member of a volunteer organization.
D. Exemption from rental fees for any indoor recreational facilities such as
rental of municipally-owned public facilities, if required, provided that
such rental is for the actual use of the active member or the member's
family.
E. Exemption from miscellaneous fees, licenses and permits, including but
not limited to cat and dog licenses, marriage licenses, certificate of
continued occupancy for any dwelling personally occupied by the active
member, and Board of Adjustment fees required in connection with
applications for either use or bulk variances. [Amended 6-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
A. Prior to January 15 of each calendar year a volunteer organization shall
submit to the Township of Rochelle Park a list of all individuals who
meet the definition for active member status. Such list shall be updated
on a periodic basis by the volunteer organization to add those
individuals who have completed their probationary status or to delete
individuals who have been dropped for their membership or who no
longer meet the criteria for active member status.
B. Each organization shall provide information to the Township Clerk
relating to family status to assist the various municipal officials in the
administration of this chapter in order to be eligible for the benefits
provided in this section.
C. All active members and their family must comply with all registration
procedures and complete all applications established by the Township
of Rochelle Park.
§ 9-2 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 9-4
7:19
§ 9-4. Exclusions.
No exemption shall be allowed for the following fees:
Chapter 10
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use and development — See Ch. 185.
§ 10-1. Continuation; purpose.
§ 10-2. Appointment; qualifications; Chairman.
A. Fees, licenses and permits associated with any for-profit activity.
B. Inclusion in programs when the registration is received after maximum
registration has been reached.
C. Fees and escrows required by either the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment in connection with any site plan or subdivision application.
[Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No.
1038-11]
D. Escrows associated with engineering inspections.
E. Posting of performance guarantees where required or permitted by law.
A. The Commission known as the "Environmental Commission of the
Township of Rochelle Park," heretofore established, is hereby
continued.
B. The Environmental Commission has been established for the
protection, development and use of natural resources, including water
resources, located within the territorial limits of the Township.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the
Mayor and associate members, if in the discretion of the Township
Committee or upon recommendation of the Commission as deemed
reasonable.
B. One of the members shall be a member of the Rochelle Park Planning
Board, and one of the members may be an official of some other board,
body or agency of the Township. All of the members shall serve without
compensation. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
C. Associate members (people who wish to serve as technical advisers)
shall not have a vote and need not be residents of the municipality.
§ 9-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 10-2
7:20
§ 10-3. Term; vacancies; removal from office.
§ 10-4. Duties.
The Environmental Commission shall have the following duties:
D. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman
and presiding officer of the Commission.
A. The full term of office of each Commissioner shall be three years;
provided, however, that the terms of the Commissioners first appointed
pursuant hereto shall be as follows: three members shall be appointed
for one year; two members shall be appointed for two years; and two
members shall be appointed for three years. Thereafter, the successor
of each member shall be appointed for the full term of three years and
until the appointment and qualification of his successor.
B. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by an expiration of a term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
C. The Township Committee may remove any member of the Commission
for cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a
hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in
person or by counsel.
A. To conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land
areas of the Township.
B. To coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes.
C. To advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans
and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for its
purposes, within the limits of funds appropriated to the Commission.
D. To keep an index of all open areas, publicly and privately owned,
including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to
obtain information on the proper use of such areas.
E. To recommend from time to time to the Planning Board plans and
programs for inclusion in the Master Plan of the Township for the
development and use of such areas. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
F. To do such other acts and things as are reasonably related to and
designed to carry out the purposes and objectives of the Commission,
including, without limitation, the payment of such clerks or other
employees as the Commission may from time to time require, within the
limits of the funds appropriated to the Commission.
G. To keep records of the meetings and activities of the Commission and to
make an annual report to the Township Committee.
§ 10-2 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 10-4
7:21
§ 10-5. Acquisitions. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
Subject to the prior approval of the Township Committee after favorable
recommendation by the Planning Board, the Environmental Commission
may acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the Township,
by gift, pledges, grants, bequests, devises or lease, for any of the purposes
of the Commission, and it shall administer the same for such purposes,
subject to the terms of such conveyance or gift. The interest so acquired
may be the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement
(including conservation easement), covenant or other contractual right
(including a conveyance on conditions, or with limitations or reversions), as
may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect limit the future use
of or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land
and water areas in the Township.
Chapter 11
ETHICS, CODE OF
§ 11-1. Statutory applicability.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has enacted the Local
Government Ethics Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq., which is applicable
to all municipalities within this state, including the Township of Rochelle
Park. The Township of Rochelle Park is not desirous of establishing a
Local Ethics Board, and therefore, the Local Finance Board in the Division
of Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs
has jurisdiction, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.5, to govern and guide the
conduct of the Township of Rochelle Park officers or employees regarding
violations of the provisions of the Local Government Ethics Law.
H. After consultation with the Township Committee, to apply for grants
and other sources of financial aid to promote environmental activities,
education, Earth Day events and other purposes related to the duties of
the Commission. [Added 3-25-1992 by Ord. No. 628]
I. After consultation with the Township Committee, to communicate with
other entities, organizations and persons to promote the purposes and
duties of the Environmental Commission, provided that they are issues
that have been studied by the Commission and found to have an impact
on Rochelle Park. [Added 3-25-1992 by Ord. No. 628]
§ 10-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 11-1
11:22
Chapter 12
FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Responsibility of Chief Financial Officer for
investment of funds for Insurance Trust
Fund — See Ch. 19.
§ 12-1. Creation.
It is hereby established in the Township of Rochelle Park, in accordance
with state statute, a position of Chief Financial Officer. Said position is
designated in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1b.
§ 12-2. Appointment and certification.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the entire Township Committee. He shall serve at the
pleasure of the Township Committee, and his appointment shall run from
January 1 to December 31. He shall be required to obtain a certification
from the Director of the Division of Local Government Services pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.2.
§ 12-3. Tenure.
The Chief Financial Officer shall receive tenure pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.8.
§ 12-4. Powers and duties.
A. The Chief Financial Officer shall be the director of his department and
shall perform all the duties pursuant to law.
B. It is understood that the Chief Financial Officer shall perform all the
duties of the Treasurer of the municipality and, in addition thereto,
shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) To organize, develop, direct and perform the work involved in the
management of the financial affairs of the township and control the
receipt and disbursement of moneys.
(2) To supervise and perform professional functions involved in the
analysis and audits of the accounts, vouchers and other records
and prepare statements concerning the financial condition of the
township.
(3) To develop, coordinate and maintain a system of accounting and
financial reporting.
§ 11-1 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 12-4
12:23
(4) To direct and implement necessary computer systems and
programs.
(5) To train personnel in the operation and maintenance of automated
systems.
(6) To report on and interpret financial data with the objective of
promoting economy and efficiency in the execution of programs.
(7) To develop, coordinate and execute financial policies, procedures
and plans.
(8) To develop, coordinate and maintain an integrated system of
financial staff services through synthesis of data and information
flow to provide the necessary financial control for the township.
(9) To confer with and serve as a technical advisor to department
directors on financial problems and other related matters.
(10) To supervise clerical and accounting staffs and assign their duties
and responsibilities.
(11) To prepare, audit and edit reports of costs and other financial
summaries and statements.
(12) To review disbursements and controls to assure adherence to
contractual obligations.
(13) To supervise and maintain essential accounting records and files.
(14) To provide technical and administrative guidance to staff.
(15) To establish internal operating policies and procedures.
(16) To plan projects or programs and recommend changes to existing
operations.
(17) To estimate budgetary needs of the Department and allocate
resources appropriately.
(18) To prepare an annual budget for the Department in accordance
with established procedures and policies.
(19) To forecast anticipated budgetary increases/reductions based upon
an analysis of the township's goals and needs.
(20) To monitor expenditures against allocations to ensure
disbursements do not exceed authorized funding levels and develop
recommended cost containment plans as are necessary to ensure
proper fiscal administration.
(21) To maximize revenues by ensuring proper state/federal
reimbursements.
§ 12-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 12-4
12:24
(22) To develop and maintain a system of accounts consistent with the
policy, procedures and requirements of the township and
applicable state/federal statutes and rules.
(23) To conduct periodic audits and inspections of varied financial
transactions and records.
(24) To prepare required fiscal/statistical reports.
(25) To analyze fiscal/statistical management reports.
(26) To establish and supervise the maintenance of suitable budgetary
controls.
(27) To supervise the operation of the Department's data processing
activities to ensure that input is accurate and that output is
sufficient to provide all needed financial and statistical information.
(28) To supervise and review the accounting procedures used through
the township to ensure that the procedures are uniform and
consistent.
(29) To prepare or direct the preparation of reports required by thirdparty
reimbursement agencies.
(30) To prepare or direct the preparation of reports to governmental
agencies required by law.
(31) To see that municipal financial operations are in accord with all
legal requirements.
(32) To monitor financial reports of all departments to see that they are
in conformity with required procedures and policies.
(33) To perform or direct the performance of cost analyses of
departments and recommend changes based upon established
norms.
(34) To direct the enforcement of delinquent tax payments, as
prescribed by law.
(35) To prepare the annual financial statement, as prescribed by law.
(36) To prepare the annual debt statement according to law.
(37) To prepare the supplement debt statements according to the Local
Bond Law7 and the municipal bond ordinances.
(38) To administer the municipal debt sale of bond application notes and
bonds, as well as the preparation of the necessary financial and
statistical data and the bond sale prospectus.
7. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq.
§ 12-4 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 12-4
12:25
Chapter 14
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
First Aid and Emergency Squad — See Ch. 16.
Police Department — See Ch. 28.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 102.
Respiratory equipment — See Ch. 153.
(39) To develop and maintain an investment program in compliance
with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 12-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 12-4
12:26
ARTICLE I
Organization
§ 14-1. Composition of Department.
The Fire Department of the Township of Rochelle Park shall consist of a
volunteer fire department and a junior auxiliary which has been organized
under the authority and jurisdiction of the Township Committee of the
Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 14-2. Control of Department; title to equipment; Commissioner.
§ 14-3. Board of Fire Officers.
The Board of Fire Officers is hereby established and shall consist of the Fire
Department's Battalion Chiefs, Captains, Lieutenants and the Fire Chief and
Assistant Chief of the Fire Department. The term of office shall commence
January 1 of each year and shall be for a term of one year.
§ 14-4. Annual meeting of Department.
The Fire Department shall hold an annual meeting on the second Tuesday
of November of each year.
A. The Township Committee shall have full charge and control over the
Fire Department, and title to all of the fire equipment shall vest in the
Township of Rochelle Park.
B. The Township Committee shall choose one of its members to act on
behalf of the Township Committee, who shall be known as the "Fire
Commissioner." He may establish such rules and regulations as shall
effectuate the purposes of this chapter, but this power shall not in any
way prevent the Board of Fire Officers from establishing rules,
regulations and bylaws; provided, however, that such rules are not
inconsistent with this chapter or with the rules established by the Fire
Commissioner. Any and all rules, regulations and bylaws established by
the Board of Fire Officers shall not be suspended, amended or
promulgated without the consent of the Fire Commissioner.
C. The Chief shall render a report to the Township Committee monthly,
beginning on the first day of January. Such report shall contain a record
of all fires attended by the Fire Department during the preceding month
and such other information as may be required or requested by the
Township Committee.
D. The Chief and the Assistant Chief shall, subject to availability and
subject to approval of the Township Administrator and Township
Committee, have the use of a vehicle.
§ 14-1 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 14-4
12:27

ARTICLE II
Membership
§ 14-5. Classes of members.
There shall be three classes of membership in the Department: active,
active life and inactive.
§ 14-6. Qualifications of members.
A. An active member is one who has attended a minimum of 50% of
required fire duty as prescribed pursuant to this chapter.
B. An active life member is one who has served 25 years as an active
member and who maintains his residence in the Township of Rochelle
Park and performs at least 50% of fire duty as prescribed pursuant to
this chapter.
C. An inactive member is one who becomes incapacitated pursuant to this
chapter or reaches the age of 62 years, provided that he has been a
member for a minimum of seven years.
A. Qualifications of membership are as follows:
(1) At the time of his appointment, each member shall be at least 18
years of age.
(2) An applicant shall be physically fit and sound of mind as certified by
a licensed physician of the State of New Jersey. An allowance in the
maximum amount of $100 shall be authorized by the Township of
Rochelle Park for said examination, after successful completion of
his/her probationary period.
(3) An applicant must be a citizen of the United States of America.
(4) An applicant must be a resident of Rochelle Park or reside within
two miles of the Township at the time of his appointment.
(5) An applicant shall be of good moral character and shall not have
been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude which would,
in the judgment of the Township Committee, be prejudicial to the
morals of the Fire Department.
(6) An applicant must meet any other qualifications as may be
prescribed from time to time pursuant to this chapter.
(7) An applicant must comply with the requirements of the Code of the
Township of Rochelle Park by successfully completing a police
background check in accordance with the requirements of that
provision of the Township Code. Results of the background check
shall be submitted, by the Township Administrator, to the Board of
Fire Officers, which shall consider the same as part of an
§ 14-5 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 14-6
12:29
§ 14-7. Applications for membership.
All applications for membership in the Rochelle Park Fire Department shall
be presented to the Board of Fire Officers of the Fire Department.
application for new membership and as part of a requirement for
continued membership in the Fire Department.
B. An applicant who is a member in good standing of a Fire Department
which was under municipal control in any other municipality of the
State of New Jersey may become a member of the Rochelle Park Fire
Department, provided that he meets all of the qualifications of
membership.
C. Auxiliary members.
(1) Any applicant who applies as an auxiliary member must work in
Rochelle Park, regardless of his residence.
(2) He must have prior Fire Department experience, including New
Jersey Level 1 Firefighter Certification.
(3) The limit on auxiliary members at any one time is 10.
(4) He shall be entitled to 1/2 the clothing allowance allowed to fulltime
active members.
(5) Auxiliary members shall not be allowed to hold any office of the
Fire Department.
(6) Auxiliary members shall not have any voting authority in the Fire
Department.
(7) Auxiliary members will respond to fire calls only during their
assigned hours of work in Rochelle Park or as needed by the Chief
of the Department.
A. An applicant shall be accepted only by the Board of Fire Officers of the
Fire Department. Acceptance shall be certified by the Secretary to the
Township Committee, which acceptance shall be subject to the approval
of the Township Committee.
(1) The admission of such applicant to the Fire Department shall be for
a temporary period of one year. At the expiration of the temporary
one-year period and the completion of the New Jersey Level 1
Firefighter Certification, the applicant shall be admitted to full
membership of the Fire Department upon recommendation of the
majority of the members of the officers, subject, however, to the
approval and confirmation by the Township Committee.
B. A rejected applicant may appeal to the Township Committee within 30
days after notice of rejection by filing with the Township Committee and
the Board of Fire Officers a written notice of his appeal and a request
§ 14-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 14-7
12:30
§ 14-8. Exempt certification.
Every fireman who shall present satisfactory evidence to the New Jersey
State Exempt Association that he has attended at least 50% of the calls
occurring in the Township of Rochelle Park and that he has served the
Township seven years as an active fireman shall be entitled to a certificate
signed by the Chairman of the Township Committee, the Township Clerk
and the Fire Chief, together with a badge of such status.
§ 14-9. Leaves of absence.
§ 14-10. Resignations from Department; removal from Township.
for a date for hearing of same. The Township Committee shall hear the
appeal on the date fixed by it and shall give a representative of the
Board of Fire Officers an opportunity to present the Board's reasons
for rejection. The Township Committee shall determine whether or not
the applicant shall be admitted to membership, and its decision shall be
final.
A. Any member of the Rochelle Park Fire Department may, upon written
request of the Board of Fire Officers and the Township Committee,
receive a six-month leave of absence, subject to the approval of the
Board of Fire Officers.
B. This leave may be extended for another six-month period, subject to
another written request to the above-mentioned bodies, which leave is
subject to the approval of the Board of Fire Officers.
C. No leave of absence will be granted for more than 12 consecutive
months.
A. Any member of the Fire Department wishing to resign shall file a
resignation with the Board of Fire Officers, who in turn will notify the
Township Committee.
B. Active members who move out of Rochelle Park within two miles may be
allowed to stay active in the Fire Department, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Any member moving from the Township or ceasing to be a resident
of the same, if further than two miles, shall, upon failure to file a
resignation within 90 days, be dropped from the Fire Department
and his company
§ 14-7 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 14-10
12:31

ARTICLE III
Officers
§ 14-11. Annual election of officers.
Members shall, at the annual meeting of the Fire Department, elect the
following officers, who shall hold office for a term of one year commencing
on the first day of January or until their successors are elected and qualify.
The election of these officers shall be subject to the confirmation and
approval of the Township Committee, and their election shall be certified to
the Township Committee.
A. Qualifications to be accepted as a candidate for Officer in the Rochelle
Park Volunteer Fire Department:
(1) Any person promoted, assigned, assumed or elected to any fire
service position of which include the management of emergency
operations must have obtained, at a minimum, Incident
Management Level 1 Certification issued by the State of New
Jersey Division of Fire Safety.
(a) In order to qualify for Incident Management Level
Certification, a person must meet the following requirements:
[1] Have obtained Firefighter 1 Certification issued by the
New Jersey Division of Fire Safety;
[2] Have three years of documented experience in the fire
service. (This means three years as a firefighter and does
not include time spent in an Explorer post or Junior
Firefighter program);
[3] Attended a twelve-hour classroom-based Basis Incident
Management Course (1-200) offered or approved by the
New Jersey Division of Fire Safety.
B. Fire Chief.
(1) To qualify for election to the office of Fire Chief, a member must
previously have served as an Assistant Fire Chief, or Fire Chief of
the Rochelle Park Volunteer Fire Department.
(2) A Fire Chief may serve for a total of two consecutive terms only.
(3) The Fire Chief, together with the Assistant Fire Chief, shall have
control over the Fire Department, subject to the control of the Fire
Commissioner.
C. Assistant Fire Chief.
(1) To qualify for election to the office of Assistant Fire Chief, a
member must have served a term of one year as a Battalion Chief of
the Rochelle Park Fire Department.
§ 14-11 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 14-12
12:33
§ 14-12. Advisory vote on Custodian of Fire Records and Chaplain.
Members of the Fire Department shall, at the annual meeting of the Fire
Department, vote on the recommendation to the Township Committee of
the following officers. Said recommendations shall not be binding on the
Township Committee, as it is the appointing body of these officers who shall
hold office for a period of one year commencing on the first day of January
next preceding their appointment or until their successors are appointed.
§ 14-13. (Reserved)
§ 14-14. Procedure upon rejection of election or recommendation.
A. Custodian of Fire Records.
(1) The Custodian shall hold his office at the pleasure of the Township
Committee.
(2) He shall have control, supervision and custody of all records of the
Fire Department and of the members thereof. The aforesaid
records shall be the property of the Township of Rochelle Park, and,
upon the expiration of his term of office, shall be surrendered to his
successor or to the Township Clerk, as the Township Committee
may direct.
(3) He shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by
the Fire Commissioner, subject to the ultimate control of the
Township Committee.
(4) He shall receive an annual salary as established by the Salary
Ordinance of the Township of Rochelle Park.
B. Chaplain. He shall perform the usual duties commensurate with this
office.
A. In the event that the Township Committee rejects the elected officer, a
special meeting of the Fire Department shall be called by the Fire
Commissioner not later than two weeks after said rejection, and all fire
companies shall be notified. The name of the officer or officers elected
or recommended at the second election shall be submitted to the
Township Committee for its confirmation or rejection.
B. In the event of rejection by the Township Committee of the election of
any officer or recommendation for appointment of any officer, the Fire
Commissioner may request a meeting with the Township Committee
and the Board of Fire Officers to reexamine the rejection.
C. In the event that the Township Committee rejects the second election or
recommendation, the Fire Commissioner shall call a second meeting in
the manner herein prescribed until the Township Committee shall have
confirmed and approved the election or recommendation of such officer.
§ 14-12 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 14-14
12:34
D. In the event of such rejection, the Township Committee shall report the
reasons for the rejection to the Department.
§ 14-14 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 14-14
12:35

ARTICLE IV
Fire Companies
§ 14-15. Limited number of members.
The membership of the Fire Department now existent or hereafter
organized shall be limited to 60 active members.
§ 14-16. Annual meetings.
The Fire Department shall conduct its annual meeting at the time provided
for in its bylaws.
§ 14-17. Election of officers; duties.
A. Members of the Fire Department shall, by majority vote, elect the
following officers, which officers shall hold office for a term of one year
commencing on the first day of January following their election or until
their successors take office. The election of all officers shall be subject
to the approval and confirmation of the Township Committee.
(1) Battalion Chief.
(a) The Battalion Chief shall have charge of his company and its
apparatus at all fires, subject to the command of his superior
officer.
(b) He shall see that apparatus and headquarters are kept clean
and respectable.
(c) He shall make a report to the Fire Chief of all services
rendered by his company in response to alarms.
(d) He shall record for this purpose the names of the members
responding to roll call upon arrival at headquarters.
(e) The Battalion Chief shall be subordinate to the command of the
Assistant Chief.
(f) To be elected Battalion Chief, a member must have been
elected to the office of Captain and held such office for one
term. The office need not have been held immediately
preceding election to a higher rank.
(2) Captain.
(a) To be elected Captain, a member must have been elected to the
office of Lieutenant and held such office for one term. The
office need not have been held immediately preceding election
to a higher rank.
(b) He shall assist the Battalion Chief in submitting a report to the
Fire Chief of all services rendered by their company.
§ 14-15 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 14-17
12:37
§ 14-18. Certification of results of election; rejections.
(c) He shall be subordinate to the command of the Battalion Chief.
(3) Lieutenant.
(a) He shall assist the Battalion Chief and Captain in the
submission of the aforementioned report.
(b) He shall be subordinate to the command of the Captain.
(4) Secretary. He shall perform the usual duties commensurate with
this office.
B. The Fire Department may create other offices as it may require;
provided, however, that the office, its term and the manner of election
are regulated by the bylaws of the Fire Department and this chapter.
C. No member of the Fire Department shall be eligible for election to any
office unless he has been a member of the Fire Department for three
years and has attended 50% of the required fire duty pursuant to this
chapter one year and 11 months preceding his election.
D. No person shall be promoted, assume or be assigned any fire service
position, the duties of which include the management of emergency
operations, unless that person has satisfied the following requirements:
(1) Has obtained Firefighter 1 Certification issued by the Division of
Fire Safety.
(2) Has three years of documented experience in the fire service. This
shall require three years as a firefighter and shall not include time
spent in an Explorer or Junior Firefighter program.
(3) Has attended a twelve-hour Basic Incident Management Course
offered by or approved by the Division of Fire Safety.
A. The Fire Department shall certify to the Township Committee at its next
regular meeting the results of any election held, and the election shall
be subject to the confirmation or rejection by the Township Committee.
B. In the event of rejection by the Township Committee, a second election
shall be held by the Fire Department at its next regular meeting. The
name of the officer or officers elected at the second election shall be
submitted to the Township Committee for its confirmation or rejection.
Should the Township Committee reject the second officer elected,
subsequent elections shall be held in the manner hereinabove
prescribed until the Township Committee confirms and approves an
officer or officers.
§ 14-17 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 14-18
12:38
ARTICLE V
Management
§ 14-19. Command of Department.
The conduct of the Fire Department on active duty shall be as follows; The
Chief shall be in command at all times after the apparatus leaves the fire
headquarters, and, in his absence, command shall fall to the highest ranking
officer until his superior arrives.
§ 14-20. Annual inspection.
The Township Committee shall make an annual inspection of the Fire
Department on the second Tuesday of October or at such times as it shall
specify. All members of the Department shall be present with personal
equipment owned by the Township unless specifically excused by the Fire
Chief. The reason for any absence shall be brought to the attention of the
Township Committee.
§ 14-21. Aid to other municipalities.
In the event of an emergency in another municipality, the Fire
Commissioner, the Chief or the Assistant Fire Chief shall have the power
to direct any fire company or companies to respond to an out-of-town fire
alarm for the purpose of assisting in the protection and preservation of life
or property when so requested by the proper officials of the municipality
seeking aid.
§ 14-22. Disciplinary action against members.
A. Disciplinary action. Department members regardless of rank, shall be
subject to disciplinary action according to the nature or the aggravation
of the offense for violating the Department rules and/or regulations; for
committing an offense punishable under the laws or statutes of the
United States, the State of New Jersey or municipal ordinances; or for
failure, either willfully or through negligence or incompetence, to obey
any lawful instruction of a superior officer. Disciplinary action, in all
cases, will be decided on the merits of each case and in conformity with
the Department rules and regulations.
B. Procedures for filing charges.
(1) Recommendations for charges against a member shall be
presented in writing to a Department officer (on forms provided by
the Department) within 10 days of knowledge of the incident. The
charges shall be followed by specifications including an
approximate time, date, location, witnesses, and all information
pertinent to the charges. NOTE: THE FORM MUST BE SIGNED BY
THE PERSON BRINGING THE CHARGES OR THE FORM WILL BE
CONSIDERED INVALID. All charges and allegations will be heard
using a hearing format.
§ 14-19 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 14-22
12:39
(2) Upon the filing of an appeal by the affected Fire Department
member, any suspension or other disciplinary action imposed shall
be stayed until such time as there is a final disposition of the
appeal. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, such disciplinary
action should not be stayed if the Township Administrator, in his
sole discretion, feels that it would not be in the best interests of the
Fire Department and the Township to stay such disciplinary action
pending final disposition.
C. Hearing and prosecutions. In all matters, the Board of Fire Officers
shall hold the hearing with the Chief of Department, or Assistant Chief
of Department serving as Chairman; the hearing will start within 10
workdays of the return receipt of the certified mailing or within the first
available date since the event occurred. In this time frame, the
Chairman shall notify the accused with a written copy of the complaint
delivered via certified mail. At that time, the Chairman will notify
witnesses and participants as to the date and time in which the hearing
will commence. Each side may request one postponement for up to a
maximum of 30 business days. A minimum of five officers must be
present to convene the hearings. The Department secretary or Junior
Lieutenant shall keep correct minutes at all proceedings. Should the
defendant plead guilty to the charges, the Board shall set penalties to
commence immediately. Should a member demonstrate willful intent to
inhibit the progress of the Board in any way, he/she shall be considered
to be in contempt of the Fire Department. The Board, at this time, may
vote for the member's dismissal from the Department.
(1) In the event that the Chief of Department is the recipient of said
charges, the next highest ranking Fire Officer, up until the rank of
Battalion Chief, will assume the responsibilities as Chairman of the
Board. If all options have been exhausted, then the most recent Ex-
Chief will assume the responsibilities as Chairman of the Board.
D. Appeals.
(1) In all cases, the accused may, within 10 business days, appeal the
decision rendered by the Board. NOTE: THE APPEAL MUST BE IN
WRITING. The letter requesting such an appeal must state the
reasons why the defendant feels an appeal is warranted. The
appeals board will be made up of five active Ex-Chiefs, with the last
Ex-Chief, in descending order, acting as Chairman of the Board. An
active Ex-Chief of the Department shall be in good standing with
the Rochelle Park Fire Department. No member of the hearing
board shall serve on the appeals board. In the event there is an
insufficient amount of Ex-Chiefs to form an appeals board, the most
senior active firefighter (in descending order) shall serve on the
board. No member shall serve on the appeals boards where a
conflict of interest is in the obvious. Should there be evidence of
impropriety or misconduct, in the above proceedings, the hearing
board shall retain the right to appeal the decision of the appeals
board to the Township Committee.
§ 14-22 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 14-22
12:40
(2) The Chairman of the appeals committee shall appoint a secretary,
who shall keep accurate minutes of all proceedings. Said minutes
shall be retained indefinitely with the personnel file of the member.
(3) The appeals board retains the right to uphold, adjust, and/or
dismiss the decision of the hearing board. The Chairman of the
appeals board shall notify, in writing, the Chairman of the hearing
board, the defendant and complainant outlining the results of the
proceedings, and the reasons for the decision. In the event the
appeals board upholds or adjusts the decision of the hearing board,
such decision shall be placed within the accused member's
personnel file. In the event that the board rules in favor of the
defendant, all records of the proceedings shall be removed from
the defendant's personnel file and he/she shall be awarded all
credits based upon his/her average percentage for the six-month
period prior to the event in question.
(4) After exhausting the above procedures, the defendant has the right
to make an appeal to the Township Committee of the Township of
Rochelle Park.
(5) Such appeal must be filed, in writing, with the Township
Committee, with a copy to the Township Attorney and Township
Administrator within 10 days of receipt of the decision of the
Appeals Board. If no appeal is timely filed, the discipline previously
imposed shall be deemed final and not subject to appeal.
E. Penalties.
(1) The following penalties may be assessed against any member of the
Rochelle Park Fire Department as disciplinary action:
(a) Written reprimand.
(b) Suspension.
(c) Demotion.
(d) Removal from the Rochelle Park Fire Department.
(2) The following is a list of assorted fire-matic charges and their
penalties:
(a) Insubordination.
[1] First offense: reprimand to removal.
[2] Second offense: thirty-day suspension to removal.
[3] Third offense: ninety-day suspension to removal.
(b) Failure to comply with general orders/Department regulations.
[1] First offense: reprimand to removal.
§ 14-22 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 14-22
12:41
§ 14-23. Compensation for fire duty; inactive members.
Members of the Fire Department who have performed 50% of their required
fire duty prior to November 1 shall be compensated as provided in the
Salary Ordinance of the Township.
[2] Second offense: thirty-day suspension to removal.
[3] Third offense: ninety-day suspension to removal.
(c) Conduct unbecoming of a firefighter.
[1] First offense: reprimand to removal.
[2] Second offense: thirty-day suspension to removal.
[3] Third offense: ninety-day suspension to removal.
F. Filing charges.8
A. Any active fireman may become an inactive member of the Fire
Department after having served 25 years as an active fireman,
regardless of age, and shall receive compensation according to the
following:
(1) For 25 years of active service, he shall receive full annual
compensation. Such an inactive member, upon application to the
Commissioner through the Board of Fire Officers, shall have the
same rights and privileges as any active member, except that he
shall neither perform the duties of an active member nor serve as
or vote for any officers of the Fire Department. Said inactive
members, wishing to resign, shall file a resignation with the Fire
Commissioner through the Fire Department Board of Officers, who
in turn shall notify the Township Committee.
B. Any member in good standing of the Fire Department who is
permanently unable to perform fire duties by reason of injury sustained
when performing fire duties shall, upon certification by the Township
Physician that such injury is permanent, be entitled to compensation, to
be set by the governing body.
C. Any active member who has completed 25 years of active service and
wishes to remain an active member shall receive his full annual
compensation, provided that he has performed 40% of the regular fire
duty prior to November 1 of any given year.
D. Any active member who has become incapacitated and, upon being
examined by the Fire Department Physician, is found to be unable to
perform active duty, may become an inactive member and shall receive
the following compensation, provided that such member remains a
resident of Rochelle Park.
8. Editor's Note: The related form is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 14-22 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 14-23
12:42
(1) Fifteen years' active duty: 1/2 of his annual compensation.
(2) Twenty years' active duty: 3/4 of his annual compensation.
(3) Twenty-five years' active duty: his full annual compensation.
§ 14-23 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 14-23
12:43

ARTICLE VI
Junior Firefighters Program
§ 14-24. Establishment.
It is hereby established the Junior Firefighters Auxiliary.
§ 14-25. Eligibility for membership.
No person shall be eligible for membership in the Junior Firefighters
Program in Rochelle Park unless he is more than 16 years of age and less
than 18 years of age. All persons shall be required to obtain permission to
join the program from their parents or guardians. Such permission shall be
in writing and acknowledged by a notary public of the State of New Jersey.
§ 14-26. Insurance coverage.
Insurance coverage will be provided to the members of the Junior
Firefighters Program pursuant to the self-insurance fund of the Township of
Rochelle Park. Coverage shall be limited to the provisions of the insurance
endorsement which will be available at the Township Administrator's office.
§ 14-27. Rules and regulations governing activities of junior
firefighters; age requirement.
§ 14-28. Additional departmental authority.
In addition to the authority granted to the Fire Department and its Board
of Fire Officers in other sections of this chapter, the Rochelle Park Fire
Department shall have the right to:
A. The Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park authorizes
the Rochelle Park Fire Department to establish rules and regulations
governing the activities of the junior firefighters. Said rules and
regulations shall provide for the training of the prospective members
for eventual membership in the Volunteer Fire Department of Rochelle
Park, which regulations shall further provide that no junior firefighter
shall be required to perform duties which would expose him to the same
degree of hazard as a regular member of the Township's Fire
Department.
B. In addition to the above relating to junior firefighters, the Township of
Rochelle Park shall require that the minimum age for the junior
program of the firefighters shall be 16 years.
A. Adopt appropriate training guidelines for all firefighters within the
Department including, without being limited to the following:
(1) Firefighter 1.
(a) Vehicle extrication training.
§ 14-24 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 14-28
12:45
(b) Blood-borne pathogen training.
(c) Driver's training.
(d) Mask fit and respiratory protection review.
B. Adopt rules, regulations and requirements for implementation and
management of the Junior Firefighter Program.
§ 14-28 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 14-28
12:46
Chapter 16
FIRST AID AND EMERGENCY SQUAD
§ 16-1. Establishment.
The Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park deems it vital
to the public interest to establish a First Aid and Emergency Squad for the
general health and welfare of the community and the Township in particular.
§ 16-2. Purpose.
The Squad shall, in emergencies and when called upon, render ambulance
and first-aid service in accordance with this chapter and with all applicable
federal and state statutes, rules and regulations and in accordance with all
bylaws, rules and regulations established hereunder.
§ 16-3. Code of ethics.
The conduct of each member of this organization shall be such as to bring
credit to the Squad, and each member shall carefully avoid any action or
deed, on or off duty, which would bring discredit to this organization or
other members of the organization. Any breach of this code shall be dealt
with according to the disciplinary rules contained in this chapter.
§ 16-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMISSIONER — The member of the Committee of the Township of
Rochelle Park assigned by the Township Committee to be the Committee's
representative to the Squad.
LINE OFFICERS — The Captain. First Lieutenant and Second Lieutenant of
the Squad.
SQUAD — The First Aid and Emergency Squad of the Township of Rochelle
Park.
§ 16-5. Number and qualifications of members; appointments and
terminations.
A. The Squad shall consist of no more than 40 active members, including
officers, but may include such number of additional inactive members
as may be determined by this chapter.
B. As a condition for membership and continued membership in the
Squad, each member shall:
(1) Be a resident of the Township of Rochelle Park or any municipality
within two miles of the border of the Township of Rochelle Park;
however, in the event that the member does not reside within
§ 14-28 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 16-5
12:47
§ 16-6. Administrative officers.
Rochelle Park or within a two-mile radius of the Township of
Rochelle Park, the member must agree to be stationed and remain
at Ambulance Headquarters or within a two-mile radius of
Ambulance Headquarters for the duration of his/her duty shift.
[Amended 10-16-2013 by Ord. No. 1063-13]
(2) Be at least 18 years of age.
(3) Be in good physical condition and be capable of carrying safely,
with another squad member, an adult weighing 175 pounds, in a
confined stairwell, on a piece of equipment normally used by the
Squad in the performance of its duties.
(4) Be able to speak and understand the English language.
(5) Hold a current valid New Jersey driver's license.
(6) Be the holder of a currently dated New Jersey State Department of
Health emergency medical technician certificate (EMT). A
candidate may come on the Squad if he/she will have been enrolled
in an EMT training program within six months of joining the Squad,
but he/she must obtain the EMT card within one year of joining or
be automatically suspended until such time as this condition is met.
(7) Successfully complete a police background check in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 27 of the Code of the Township of
Rochelle Park. The results of the background check shall be
submitted, by the Township Administrator, to the Captain of the
First Aid and Emergency Squad for consideration in connection
with an application for new membership and continued
membership in the squad. [Added 8-16-2006 by Ord. No.
954-06]
C. All appointments to and terminations from the Squad shall be submitted
to the Township Committee for its review and approval.
A. The administrative officers (if necessary) shall consist of a President
(who shall attain at least five years of continuous and active service on
the Squad during his/her term as President), Vice President, Treasurer
and Secretary (who shall attain at least two years of continuous and
active service on the Squad during his/her term of office).
B. The duties of the officers are as follows:
(1) President: shall preside at all meetings; he/she shall appoint all
committees and be ex officio member of same. He/she shall conduct
and be responsible for all administrative business. He/she shall be
considered as official spokesman for the Squad.
§ 16-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 16-6
12:48
§ 16-7. Line officers.
(2) Vice President: shall assume the duties of the President in his/her
absence. Should the office of President become vacant, the Vice
President shall assume the office and title of President.
(3) Treasurer: shall be the custodian of the funds of the Squad and
shall maintain accurate records of the condition of such funds,
including receipts and disbursements.
(4) Secretary: shall keep a true and accurate record of the proceedings
of the Squad at each meeting. The Secretary shall answer all
communications and send out all notices in a timely manner.
(5) Corresponding Secretary: will work with the President as needed.
C. Should any Squad office become vacant, except for President, as
outlined above, a special election shall be held at the next regular
monthly meeting.
A. The line officers of the Squad shall consist of a Captain (who shall attain
at least five years of continuous and active service on the Squad during
his/her term as Captain and have served at least one year as
Lieutenant), First Lieutenant and Second Lieutenant (who shall attain
at least three years of continuous and active service on the Squad
during his/her term a Lieutenant). All line officers must be certified in
Incident Command System prior to being elected to any line office.
B. The duties of the line officers shall be:
(1) Captain: shall be in charge of the actual operation of the Squad,
subject to the direction of the Township Committee, including its
equipment and building, and shall be responsible for the good
order of such. He/she shall conduct drill meetings, prepare and
post all duty rosters, inspect annually the driver's license and EMT
certification of each member, report monthly to the Township
Committee, through the Commissioner, respecting the condition of
all apparatus and equipment of the Squad, the activities of the
Squad and the Youth Squad and the status of its membership, and
shall provide such other information concerning the Squad as may
be requested, from time to time, by the Commission of the
Township Committee.
(2) First Lieutenant: shall assist the Captain and, in his/her absence,
perform all of his/her duties and be in charge of all radio
equipment.
(3) Second Lieutenant: shall assist the Captain and First Lieutenant
and, in the absence of the First Lieutenant, shall perform all of his/
her duties and be in charge of the ordering and stocking of all
medical and oxygen supplies.
§ 16-6 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 16-7
12:49
§ 16-8. Election of officers; reelection; vacancies.
§ 16-9. Active membership.
C. The Squad may create additional service officer positions, and
prescribe the duties and qualifications of such, it deems necessary for
the operation of the Squad.
A. The election of the officers of the Squad shall take place at the
November meeting of the Squad, by closed ballot, with no proxy voting
permitted, and election to any office shall be by a majority of the votes
cast for that office.
B. The officers so elected shall enter upon the duties of their offices on the
first day of January following their election and shall serve for a period
of one year and until their successors are elected and qualified.
C. Officers may be elected to succeed themselves with no maximum
service restriction.
D. In the event of a vacancy in any office, the unexpired term shall be filled
at the next regular monthly meeting of the Squad, and each member of
the Squad shall receive written notification at least 48 hours in advance
advising of the vacancy and stating that the same shall be filled by
election at such meeting. Elections to fill vacancies shall be by ballot in
the manner described above respecting the election of officers at the
annual election.
A. Probationary membership:
(1) In order to be considered for probationary membership, an
individual must have successfully completed an EMT training
program and obtained an EMT certificate.
(2) Probationary status is defined as a period of time in which the
individual will be given the opportunity to participate in all phases
and become acclimated with the operation of the Squad. However,
during this time, he/she will be permitted to ride the ambulance
only as a third or fourth member and will not be permitted to drive
the ambulance except for training purposes, unless otherwise
approved and under the discretion of a line officer.
(3) An individual will remain on probation for a six-month period, at
which time he/she may apply to the general membership for senior
membership. With the recommendation of a line officer, a
probationary member may come off probation sooner than six
months. In either case, a majority vote of the voting members
present at a regular Squad meeting is needed to grant an individual
senior membership.
§ 16-7 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 16-9
12:50
(4) Probationary members may attend all meetings, however, they
shall not be permitted to vote and will not be considered part of a
quorum.
(5) A probationary member may be dropped from the Squad at any
time during his/her probationary period for just cause by a majority
vote of the membership present at a regular Squad meeting.
(6) Members who have transferred from another squad shall serve a
probationary period of three months.
B. Senior membership:
(1) Senior members must have the knowledge and skills necessary to
provide Basic Life Support as evidenced by maintaining
certification as an EMT as recognized by the New Jersey State
Department of Health and American Heart Association certification
in cardiopulmonary resuscitation for the health-care provider.
(2) All senior members shall comply with such additional training
requirements as established by the Squad. Failure to comply with
this section will result in immediate suspension from the Squad
until all requirements in which he/she was previously delinquent
are met.
(3) All senior members must attend 60% of regular monthly meetings
in order to retain their senior membership status, unless otherwise
excused for just cause by the Captain of the Squad.
(4) All active senior members shall have one vote.
(5) All senior members are required to answer 30% of all calls per year.
C. (Reserved)9
D. (Reserved)10
E. Observer status:
(1) A person may come on the Squad if he/she is currently, or will be
within six months' time, en rolled in an EMT training program and
will obtain an EMT certificate within one year of joining, or
otherwise be automatically dropped from the Squad.
(2) An observer must be minimally certified in American Heart
Association CPR for the health-care provider.
(3) An observer may ride on the ambulance only to observe and may
not evaluate or treat any patient with the exception of performing
9. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Associate membership, was repealed 10-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 1053-12.
10.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, Active life membership, was repealed 5-15-2013 by
Ord. No. 1060-13.
§ 16-9 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 16-9
12:51
§ 16-10. Duties of active membership.
§ 16-11. Life membership. [Amended 5-15-2013 by Ord. No.
1060-13]
CPR. However, an observer will not be allowed to ride on a call
where there already is a full crew of four members.
(4) Observers can only respond with the ambulance and only with the
Captain's prior approval. [Added 10-17-2012 by Ord. No.
1053-12]
(5) Observers must have successfully completed a police background
check. [Added 10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1053-1211]
A. Active members must fulfill their duty assignments of riding one night
shift each week and one weekend shift each month. If a member cannot
fulfill his/her assignment, that member must attempt to secure a
substitute and notify the Captain, other line officer or senior crew
member as to who will act as the substitute. [Amended 5-15-2013 by
Ord. No. 1060-13]
B. The crews shall check the ambulances and equipment as per schedule.
A rig check sheet must be completed for every shift and any deficiencies
noted and, wherever possible, corrected.
C. The building and vehicles must be kept clean and orderly.
A. Any member who attains 10 years of active service in good standing
may be considered for lifetime membership. To be considered a
member in good standing, the following must be achieved:
(1) Must meet the requirements of LOSAP and/or the requirements for
active membership.
(2) Cannot have more than two suspensions within a five-year period.
B. Any member who retires from active service and becomes an inactive
life member shall return all appropriate Squad equipment.
C. An inactive life member shall be eligible to attend and participate in all
meetings, but shall not vote.
D. Upon becoming in inactive life member, the member’s badge number
shall be retired from the active service roster. This shall not apply to
Badge Nos. 1, 2 and 3.
E. Active life membership. A life member may be considered an active
member with all privileges of regular membership by fulfilling a
minimum duty requirement of one duty shift per month. However, such
11.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection F, Designated driver/lifter,
which immediately followed this subsection.
§ 16-9 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 16-11
12:52
§ 16-12. Meetings.
§ 16-13. Apparatus and equipment.
§ 16-14. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
life member may not be eligible to hold the office of Captain, Lieutenant
or Training Officer.
A. A quorum shall constitute the physical presence of 50% plus one of the
voting membership.
B. General meetings shall be held at least once a month, the exact day
being at the discretion of the President or Captain of the Squad.
C. A special meeting may be called at any time by the President or Captain
or by a written request to the President or Captain by five qualified
voting members. All members must have 36 hours written notice of
such a meeting.
D. Any member who cannot be at a meeting for just cause as substantiated
by the Secretary, may submit a write-in ballot to the Secretary prior to
the start of the meeting.
A. The apparatus and equipment of the Squad shall be used only for the
purpose for which it is intended and for which the Squad is established,
including training purposes, and also including participation in parades
and official ceremonies when authorized by the Township Committee or
by the Commissioner.
B. The members of the Squad shall be responsible for the care and
operation of the apparatus and equipment and shall observe all Squad
rules and regulations regarding such operation and care.
C. No member of the Squad shall tamper with apparatus or equipment or
fix or repair the same unless so authorized by the Captain or, in his
absence, the First Lieutenant or, in the absence of both the Captain and
First Lieutenant, the Second Lieutenant.
D. No member under the age of 18 shall drive an ambulance.
E. The acquisition of any apparatus or equipment, the making of any
purchase or the entering into any contract, the cost or contract price of
which, in whole or in part, is to be paid with or out of public funds, shall
be acquired, made or entered into only in accordance with applicable
law and the Township's standard purchasing procedures.
A. The Squad is hereby authorized and empowered to establish rules and
regulations which shall provide for the administration and operation of
the Squad and prescribe the duties and rules of conduct of the members
thereof and shall contain such other matters as are necessary or useful
for the proper functioning of the Squad. Said rules and regulations shall
§ 16-11 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 16-14
12:53
§ 16-15. Expulsion or suspension of member.
not become effective until first presented to and approved by the
Township Committee.
B. Said rules and regulations and any amendments or supplements thereto
must be accepted by 2/3 majority vote of the membership present and
voting at a meeting of the membership of the Squad. Notice of such
proposed rules and regulations and amendments or supplements
thereto shall be given, by mail, to each member at least seven days
prior to the date of such meeting.
A. Grounds for suspension. Failure to obey a lawful order of a line officer,
insubordination to a line officer, negligence or willfully improper
misconduct in the performance of duty (including practice drills,
training sessions, inspections, emergency calls or other squad duties)
and violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable
ordinance or statute or any applicable rule or regulation adopted
thereunder or of the rules and regulations of the Squad shall constitute
grounds for suspension or expulsion of a member of the Squad.
B. If the Captain or any other line officer has reason to believe that there
are grounds for expulsion or suspension of any Squad member for any
of the reasons set out in Subsection A above, he/she shall prepare a
written statement of the charges against such member. If such charges
are made by a line officer other than the Captain, they shall, promptly
after such written statement is prepared, be delivered to the Captain.
C. The Captain shall fix a date, time and place when such charges shall be
heard by the Disciplinary Committee (consisting of the line officers and
two senior members randomly selected on an annual basis) and shall
cause to be served upon the Squad member so charged a written copy
of the charges against him, together with a written notice of the date,
time and place when such charges shall be heard, provided that such
hearing shall be held not less than 10 days after the written charges
and the written notice of hearing are served upon the Squad member
whose conduct is the subject of such charges. The Captain shall also
cause notice of such hearing to be given to the Disciplinary Committee
not less than five days prior to the date fixed for the hearing.
D. At the hearing to be held before the Disciplinary Committee, the
Captain or presiding officer shall announce the charges to the
Committee. The line officer who has made such charges shall present
the grounds therefor and the reasons why such charges were made and
any facts and information, including testimony by anyone having
knowledge which relates to the charges, which he/she believes
substantiates the charges. Any Squad member shall have the right to
present any information or facts which may relate thereto. The Squad
member who is charged with misconduct shall have the right to be
heard with respect to such charges and to present such information or
facts as he believes relates to the charges or his defense thereto,
§ 16-14 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 16-15
12:54
§ 16-16. Leave from active membership; physical disability.
[Amended 11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 1025-10]
including testimony of persons having knowledge or information which
relates thereto. The Squad member who is charged shall also have
the right to appear with an attorney, provided that any cost thereof
shall be at such Squad member's sole cost and expense. [Amended
10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 1053-12]
E. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Disciplinary Committee shall vote
to determine guilt or innocence of the charges presented and, if guilty,
whether the member found guilty should be expelled from membership
or suspended and, if suspended, the duration of such suspension. Any
finding of guilty and imposition of any penalty shall require a majority
vote of the Disciplinary Committee. The result of the hearing shall,
promptly thereafter, be reported to the Township Committee by the
Captain.
F. The Captain shall have the right to suspend any member of the Squad
for any of the reasons set forth in Subsection A if the Captain
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the
member has committed one or more of the acts described in Subsection
A and if he/she determines that the charges are sufficiently serious to
require immediate action, provided that the Captain shall first give the
member an opportunity to be heard. Following such suspension, the
Captain shall forthwith prepare a written charge, which shall be
forthwith served upon the member, and, if the member suspended so
demands, notwithstanding the notice provisions of Subsection C, a
hearing before the Disciplinary Committee shall be held, provided that
such member gives written notice to the Secretary of the Squad within
five days of the effective date of the suspension. The Captain shall give
at least three days' written notice thereof to the Disciplinary Committee
and to the Township Committee. Such trial shall take place no less than
five days after the date of such notice. [Amended 10-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 1053-12]
G. If any member shall be expelled or suspended from the Squad, such
member may appeal such removal or suspension to the Township
Committee. Such appeal shall be made by giving notice thereof to the
Secretary of the Squad and to the Township Clerk within 10 days after
notice of such expulsion or suspension is given to such member. The
Township Committee shall hear the matter de novo and may affirm such
expulsion or suspension if it finds the member guilty, or, if it finds the
member guilty but believes the penalty imposed to be unduly severe, it
may reduce such penalty, or, if it finds the member not guilty, it shall
forthwith reinstate him/her as an active member of the Squad.
A. All requests for leave must be submitted to the Captain in writing.
B. All requests should state the following information:
§ 16-15 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 16-16
12:55
§ 16-17. Failure to maintain membership requirements.
(1) Duration of leave.
(2) Reason(s) for leave (medical, personal, student).
C. All personal leaves of absence are allowed up to six months' duration. A
member who wishes to extend his/her leave beyond six months must
submit his/her request in writing to the Squad Secretary to be brought
before the full membership for a vote.
D. All student leaves are allowed up to eight months' duration. A member
who wishes to extend his/her leave beyond eight months must submit
his/her request in writing to the Squad Secretary to be brought before
the full membership for a vote.
E. All leaves of 30 days or more require him/her to turn in their key, pager
and badge to the Captain.
F. When a member returns from a medical leave of absence he/she must
submit a written statement from their attending physician that they are
physically able to return to active duty.
G. Physical disability of a member.
(1) Any member who, by reason of injury or illness, shall become
temporarily unable to perform the duties required of a Squad
member shall be placed on inactive status. If, after a period of six
months on inactive status, the member shall remain unable to
perform the duties of a Squad member, such inability shall be
deemed permanent, and the member shall be retired from the
Squad; provided, however, that, if it shall be established to the
satisfaction of the Township Committee that such disability is not
permanent, such inactive status may be continued for an additional
period of time as determined by the Township Committee.
(2) If at any time, by reason of accident or illness or otherwise, the
Captain in his judgment believes that there exists a question as to
whether a member is able to perform the duties of a Squad
member, the Captain may instruct such member to obtain a
physical examination by a physician, at the Squad's expense, for
the purpose of determining the member's ability to fulfill the duties
of Squad member. If the report of such examination shall show a
member's inability to perform the duties of a Squad member, such
member shall be placed on inactive status as provided in
Subsection G(1) above.
(3) A Squad member who contests a finding that he or she is unable to
perform the duties of a Squad member by reason of disability may
appeal such decision to the Township Committee in the manner
provided in § 16-14.
§ 16-16 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 16-17
12:56
§ 16-18. Youth Squad.
A. If at any time the Captain determines that a Squad member shall have
failed or ceased to comply with the conditions for membership in the
Squad as set out in § 16-5B hereof or in any other applicable ordinance,
statute, rule or regulation, he/she shall so advise the Squad member
and give him/her a reasonable opportunity, within the time period
described by the Captain, to correct such failure or remedy such
condition. In the event that such failure is not corrected or such
condition is not remedied within such time period, the Captain shall
suspend such member from active service until the same has been
accomplished, and, if not accomplished within six months from the date
of such suspension, such member shall be retired from membership in
the Squad, provided that such Squad member shall have the right to
demand a hearing before the Disciplinary Committee on any such
decision made by the Captain, and in such event a hearing shall be held
in the manner and pursuant to the notice required by § 16-14 hereof,
and provided, any such action shall be subject to appeal to the Township
Committee, as provided in § 16-14.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Captain to determine that all Squad
members comply with all applicable requirements of federal and state
law and applicable requirements of the New Jersey State First Aid
Council enacted pursuant to federal or state law with respect to
training, qualifications and certifications of Squad members, and any
Squad member who shall not have complied with any such training
qualification or certification requirement shall not be permitted to
engage in any activity of the Squad for which such training,
qualification or certification shall be required. The filing with the
Township Committee or with any other agency of all required
certifications relative to the training and qualifications of Squad
members shall be the responsibility of the Captain.
A. Establishment and qualifications for membership.
(1) There is hereby created and established in and for the Township of
Rochelle Park a Youth Squad for the First Aid and Emergency
Squad for the Township of Rochelle Park.
(2) The Youth Squad shall be limited to persons between the ages of 16
and 18 years, each of whom shall be a resident of the Township of
Rochelle Park or any municipality within two miles of the border of
the Township of Rochelle Park, in good health, as shall be so
certified by a physician licensed to practice in the State of New
Jersey.
(3) Each applicant for Youth Squad membership shall have the written
permission therefor of his/her parent or guardian, and such written
permission shall be in such form as shall be approved by the
Captain of the First Aid and Emergency Squad for the Township of
Rochelle Park, and which written permission shall be kept as part
§ 16-17 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 16-18
12:57
of the permanent record of the First Aid and Emergency Squad by
the Secretary thereof.
(4) Members of the Youth Squad shall be insured with the same
coverage and in the same amounts provided for the regular
members of the First Aid and Emergency Squad of the Township of
Rochelle Park.
B. Rules and regulations. The rules and regulations of the First Aid and
Emergency Squad of the Township of Rochelle Park shall be the rules
and regulations to govern the activities of the Youth Squad consistent
with and in conformance with the following:
(1) No Youth Squad member shall be required to perform the same
actual emergency duties as a member of the First Aid and
Emergency Squad.
(2) The Captain of the Township of Rochelle Park's First Aid and
Emergency Squad shall provide for an education program for first
aid and emergency services designed to train the members of the
Youth Squad in the providing of first aid and emergency services as
authorized by this chapter and the laws of the State of New Jersey.
Such training shall be with a view toward qualifying such Youth
Squad members as qualified and certified members of the regular
First Aid and Emergency Squad of the Township of Rochelle Park.
(3) The Captain of the First Aid and Emergency Squad may direct
advisers and training officers to assist him in the training of the
Youth Squad members.
(4) The Captain of the First Aid and Emergency Squad shall file reports
with the governing body concerning the membership, training and
status of the Youth Squad, which reports shall be filed by the month
of January in each year.
(5) The members of the Youth Squad shall attend emergency services
performed by the First Aid and Emergency Squad, provided that
they shall have completed their training and have been approved
by the Captain. Youth Squad members may, at the discretion of and
in the presence of a regular Squad member, assist in equipment
maintenance and inventory and may participate in training
exercises scheduled for the members of the First Aid and
Emergency Squad, in the sole discretion of the Captain thereof. No
Youth Squad member shall administer first aid and emergency
service to any person in the name of or under the auspices of the
First Aid and Emergency Squad of the Township of Rochelle Park
unless authorized by an officer or senior member present.
(6) The Captain of the First Aid and Emergency Squad of the Township
of Rochelle Park may apply for appropriations for equipment and
training on behalf of the Youth Squad. Any equipment purchased
for such Youth Squad shall be logged and inventoried in a separate
§ 16-18 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 16-18
12:58
ledger maintained by the First Aid and Emergency Squad for such
purpose. In no event shall equipment for Youth Squad members
be released from possession and control of the First Aid and
Emergency Squad without the prior written consent of the Captain
or his, designated representative.
(7) No member under the age of 18 shall operate any power-assisted
mechanical equipment of the Township of Rochelle Park First Aid
and Emergency Squad.
C. Limitations of membership. The Youth Squad shall be limited to not
more than 20 members.
D. Discipline of members.
(1) All Youth Squad members shall be subject to disciplinary action by
the Captain of the First Aid and Emergency Squad of the Township
of Rochelle Park, and all disciplinary action taken against a
member by said Captain shall be final and in the Captain's sole
discretion, subject to appeal to the Township Committee as
provided in § 16-14.
(2) Infractions.
(a) Apart from rules and regulations which may be established by
the Captain of the First Aid and Emergency Squad, youth
members who violate any of the following restrictions shall be
subject to immediate disciplinary action by the Captain:
[1] Violation of any provision of this chapter.
[2] Failure to obey an order or direction of a regular First Aid
and Emergency Squad member in the line of duty.
[3] Insubordination to any regular member of the First Aid
and Emergency Squad in the line of duty.
[4] Failure to attend mandatory training sessions, unless
specifically excused by the Captain of the First Aid and
Emergency Squad.
[5] The commission of any act or series of acts which tend or
may tend to discredit the Youth Squad or the regular First
Aid and Emergency Squad.
[6] Violations of any rule or regulation established by the
Captain for the Squad or by the First Aid and Emergency
Squad for the conduct of its regular members.
(b) Disciplinary action taken by the Captain may include
suspension of the Youth Squad member for a period of not
more than 21 days or expulsion.
E. Progression to regular membership:
§ 16-18 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 16-18
12:59
§ 16-19. Municipal charges for certain calls. [Added 4-16-2008 by
Ord. No. 983-08; amended 6-17-2009 by Ord. No. 1003-09]
(1) Upon reaching the age of 18 years, a Youth Squad member will
become eligible to progress to regular membership of the First Aid
and Emergency Squad.
(2) A Youth Squad member who has served at least six months on the
Youth Squad will be eligible for senior membership status upon his/
her 18th birthday, however, he/she shall remain on a six-month
driving probationary period.
(3) Youth Squad members with less than six months service on the
Youth Squad must serve a six-month probationary period as set out
in § 16-9 before being considered for senior membership.
F. The Youth Squad may, if approved by the Captain of the First Aid and
Emergency Squad and the Township Committee, adopt a Constitution
and bylaws relating to the conduct of the affairs of such Youth Squad
and, subject to approval, elect a Captain, Lieutenant, Secretary and
Treasurer.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUSINESS FACILITY — A facility operated for profit which shall
include, without being limited to, a nursing home, rehabilitation center,
convalescence center, medical office, medical clinic, physician's office
or hospital.
NONEMERGENCY CALL — A call received by the Rochelle Park First
Aid and Emergency Squad which requires a response by members of
the Rochelle Park Ambulance Corp. and which has been determined, by
representatives of the Rochelle Park First Aid and Emergency Squad,
not to be an emergency. This shall also include calls where, upon
arrival, it is determined that transportation has already been provided
by a private service.
B. Municipal charge for services. There shall be a municipal fee, payable
to the Township of Rochelle Park, in the amount of $500 for each call
determined to be a nonemergency call to any business facility as
defined herein. This fee shall be the obligation of the owner/operator of
the facility.
C. Procedure for billing. The Rochelle Park First Aid and Emergency
Squad shall submit a monthly report to the Township Administrator
which shall provide the name and address of any business facility which
has received nonemergency calls together with the number of calls and
the dates of those calls. The Township Administrator shall, thereafter,
render a monthly statement to the business facility for the calls which
are provided for pursuant to this section. The amount of the charge
shall be due and payable within 30 days of date of billing and,
§ 16-18 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 16-19
12:60
§ 16-20. Third party payment plan for emergency medical services.
[Added 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1016-10]
Chapter 18
HISTORICAL SOCIETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic structures in flood hazard
areas — See Ch. 104.
§ 18-1. Establishment.
There is hereby created the Rochelle Park Historical Society.
§ 18-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Historical Society shall be to:
thereafter, if not paid, shall incur interest charges at a rate of 18% per
year.
A. There is hereby established a third party payment plan for emergency
medical services for the response of ambulance services and the
transportation by ambulance to hospitals or other emergency medical
facilities by the Township’s Emergency Medical Service (EMS).
B. The fees for such services shall be as set forth in Chapter 100 of the
Code of the Township of Rochelle Park, relating to fees, as may be
amended from time to time.
C. The Township of Rochelle Park shall establish a billing program for such
third party payment plan for Emergency Medical Services provided by
the Township’s Emergency Medical Service (EMS).
A. Gather and preserve maps, photos, articles, memorabilia and other
items that would document life and events in Rochelle Park, past and/or
present.
B. Conduct interviews with citizens to obtain an oral history of the
Township.
C. Apply for grants, with the approval of the Township Committee, from
available sources.
D. Produce enrichment materials such as pamphlets, flyers, videos, etc.
E. Sponsor educational seminars/programs.
F. Set up historical exhibitions/displays.
§ 16-19 FINANCIAL OFFICER, CHIEF § 18-2
12:61
§ 18-3. Memberships; terms; vacancies.
§ 18-4. Terms of officers; appointment.
§ 18-5. Duties of officers.
§ 18-6. Meetings.
G. Attend lectures/conferences that would enhance the functioning of the
Historical Society.
H. Make periodic reports to the Township Committee.
I. Hold fundraisers to promote/accomplish the above objectives.
A. The Society shall consist of seven full voting members. The terms of
members shall be three years, commencing on January 1. Members
shall be appointed by the Mayor of Rochelle Park and serve at the
discretion of said Mayor and the Rochelle Park Township Committee.
[Amended 5-17-2017 by Ord. No. 1109-17]
B. Vacancies on the Society shall be filled within 60 days by
recommending replacements to the Mayor of Rochelle Park.
A. Officers shall serve one-year terms commencing on January 1 and
ending on December 31. The Society shall reorganize and appoint
officers at the last regular meeting in December. There shall be a limit
of two consecutive terms of an officer in any one position.
B. The officers shall include a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary/
Treasurer.
A. Chairman: The Chairman shall preside at all meetings and enforce all
the rules and procedures of the Society. The Chairman shall sign all
vouchers for moneys spent upon approval by the Society.
B. Vice Chairman: The Vice Chairman shall, in the absence of the
Chairman or at the Chairman's request, discharge the duties of the
Chairman and such further duties as the Chairman may direct.
C. Secretary/Treasurer: The Secretary/Treasurer shall keep a record of all
matters transacted at the meetings; and shall notify members of all
meetings. In addition, the Secretary/Treasurer shall have charge of all
financial records; shall keep records of all vouchers paid by the
Township Treasurer; shall keep a record of the balance in the budget;
and shall prepare a new budget each year and shall send a duplicate to
the Township Administrator.
A. Meetings shall be held within the discretion of the Society. Notice of all
meetings shall be posted by the Secretary in the Municipal Building for
public review.
§ 18-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 18-6
12:62
§ 18-7. Bylaws.
The Historical Society may adopt bylaws in conformance with state statutes.
Chapter 19
INSURANCE TRUST FUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Chief Financial Officer — See Ch. 12.
§ 19-1. Establishment of fund; appropriation.
§ 19-2. Purpose of trust.
The primary purpose of this trust is to establish a fund to permit the
governing body or fund commissioner to secure insurance protection for the
local unit.
§ 19-3. Investment of funds.
Investment of funds shall be under the direction of the Chief Financial
Officer in accordance with the Local Fiscal Affairs Law13, which provides
rules and regulations for the control, investment and disbursement of said
funds.
B. Special emergency meetings can be called by the Chairman, or Vice
Chairman acting for the Chairman, with at least two days' notice to all
members.
C. Meetings will be held in accordance with normal parliamentary
procedures based on Robert's Rules of Order.
A. The governing body may make direct budget appropriations to the
insurance trust funds in accordance with the Local Budget Law12 and
may apply insurance reimbursements or settlements to said trust fund
for insurance protection.
B. It has been determined that an appropriation will be made available in
the 1997 municipal budget or from prior year insurance refunds to
establish the principal insurance fund in accordance with the conditions
established through this chapter.
12.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq.
§ 18-6 INSURANCE TRUST FUND § 19-4
19:63
§ 19-4. Reduction of principal appropriated amount.
If the governing body at some future date determines that conditions permit
a reduction of the principal amount appropriated to the trust fund, they may
cancel a portion of the funds for use in the current operating budget by not
less that a two-thirds vote of the full governing body.
Chapter 21
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire department — See Ch. 14. First aid and emergency squad — See Ch. 16.
§ 21-1. Program created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 199714 to reward members of
the volunteer fire-fighting and Ambulance Corps. for their loyal, diligent and
devoted services to the residents of the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 21-2. Annual contributions.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferredincome
account for each volunteer member who meets the criteria set forth
below; that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that
shall be established by the Township of Rochelle Park pursuant to P.L. 1997,
c. 388; and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws
of the State of New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue Code, and
this chapter.
§ 21-3. Criteria for eligibility.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
who meets the criteria as follows:
§ 21-4. Prior years service; total allowance.
A. Achieves minimum service levels to be eligible for an annual
contribution.
B. Five years of service are required for vesting.
C. The annual contribution shall be $600 per eligible member for firefighters
and $750 per eligible member for Ambulance Corp.
14.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.
§ 19-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 21-4
21:64
§ 21-5. Estimated cost.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
§ 21-6. Credit.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited for one year of volunteer
service provided to the Volunteer Fire Department/Ambulance Corps. in
accordance with the following schedule:
A. The LOSAP shall provide for contributions, as credit for no more than
one year of prior services for each eligible volunteer in accordance with
the following schedule:
LOSAP Prior Service Schedule
Number of Years Prior Service Contribution for Fire Fighters
1 600
2 1,200
3 1,800
4 2,400
5 3,000
Number of Years Prior Service Contribution for Ambulance
Corp.
1 $750
2 1,500
3 2,250
4 3,000
5 3,750
B. The total allowance, including retroactive compensation, shall not
exceed $1,150 per person per year and shall include volunteer
membership and participation in the Rochelle Park Fire Department
and Volunteer Ambulance Corp.
A. For regular annual services of fire fighters at $600 per member, the
total Department cost is $30,000 per year.
B. For regular annual services of Ambulance Corp. members at $750 per
member, the total Department cost is $11,250 per year.
C. Fifty fire fighters and 15 Ambulance Corp. members.
D. For contribution for one prior year of service: $80,000 estimated for five
years.
A. Fire Department: See Schedule A.15
15.Editor's Note: Said Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 21-4 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 21-6
21:65
§ 21-7. When effective.
This chapter shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a public
question at the November 6, 2001, general election.17 If approved by voters,
it shall be effective January 1, 2002.
Chapter 21A
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 21A, Library Director, adopted 12-16-2015 by Ord. No.
1091-15, was repealed 9-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1131-18.]
Chapter 22
MULTIPLE DWELLING REVIEW BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing — See Ch. 117. Property maintenance — See Ch. 150.
B. Ambulance Corps.: See Schedule B.16
16.Editor's Note: Said Schedule B is included at the end of this chapter.
17.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 837 was approved at said general election.
§ 21-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 21-7
22:66
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 22-1. Definitions of terms.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LANDLORD — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
other entity, and any officer, agent or employee of any of the foregoing,
which is the owner, rental agent, manager of or otherwise has authority to
rent any rental unit to a tenant.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building containing three or more dwelling
units.*
RENTAL — Any and all charges made by a landlord to a tenant in
consideration of the tenant's occupancy of a rental unit.
RENTAL UNIT — Any portion of a multiple dwelling which is offered for
rent or rented for dwelling purposes and for which a rental charge is made,
and includes all privileges, services, equipment, facilities and improvements
connected with the use or occupancy thereof.*
SERVICES — Adequate sanitary facilities, heat, light and ventilation as
defined in the Board of Health Ordinances and Building Property
Maintenance Codes of the Township of Rochelle Park.18 Also included shall
be the provisions of garbage disposal, snow removal and the repair,
replacement and maintenance of landlord-provided fixtures and appliances.
TENANT — Any individual who is an occupant of a rental unit.
*NOTE: "Multiple dwellings" and "rental units" shall not include, and this
chapter shall not apply to, motels, hotels or rooming houses.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 117, Housing; and Ch. 150, Property Maintenance.
§ 22-1 MULTIPLE DWELLING REVIEW BOARD § 22-1
22:67

ARTICLE II
Composition of Review Board
§ 22-2. Board created.
There is hereby created a Multiple Dwelling Review Board.
§ 22-3. Number of members.
Said Board shall consist of five members, appointed by the Township
Committee.
§ 22-4. Qualifications of members.
Said Board shall consist of:
§ 22-5. Designation of Chairman and Secretary.
The Multiple Dwelling Review Board shall designate one member, by
majority vote, as Chairman. The resident member of the Board who is not a
landlord or tenant shall be designated as Secretary of the Board.
§ 22-6. Compensation of Secretary.
No member of the Board shall receive compensation for his services, except
that the Secretary shall receive a salary to be determined by the Township
Committee and to be provided for in the Township of Rochelle Park Salary
Ordinance.19
§ 22-7. Alternate members.
The Township Committee shall also appoint one landlord and one tenant
to serve as alternate members of the Board for terms of three years. In
the event that any matter is brought before the Board in which a conflict
of interest exists on the part of a landlord Board member, the alternate
landlord shall replace said landlord member, assume all his powers and
A. Two landlords, one being a landlord for a multiple dwelling containing
20 rental units or less and serving a term of two years and one being a
landlord for a multiple dwelling containing 21 rental units or more and
serving a term of three years.
B. Two tenants, one being a tenant in a multiple dwelling containing 20
rental units or less and serving a term of two years and one being a
tenant in a multiple dwelling containing 21 rental units or more and
serving a term of three years.
C. One resident of Rochelle Park who is not a landlord or tenant and
serving a term of three years.
19.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance in on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 22-2 MULTIPLE DWELLING REVIEW BOARD § 22-7
22:69
duties and serve as Board member in all matters in which the conflict of
interest exists. In the event that any matter is brought before the Board in
which a conflict of interest exists on the part of a tenant Board member,
the alternate tenant shall replace said tenant Board member, assume all
his powers and responsibilities and serve as Board member in all matters
in which the conflict of interest exists. Alternates shall serve as Board
members only when a conflict of interest exists.
§ 22-7 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 22-7
22:70
ARTICLE III
Duties and Powers
§ 22-8. General duties.
The Multiple Dwelling Review Board shall make studies and investigations,
conduct hearings, review complaints relative to rental charges and services
and attempt to resolve amicably any and all disputes between landlords and
tenants.
§ 22-9. Recommendation of fair rental; considerations.
When the Multiple Dwelling Review Board believes that such action would
assist in furthering the resolution of a dispute, the Board may recommend
a fair rental, based upon its investigations, studies and hearing, and may
publicize its findings. The Board shall consider the following when
determining fair rent figure:
§ 22-10. Regular meetings.
The Board shall hold meetings on at least one occasion each month. Said
meeting shall be held on the evening designated by the Board at its first
regular meeting.
§ 22-11. Minutes of meetings.
The Secretary shall prepare minutes of each meeting and submit a copy of
said minutes, along with a monthly report of the Board's activities, to the
Township Committee.
A. Rents for similar accommodations within the same multiple dwelling or
complex of housing.
B. Rents for similar dwelling units in the same area or in other similar
areas of the municipality.
C. The physical condition of the premises and the nature and extent of
services actually provided by the landlord.
D. The cost of providing the rental service, as presented by the landlord.
E. Recent variations in cost of providing rental services.
F. Recent increases or decreases in the nature or amount of services
provided by the landlord.
§ 22-8 MULTIPLE DWELLING REVIEW BOARD § 22-11
22:71

ARTICLE IV
Appeals
§ 22-12. Decisions of Multiple Dwelling Review Board.
All decisions of the Multiple Dwelling Review Board shall be final, except
that any decision of the Multiple Dwelling Review Board may be appealed
to the Township Committee.
§ 22-13. Decisions of Township Committee.
Any decision made by the Township Committee shall be final, provided that
further recourse shall be had in the courts.
§ 22-14. Consultations by Township Committee with other
employees. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
Upon any appeal to the Township Committee, the Township Committee
may consult with other township employees or divisions of township
government, including but not limited to the Township Attorney, Township
Construction Official, Township Engineer and Department of Health, when
such individuals or Departments possess expertise in an area of dispute and
such expertise would aid in the resolution of a dispute.
§ 22-15. Notice of appeal required. [Added 10-20-1975 by Ord. No.
374]
No appeal shall be taken to the Township Committee unless notice of said
appeal is given in writing to the Township Committee within 15 days of the
final decision of the Multiple Dwelling Review Board.
§ 22-12 MULTIPLE DWELLING REVIEW BOARD § 22-15
22:73

ARTICLE V
Landlord Regulations
§ 22-16. Restriction as to rent increases.
No landlord shall increase the rent for any dwelling unit more than one time
during any twelve-month period.
§ 22-17. Deposits by landlords to cover claims. [Amended
10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 560; 4-22-1991 by Ord. No. 613]
Should any claims arise pursuant to this chapter by tenants and a
determination specifically made that the landlord is obligated for said
claims, then the landlord shall compensate the tenant as directed by the
Board.
§ 22-18. (Reserved)20
§ 22-19. (Reserved)
§ 22-20. (Reserved)
§ 22-21. (Reserved)
§ 22-22. (Reserved)
20.Editor's Note: Former §§ 22-18 through 22-22, dealing with delivery of deposits to the
Treasurer and expenditures by Multiple Dwelling Review Board, as amended, were deleted
4-22-1991 by Ord. No. 613, which ordinance also provided that it shall not be the
obligation of the township to maintain an account for deposits by the landlords. The
Treasurer shall notify all the depositors who presently have funds with the municipality
that they must present a claim for the return of moneys previously deposited with the
Treasurer. Evidence of said deposit shall be as designated by the Treasurer. Should any of
the landlords fail to respond within 90 days of said notices, then the Treasurer is hereby
directed to transfer such funds to the general account of the township.
§ 22-16 MULTIPLE DWELLING REVIEW BOARD § 22-22
22:75

ARTICLE VI
Procedures
§ 22-23. Complaint and request for hearing.
Any landlord or tenant may file a complaint and request for a hearing before
the Multiple Dwelling Review Board alleging any violation of any provision
of this chapter.
§ 22-24. Request for ruling without hearing.
Any landlord or tenant may file a written request for a ruling by the Multiple
Dwelling Review Board without a request for a hearing before the Board
alleging a violation of this chapter.
§ 22-25. Demand for resolution of dispute.
Any landlord or tenant may file a demand for decisions or resolution of a
dispute between a landlord and tenant.
§ 22-26. Attendance of witnesses at hearing.
The Multiple Dwelling Review Board may compel the attendance of persons
at any hearing and may issue subpoenas and administer oaths.
§ 22-27. Time for hearing.
The Multiple Dwelling Review Board shall hold a hearing within 15 days
following the receipt of a demand for a hearing.
§ 22-28. Time for filing complaint or request for hearing. [Added
10-20-1975 by Ord. No. 374]
All complaints or requests for hearings must be received by the Board at
least 15 days prior to the regular monthly meeting date in order to be listed
on the agenda for said meeting. Any requests or complaints received less
than 15 days prior to the regular monthly meeting shall be heard at the
following monthly meeting or at a special meeting set by the Board with
appropriate notice to all parties concerned.
§ 22-29. Additional rules and regulations. [Added 10-20-1975 by
Ord. No. 374]
The Multiple Dwelling Review Board shall be authorized to make additional
rules and regulations governing the procedures of the Board.
§ 22-23 MULTIPLE DWELLING REVIEW BOARD § 22-29
22:77

ARTICLE VII
Fees
§ 22-30. Fees for applications to Review Board.
The following fees shall be paid by an applicant for decision,
recommendation, resolution or hearing before the Board:
§ 22-31. Payment of fees; deposit.
All fees shall be payable to the Multiple Dwelling Review Board and
deposited with the Township of Rochelle Park into the general fund.
A. Written request for a ruling without a hearing: $1.
B. Written request for a hearing before the Board: $2.
C. Appeal to Township Committee: $5.
§ 22-30 MULTIPLE DWELLING REVIEW BOARD § 22-31
22:79

ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
§ 22-32. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-20-1975 by Ord. No.
374]
Any conviction for a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $250 or imprisonment for not more
than 30 days. Each day that a violation occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
§ 22-32 MULTIPLE DWELLING REVIEW BOARD § 22-32
22:81

ARTICLE IX
Retaliatory Evictions
[Added 10-20-1975 by Ord. No. 374]
§ 22-33. Incorporation of statutory provisions.
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:42-10.10 and N.J.S.A. 2A:42-10.12 forbidding
retaliatory eviction proceedings are incorporated herein by reference.
§ 22-34. Penalties for violations of statute.
Any violation by a landlord of any provision of the statutes incorporated by
reference in § 22-33 shall subject said landlord to the penalties provided by
this chapter.
§ 22-33 MULTIPLE DWELLING REVIEW BOARD § 22-34
22:83
Chapter 24
MUNICIPAL ALLIANCE COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 58. Tobacco — See Ch. 171.
§ 24-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established within the Township of Rochelle Park a
Municipal Alliance Committee for the Prevention of Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse (hereinafter referred to as the "Alliance Committee").
§ 24-2. Purposes.
The purposes of the Alliance Committee are as follows:
§ 24-3. Functions and duties.
The functions and duties of the Alliance Committee shall include, but shall
not be limited to:
A. Organizing and coordinating efforts involving schools, law
enforcement, business groups and other community organizations for
the purpose of reducing alcoholism and drug abuse.
B. In cooperation with local school districts, developing comprehensive
and effective alcoholism and drug abuse education programs in grades
kindergarten through 12.
C. In cooperation with local school districts, developing procedures for
prevention, treatment/referral and discipline of students abusing
alcohol or drugs.
D. Developing comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse education,
support and outreach efforts for parents in the community.
E. Developing comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse community
awareness programs.
A. Creating a network of community leaders, private citizens and
representatives from public and private human service agencies who
are dedicated to a comprehensive and coordinated effort to promote
and support drug and alcohol prevention and education programs and
related activities with an emphasis on youth.
B. Conducting an assessment of the community to determine the needs of
the community in relation to alcoholism and drug abuse issues.
§ 22-34 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 24-3
24:84
§ 24-4. Membership; terms; representation.
C. Identifying existing efforts and services acting to reduce alcoholism and
drug abuse.
D. Coordinating projects within the Township of Rochelle Park to avoid
fragmentation or duplication.
E. Developing programs to be implemented at the municipal level that
accomplish the purposes of the state's alliance effort and that of the
Municipal Alliance Committee.
F. Assisting the Township of Rochelle Park in acquiring funds for alliance
programs.
G. Cooperating with the Governor's Council on Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse and the Bergen County Local Advisory Committee on Alcoholism
and Drug Abuse Alliance Steering Subcommittee to provide municipal
data, reports or other information which may be required for the
county's annual alliance plan or needed to assist the alliance effort.
A. The Alliance Committee shall consist of up to 15 members appointed by
the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Township Committee.
B. The terms for each of the members shall be three years and shall expire
on December 31 of the last year for which the appointment shall have
been made.
C. The initial terms shall be so arranged so as to have not more than 1/3 of
the terms expire in any one year.
D. In making appointments, the Mayor and the Township Committee may,
but shall not be required to, consider representation from the following
categories:
(1) Mayoral representative.
(2) Chief of Police.
(3) President of the School Board.
(4) Superintendent of Schools.
(5) A student assistance coordinator.
(6) A representative of the Parent/Teacher Association.
(7) A representative of the local bargaining unit for teachers.
(8) A representative of the Chamber of Commerce, including but not
limited to local business and industry representatives.
(9) A representative of organized labor.
(10) A municipal court judge or representative of the court system.
§ 24-3 MUNICIPAL ALLIANCE COMMITTEE § 24-4
24:85
§ 24-5. Organization.
(11) Representatives of local civic organizations.
(12) Representatives of local mental health agencies and local
treatment and prevention providers.
(13) Representatives of local religious groups.
(14) Private citizens to include a youth representative and youth and
adults recovering from drug and/or alcohol abuse.
E. Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor, with the approval of the
Township Committee for the balance of the unexpired term.
F. Not less than 50% of the Alliance Committee shall be residents of the
Township of Rochelle Park.
A. A quorum of the Alliance Committee shall consist of a majority of its
membership, excluding vacancies.
B. Actions shall require the vote of a majority of a quorum present.
C. The Alliance Committee shall, at its first meeting held during each
calendar year or at its first meeting following the creation of the
Alliance Committee, elect from its membership a President, Vice
President, Secretary and such other officers as it deems appropriate,
which officers shall serve until the following annual meeting or unless
or until their successors shall be elected and qualified.
D. Minutes of all meetings shall be taken to serve as a public record.
E. The President of the Alliance Committee may, with the support of the
Alliance Committee, appoint from its membership such standing and ad
hoc committees as deemed necessary or appropriate.
F. Meetings of the Alliance Committee shall be governed by the most
recent edition of Robert's Rules of Order Revised.
G. The Alliance Committee may adopt bylaws, subject to the approval of
the Township Committee, not inconsistent with the terms hereof.
H. The Alliance Committee shall meet at least once each month, at such
location and on such dates and times as fixed by the President upon
notice to each of the Alliance Committee's members. In addition, the
President may call such special meetings of the Alliance Committee as
the President deems necessary or appropriate upon notice to each of
the Alliance Committee's members.
I. The Alliance Committee shall establish a fundraising committee from
among its membership, which shall meet at least quarterly during the
project period to develop and implement a plan for raising matching
funds and for identifying and utilizing existing resources over the
lifetime of the project.
§ 24-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 24-6
24:86
§ 24-6. Compensation.
Each member of the Alliance Committee shall serve without compensation,
and no Alliance Committee member shall incur any expense without prior
approval by the Township Committee.
§ 24-7. Removal of members.
The Township Committee may remove members from the Alliance
Committee for failure to attend meetings or for otherwise failing to carry
out the duties and responsibilities of membership upon notice to the
member and after affording such member an opportunity to be heard.
Chapter 26
PAYROLL SERVICES
§ 24-6 PAYROLL SERVICES § 24-7
26:87

ARTICLE I
Electronic Disbursement Controls
[Adopted 5-18-2005 by Ord. No. 927-05]
§ 26-1. Approval of the use of disbursing organization for payment
of claims.
The use of a servicer for payment of payroll agency claims is hereby
authorized. The servicer shall be permitted to perform the following tasks:
§ 26-2. Approval officer.
§ 26-3. Compliance with laws and regulations.
The Township of Rochelle Park specifically adopts all requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.1 et seq., as if set forth herein at length and verbatim.
A. Data collection.
B. Servicer report preparation.
C. Calculation of withholding.
D. Direct deposit of payroll disbursements.
E. Municipal transfer of funds to the disbursing organization account for
subsequent payment.
A. The Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Rochelle Park is hereby
designated as the approval officer who shall be responsible for
authorizing and supervising the activities of the disbursing
organization. This authorization is made pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17(a)(1).
B. The duties of the approval officer shall be supplemented to include the
reconciliation and analysis of all general ledger accounts affected by
the activities of the disbursing organization.
C. The approval officer shall also be authorized to enter into an agreement
with the disbursing organization which will allow holding of funds
pending transmittal of those funds to a payee. The disbursing
organization shall be authorized to hold the funds pending transmittal.
§ 26-1 PAYROLL SERVICES § 26-3
26:89
Chapter 27
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 8.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 11.
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Length of Service Awards Program — See Ch.
21.
Payroll services — See Ch. 26.
Police Department — See Ch. 28.
§ 26-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 26-3
26:90
Part 1
[Adopted 8-1G6-e2n0e0r6alB PyoOlicrdie. sNo. 955-0621]
ARTICLE I
Background Checks
§ 27-1. Background checks as condition of employment.
An applicant for employment by the Township shall be the subject of a
background investigation by the Rochelle Park Police Department. This
investigation shall be conducted by the Chief of Police or his designee and
shall include a review of all available public records as well as a review of
records of the Division of Motor Vehicles and those agencies necessary to
conduct criminal background checks.
§ 27-2. Procedure.
§ 27-3. Employment conditioned upon receipt of report.
A. Upon application for employment by the Township of Rochelle Park, the
applicant shall execute the following forms to be made available
through the office of the Township Administrator:
(1) Form No. 1: Authorization for Release of Information.
(2) Form No. 2: Affidavit and Certification of Applicant.
(3) Form No. 3: Background Information Form.
B. The above forms are hereby incorporated into this article and are
attached hereto.22
A. The background check required pursuant to this article shall be
conducted prior to the commencement of employment by the Township
if possible. If, as of the effective date of commencement of employment,
the background check required by this article has not been completed
or received by the Township Administrator, the employment of the
individual which was the subject of the background check shall be
conditioned upon receipt of the results of the background check and
confirmation that the same is consistent with the information provided
by the applicant in Form No. 3. If it is determined, upon receipt of the
results of the background check, that the information provided in Form
No. 3 is not truthful or if the background check reveals that the
employee has been convicted of any crime or disorderly persons offense
involving danger to the person, against the family, children or
incompetents, involving theft or involving any controlled dangerous
substance, the prospective employee may be denied employment on
21.This Ordinance Also Repealed Former Ch. 27, Personnel Policies, Miscellaneous, Adopted
5-18-2005 By Ord. No. 926-05.
22.Editor's Note: Said forms are available through the office of the Township Administrator.
§ 27-1 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-3
26:91
§ 27-4. Checks for existing employees.
All persons employed by the Township of Rochelle Park as of the effective
date of this article shall be required to submit to the background check
described in this article upon receipt of a request to do so from the
Township Administrator or Chief of Police. Upon receipt of a request to
submit to such check, the employee shall contact the Rochelle Park Police
Department in order to facilitate the completion of the same.
§ 27-5. Confidentiality of information.
The information set forth on Form Nos. 1, 2 and 3 and the results of
the background check shall remain confidential to the extent that such
confidentiality is possible. Upon receipt of the result of the police
background check, the same shall be provided to the Township
Administrator, who shall provide a summary of the report to the members
of the Township Committee in a confidential memorandum.
this basis or, if employed, will be subject to immediate termination for
failure to accurately disclose such information.
B. If employment commences prior to receipt of the background check,
said employment shall be deemed conditional and not permanent until
such time as the results of the background check are received.
§ 27-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-5
26:92
Part 2
P[Aodliocpietse dAn1d0- P2r4o-2ce0d1u8res 23]
ARTICLE II
Personnel Policy of Rochelle Park
§ 27-6. Preamble; general.
A. It is the policy of the Township of Rochelle Park to treat employees and
prospective employees in a manner consistent with all applicable
employment laws and regulations. The personnel policies and
procedures of the Township of Rochelle Park shall apply to all
employees, volunteers, (elected or) appointed officials and independent
contractors. In the event there is a conflict between these rules and any
collective bargaining agreement, personnel services contract, or
federal or state law, including the Attorney General's guidelines with
respect to Police Department personnel matters and the New Jersey
Civil Service Act, the terms and conditions of that contract or law shall
prevail. In all other cases, these policies and procedures shall prevail.
B. All employees, officers and department heads shall be appointed and
promoted by the Township Committee. No person shall be employed or
promoted unless there exists a position created by an ordinance
adopted by the Township Committee as well as the necessary budget
appropriation and salary ordinance.
C. The Administrator and all managerial/supervisory personnel are
authorized and responsible for personnel policies and procedures. The
Administrator shall also have access to the Township Attorney/Labor
Attorney appointed by the Township Committee for guidance in
personnel matters.
D. As a general principle, the Township of Rochelle Park has a no-tolerance
policy towards workplace wrongdoing. Township officials, employees
and independent contractors are to report anything perceived to be
improper. The Township believes strongly in an open door policy and
encourages employees to talk with their supervisor, department head,
or administrator concerning any problem.
E. The Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual, adopted by the
Township Committee, is intended to provide guidelines covering public
service by Township employees and is not a contract. This manual
contains many, but not necessarily all, of the rules, regulations, and
conditions of employment for Township personnel. The provisions of
this manual may be amended and supplemented from time to time
without notice and at the sole discretion of the Township.
23.Editor's Note: This Ordinance Also Superseded Former Part 2, Policies And Procedures,
Adopted 10-19-2016 By Ord. No. 1105-16.
§ 27-6 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-6
26:93
F. To the maximum extent permitted by law, the employment practices of
the Township of Rochelle Park shall operate under the legal doctrine
known as employment at will. Within federal and state law, and any
applicable bargaining unit agreement, the Township of Rochelle Park
shall have the right to terminate an employee at any time and for any
reason, with or without notice, except the Township of Rochelle Park
shall comply with all federal and state legal requirements requiring
notice and an opportunity to be heard in the event of discipline or
dismissal.
§ 27-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-6
26:94
ARTICLE III
Employee Rights and Obligations Policies
§ 27-7. Antidiscrimination.
The Township of Rochelle Park is committed to the principle of equal
employment opportunity and antidiscrimination pursuant to Title VII of the
1964 Civil Rights Act, as amended, by the Equal Opportunity Act of 1972
and the New Jersey Law Against Discrimination, as amended, and by the
New Jersey Pregnant Worker's Fairness Act (LAD). Under no circumstances
will the Township discriminate on the basis of sex, race, creed, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, age, marital or political status, affectional
or sexual orientation, domestic partnership status, civil union status,
atypical heredity, cellular or blood trait, genetic information, disability
(including AIDS or HIV infection), pregnancy (including pregnancy-related
medical condition), childbirth, breastfeeding, liability for service in the
United States armed forces, gender identity or expression, and/or any other
characteristic protected by law. Decisions regarding the hiring, promotion,
transfer, demotion or termination are based solely on the qualifications and
performance of the employee or prospective employee. If any employee or
prospective employee feels they have been treated unfairly, they have the
right to address their concern with their supervisor, or if they prefer their
administrator.
§ 27-8. Americans with Disabilities Act and New Jersey Pregnant
Worker's Fairness Act.
A. In compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, the ADA
Amendments Act and the New Jersey Law Against Discrimination, as
amended by the New Jersey Pregnant Worker's Fairness Act (LAD), the
Township of Rochelle Park does not discriminate based on disability,
pregnancy, pregnancy-related medical condition or childbirth. The
Township of Rochelle Park will endeavor to make every work
environment handicap accessible and all future construction and
renovation of facilities will be in accordance with applicable barrierfree
federal and state regulations and the Americans with Disabilities
Act Accessibility Guidelines, as well as the ADA Amendments Act.
B. It is the policy of the Township to comply with all relevant and
applicable provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act, the ADA
Amendments Act and LAD. We will not discriminate against any
employee or job applicant with respect to any terms, conditions, or
privileges of employment on the basis of a known or perceived
disability, pregnancy, childbirth,breastfeeding or pregnancy-related
medical condition. We will also make reasonable accommodations to
known physical or mental limitations of all employees and applicants
with disabilities or who are pregnant, provided that the individual is
otherwise qualified to safely perform the essential functions of the job
and also provided that the accommodation does not impose undue
hardship on the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 27-7 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-8
26:95
§ 27-9. Contagious or life threatening illnesses.
C. The Administrator shall engage in an interactive dialogue with
disabled/pregnant employees and prospective disabled/pregnant
employees or their respective physician to identify reasonable
accommodations. In the case of an employee breastfeeding her infant
child, the accommodation shall include reasonable break time each day
to the employee and a suitable room or other location with privacy,
other than a toilet stall, in close proximity to work area for the
employee to express breast milk for the child. All decisions with regard
to reasonable accommodation shall be made by the Administrator.
Employees who are assigned to a new position as a reasonable
accommodation will receive the salary for their new position. The
Americans with Disabilities Act does not require the Township of
Rochelle Park to offer permanent light duty, relocate essential job
functions, or provide personal use items such as eyeglasses, hearing
aids, wheelchairs, etc.
D. Employees should also offer assistance, to the extent possible, to any
member of the public who requests or needs an accommodation when
visiting Township of Rochelle Park facilities. Any questions concerning
proper assistance should be directed to the Administrator.
A. The Township of Rochelle Park encourages employees with contagious
diseases or life-threatening illnesses to continue their normal pursuits,
including work, to the extent allowed by their condition. The Township
of Rochelle Park shall make reasonable accommodations to known
physical and mental limitations of all employees, provided that the
individual is otherwise qualified to safely perform the essential
functions of the job and also provided that the accommodation does not
impose an unreasonable hardship on the Township of Rochelle Park.
B. The Township of Rochelle Park will take reasonable precautions to
protect such information from inappropriate disclosure, including the
following:
(1) Medical information may be disclosed with the prior written
informed consent of the person who is the subject of the
information.
(2) Information may be disclosed without the prior written consent to
qualified individuals for the purpose of conducting management
audits, financial audits, and program evaluations, but these
individuals shall not identify, either directly or indirectly, the
person who is the subject of the record in a report or evaluation, or
otherwise disclose the person's identity in any manner. Information
shall not be released to these individuals unless it is vital to the
audit or evaluation.
(3) Information may be disclosed to the Department of Health as
required by state or federal law.
§ 27-8 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-9
26:96
§ 27-10. Safety.
§ 27-11. Transitional duty.
C. Managers and other employees have a responsibility to maintain the
confidentially of employee medical information. Anyone inappropriately
disclosing such information shall be subject to disciplinary action.
A. The Township of Rochelle Park will provide a safe and healthy work
environment and shall comply with the Public Employees Occupational
Safety and Health Act (PEOSHA). The Township of Rochelle Park is
equally concerned about the safety of the public. Consistent with this
policy, employees will receive periodic safety training and will be
provided with appropriate safety equipment. Employees are
responsible for observing safety rules and using available safety
devices including personal protective equipment. Failure to do so
constitutes grounds for disciplinary action. Any occupational or public
unsafe condition, practice, procedure or act must be immediately
reported to the supervisor or Department Head. Any on-the-job
accident or accident involving Township of Rochelle Park facilities,
equipment or motor vehicles must also be immediately reported to the
supervisor or department head.
B. The Township of Rochelle Park has appointed a Safety Committee that
meets on a regular basis to discuss and recommend solutions to safety
problems. Employees are encouraged to discuss safety concerns with
their Safety Committee representative.
A. The Township will endeavor to bring employees with temporary
disabilities back on the job as soon as possible and may assign
transitional duty to employees who temporarily cannot perform the
essential functions of their positions because of injury or illness.
Transitional duty is not guaranteed and will not exceed 45 workdays. If
a department already has one employee on transitional duty, it is
unlikely that another employee from that department will be assigned
transitional duty.
B. An employee requesting transitional duty or the workers compensation
physician shall notify the Administrator as soon as the temporarily
disabled employee is able to return to work with restrictions.
Transitional duty will only be assigned if the employee will probably be
able to perform the essential functions of the position after the
transitional duty period. The Administrator will consult with the
department head to determine if there is any meaningful work that can
be performed consistent with the restrictions. Transitional duty
assignments may be in any department and not just the employee's
normal department. The Administrator will decide if it is in the best
interest of the Township of Rochelle Park to approve a transitional duty
request and will notify the employee of the decision. The Township
§ 27-9 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-11
26:97
§ 27-12. Drugs and alcohol.
reserves the right to terminate the transitional duty assignment at any
time without cause.
C. Employees may not refuse transitional duty assignments that are
recommended by the workers compensation physician. In such cases,
failure to report to work as directed shall constitute immediate grounds
for dismissal. If the employee believes that the transitional duty
assignment is beyond the employee's abilities, the employee may
request a meeting with the Administrator who will render a written
response within 24 hours.
D. Employees on transitional duty will receive their regular salaries and
are prohibited from engaging in any outside employment of any kind
unless they receive prior written approval from the Administrator. If
transitional duty is approved, the employee or workers compensation
physician must keep the Administrator informed of the medical
progress. (Employees assigned to transitional duty will be allotted time
off to attend medical or physical therapy appointments but must
request leave time for any other reason. If, at the end of transitional
duty period the employee is not able to return to work without
restrictions, the Township of Rochelle Park reserves the right at its sole
discretion to extend the transitional duty or place the employee back on
workers compensation or disability. This policy does not affect an
employee's rights under the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Family
and Medical Leave Act, the Fair Labor Standards Act, the Contagious or
Life Threatening Illnesses Policy or other Federal or State law.
A. The Township of Rochelle Park recognizes that the possession or use of
unlawful drugs and the abuse of alcohol pose a threat to the health and
safety of all employees. Any employee who is observed by a supervisor
or department head to be intoxicated or under the influence of alcohol
or drugs during working hours or is under reasonable suspicion of same
shall be immediately tested and is subject to discipline up to and
including termination. The supervisor or department head will
immediately report any reasonable suspicions to the Administrator.
B. An employee will be required to submit to alcohol, drug or controlled
substance testing when the employee's work performance causes a
reasonable suspicion that that employee is impaired due to current
intoxication, drug or controlled substance use or in cases where
employment has been conditioned upon remaining alcohol, drug, or
controlled dangerous substance free following treatment. Refusal to
submit to testing when requested may result in immediate disciplinary
action, including termination. Supervisors or department heads that
observe behavior constituting reasonable suspicion are required to
institute testing and do not have the option of sending the employee
home as an alternative.
§ 27-11 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-12
26:98
§ 27-13. Workplace violence.
C. The manufacturing, distribution, dispensation, possession, and use of
alcohol or unlawful drugs on Township of Rochelle Park premises or
during work hours by employees is strictly prohibited.
D. Employees must notify their supervisor within five days of conviction
for a drug or alcohol related violation, whether or not the violation
occurred in the workplace.
E. Employees who are required to maintain a commercial driver's license
(CDL) are subject to random drug testing as required by the federal
government.
F. Employees using prescription drugs that may affect job performance or
safety must notify the Administrator who is required to maintain the
confidentiality of any information regarding an employee's medical
condition in accordance with the Health Insurance Portability and
Protection Act. Township of Rochelle Park personnel who hold a
commercial driver's license (CDL) are subject to the provisions of the
Commercial Driver's Licenses Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy. (A
program to assist employees who may have a drug/alcohol problem is
provided through the Township of Rochelle Park's Employee Assistance
Program. No prescription drug should be used by any person other than
the individual to whom it is prescribed. Such substances or
nonprescription (over-the-counter) drugs should be used only as
prescribed or indicated. Employees are prohibited from consuming
prescription drugs that are not prescribed in their name on Township of
Rochelle Park property or while performing Township of Rochelle Park
business. Soliciting or distributing prescription drugs for or to other
employees is also strictly prohibited.
A. The Township of Rochelle Park will not tolerate workplace violence.
Violent acts or threats made by an employee against another person or
property are cause for immediate dismissal and will be fully prosecuted.
This includes any violence or threats made on Township of Rochelle
Park property, at Township of Rochelle Park events or under other
circumstances that may negatively affect the Township of Rochelle
Park's ability to conduct business.
B. Prohibited conduct includes:
(1) Causing physical injury to another person;
(2) Making threatening remarks;
(3) Aggressive, hostile, or bullying behavior that creates a reasonable
fear of injury to another person or subjects another individual to
emotional distress;
(4) Intentionally damaging employer property or property of another
employee;
§ 27-12 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-13
26:99
§ 27-14. General anti-harassment.
(5) Possession of a weapon while on Township of Rochelle Park
property or while on Township of Rochelle Park business except
with the authority of the Police Chief; and
(6) Committing acts motivated by, or related to, sexual harassment or
domestic violence.
C. Any potentially dangerous situations must be immediately reported.
The Township of Rochelle Park will actively intervene in any potentially
hostile or violent situation.
A. It is the Township of Rochelle Park policy to prohibit harassment of an
employee by another employee, management representative, supplier,
volunteer, or business invitee on the basis of actual or perceived sex,
race, creed, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, marital or
political status, affectional or sexual orientation, domestic partnership
status, civil union status, atypical heredity, cellular or blood trait,
genetic information, disability (including AIDS or HIV infection),
gender identity or expression, liability for service in the United States
armed forces, and/or any other characteristic protected by law.
Harassment of nonemployees by our employees is also prohibited.
While it is not easy to define precisely what harassment is, it includes
slurs, epithets, threats, derogatory comments, unwelcome jokes,
teasing, caricatures or representations of persons using electronically
or physically altered photos, drawings or images, and other similar
verbal, written, printed or physical conduct.
B. If an employee is witness to or believes to have experienced
harassment, immediate notification of the supervisor or other
appropriate person should take place. See the Employee Complaint
Policy.24
C. Harassment of any employees, in connection with their work, by
nonemployees may also be a violation of this policy. Any employee who
experiences harassment by a nonemployee, or who observes
harassment of an employee by a nonemployee should report such
harassment to the supervisor. Appropriate action will be taken against
any nonemployee.
D. Notification of appropriate personnel of any harassment problem is
essential to the success of this policy and the Township of Rochelle Park
generally. The Township of Rochelle Park cannot resolve a harassment
problem unless it knows about it. Therefore, it is the responsibility of all
employees to bring those kinds of problems to attention of the
appropriate officials so that steps are taken to correct them.
24.Editor's Note: See § 27-17, Employee Complaints.
§ 27-13 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-14
26:100
§ 27-15. Anti-sexual harassment.
E. Violation of this harassment policy will subject employees to
disciplinary action, up to and including, immediate discharge.
A. It is the Township of Rochelle Park's policy to prohibit sexual
harassment of an employee by another employee, management
representative, supplier, volunteer, or business invitee. The Township of
Rochelle Park prohibits sexual harassment from occurring in the
workplace or at any other location at which Township of Rochelle Park
sponsored activity takes place. Sexual harassment of nonemployees by
our employees is also prohibited. The purpose of this policy is not to
regulate personal morality or to encroach upon one's personal life, but
to demonstrate a strong commitment to maintaining a workplace free of
sexual harassment.
B. Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors and other
verbal, physical or visual conduct of a sexual nature constitute
harassment when:
(1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment;
(2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for an employment decision affecting the individual; or
(3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive work environment.
C. Regarding unwelcome sexual advances toward nonemployees, requests
for sexual favors and other verbal, physical or visual conduct of a sexual
nature constitute harassment when:
(1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly in
exchange for a benefit;
(2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for a decision affecting the individual; or
(3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering
with an individual's activities or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive environment.
D. Sexual harassment may include unwanted sexual advances; offering
employment benefits in exchange for sexual favors; visual conduct
(leering, making sexual gestures, displaying of sexually suggestive
objects or pictures, cartoons or posters); verbal sexual advances,
propositions or requests; verbal abuse of a sexual nature; graphic
verbal commentaries about an individual's body; sexually degrading
words used to describe an individual; suggestive or obscene letters,
caricatures or representations of persons using electronically or
§ 27-14 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-15
26:101
§ 27-16. Whistle blower protection.
physically altered photos, drawings, or images; notes or invitations;
and/or, physical conduct (touching, assault, impeding or blocking
movements).
E. If an employee is witness to or believes that the employee has
experienced sexual harassment, they must immediately notify their
supervisor or other appropriate person. See the Employee Complaint
Policy.25
F. Harassment of Township of Rochelle Park employees, in connection
with their work, by nonemployees may also be a violation of this policy.
Any employee who experiences harassment by a nonemployee, or who
observes harassment of an employee by a nonemployee should report
such harassment to their supervisor. Appropriate action will be taken
against any nonemployee.
G. Notification by employee to appropriate personnel of any harassment
problem is essential to the success of this policy and the Township of
Rochelle Park generally. The Township of Rochelle Park cannot resolve
a harassment problem unless it is reported. Therefore, it is the
responsibility of all employees to bring those kinds of problems to the
attention of management so that steps are necessary to correct them.
H. Violation of this sexual harassment policy will subject employees to
disciplinary action, up to and including, immediate discharge.
A. Employees have the right under the Conscientious Employee Protection
Act (CEPA) to complain about any activity, policy or practice that the
employees reasonably believe is in violation of a law, rule, or regulation
promulgated pursuant to law without fear of retaliation or reprisal. This
right shall be communicated to all employees in an annual letter
outlining the specific employee complaint procedure and in a posted
notice. A written acknowledgement that the employee received, read,
and understood this letter will be included in the employee's official
personnel file. The annual notice shall be in English and Spanish and
must contain the name of the person who is designated to receive
written notification of policies or practices that might violate CEPA.
This right will also be communicated in the Employee Handbook.26 All
complaints will be taken seriously and promptly investigated.
B. The Township of Rochelle Park shall not take any retaliatory action or
tolerate any reprisal against an employee for any of the following:
(1) Disclosing or threatening to disclose to a supervisor, department
head, the Administrator, other official or to a public body, as defined
in the Conscientious Employee Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 34:19-1 et
25.Editor's Note: See § 27-17.
26.Editor's Note: See § 27-66.
§ 27-15 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-16
26:102
§ 27-17. Employee complaints.
seq.) an activity, policy or practice that the employee reasonably
believes is in violation of a law, a rule or regulation promulgated
pursuant to law;
(2) Providing information to, or testifying before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, an inquiry into any violation
of law, or a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law; or
(3) Objecting to, or refusing to participate in any activity, policy, or
practice that the employee reasonably believes is a violation of a
law, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law; is fraudulent
or criminal; or is incompatible with a clear public policy mandate
concerning the public health, safety, or welfare.
C. In accordance with the statute, the employee must bring the violation to
the attention of the Administrator. However, disclosure is not required
where the employee is reasonably certain that the violation is known to
one or more officials; the employee reasonably fears physical harm; or
the situation is emergent in nature. Employees are encouraged to
complain in writing using the Employee Complaint form.27 See
Employee Complaints § 27-17. Under the law, the employee must give
the Township of Rochelle Park a reasonable opportunity to correct the
activity, policy or practice. The administration of whistle blower
complaints is not subject to the limitations in the Grievance Policy.28
A. Employees who observe actions they believe to constitute harassment,
sexual harassment, or any other workplace wrongdoing should
immediately report the matter to their supervisor, or, if they prefer, or
do not think that the matter can be discussed with their supervisor, they
should contact the department head and or the Administrator.
Reporting of such incidents is encouraged both when an employee feels
that he or she is subject to such incidents, or observes such incidents in
reference to other employees. Employees should report incidents in
writing using the employee complaint form, but may make a verbal
complaint at their discretion. If the employee has any questions about
what constitutes harassment, sexual harassment, or any other
workplace wrongdoing, they may ask their supervisor or one of the
individuals listed above. All reports of harassment, sexual harassment,
or other wrongdoing will be promptly investigated by a person who is
not involved in the alleged harassment or wrongdoing.
B. No employee will be penalized in any way for reporting a complaint.
There will be no discrimination or retaliation against any individual who
files a good-faith harassment complaint, even if the investigation
produces insufficient evidence to support the complaint, and even if the
charges cannot be proven. There will be no discrimination or retaliation
27.Editor's Note: Said form is included as an attachment to this chapter.
28.Editor's Note: See § 27-18.
§ 27-16 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-17
26:103
§ 27-18. Grievances.
against any other individual who participates in the investigation of a
complaint.
C. If the investigation substantiates the complaint, appropriate corrective
and/or disciplinary action will be swiftly pursued. Disciplinary action,
up to and including discharge, will also be taken against individuals
who make false or frivolous accusations, such as those made
maliciously or recklessly. Actions taken internally to investigate and
resolve harassment complaints will be conducted confidentially to the
extent practicable and appropriate in order to protect the privacy of
persons involved. Any investigation may include interviews with the
parties involved in the incident, and if necessary, with individuals who
may have observed the incident or conduct or who have other relevant
knowledge. The complaining employee will be notified of a decision at
the conclusion of the investigation, within a reasonable time from the
date of the report an incident.
A. A grievance is any formal dispute concerning the interpretation,
application and enforcement of any personnel policy or procedure of
the Township of Rochelle Park. Grievances from union employees will
be handled pursuant to the terms of the applicable bargaining unit
agreement. All grievances from nonunion employees must be presented
within five working dates after arising and failure to report a grievance
within such time shall be deemed as a waiver of the grievance. In the
event of a settlement or ruling that results in a determination of
monetary liability, such liability shall not exceed more than thirty
working days prior to the date the grievance was first presented in
writing.
(1) Step One: Any employee or group of employees with a grievance
shall verbally communicate the grievance to the supervisor or
department head who will discuss the matter with the
Administrator. The supervisor or department head will
communicate the decision to the employee within two working
days.
(2) Step Two: If the employee is not satisfied with the decision, the
employee must submit a written grievance to the Administrator
detailing the facts and the relief requested. The decision in step
one will be deemed final if the employee fails to submit a written
grievance within five days working days of the step one decision.
After consulting the Administrator he/she will render a written
decision to the employee within five working days after receipt of
the written grievance.
§ 27-17 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-18
26:104
§ 27-19. Access to personnel files.
B. These limitations do not apply to employee complaints made under the
general anti-harassment policy,29 the anti-sexual harassment policy30 or
the whistle blower policy.31
A. The official personnel file for each employee shall be maintained by the
Administrator. Personnel files are confidential records that must be
secured in a locked cabinet and will only be available to authorized
managerial and supervisory personnel on a need-to-know basis.
Records relating to any medical condition will be maintained in a
separate file. Electronic personnel and medical records must be
protected from unauthorized access. Upon request, employees may
inspect their own personnel files at a mutually agreeable time on the
Township of Rochelle Park premises in the presence of the
Administrator or a designated supervisor. The employee will be entitled
to see any records used to determine his or her qualification for
employment, promotion or wage increases and any records used for
disciplinary purposes. Employees may not remove any papers from the
file. Employees will be allowed to have a copy of any document they
have signed relating to their obtaining employment. Employees may
add to the file their versions of any disputed item.
B. Personnel files do not contain confidential employee medical
information. Any such information that the Township of Rochelle Park
may obtain will be maintained in separate files and treated at all times
as confidential information. Any such medical information may be
disclosed under very limited circumstances in accordance with any
applicable legal requirements.
C. The Township of Rochelle Park endeavors to maintain the privacy of
personnel records. There are limited circumstances in which the
Township of Rochelle Park will release information contained in
personnel or medical records to persons outside the Township of
Rochelle Park. These circumstances include:
(1) In response to a valid subpoena, court order or order of an
authorized administrative agency;
(2) To an authorized governmental agency as part of an investigation
of the Township of Rochelle Park's compliance with applicable law;
(3) To the Township of Rochelle Park's agents and attorneys, when
necessary;
(4) In a lawsuit, administrative proceeding, grievance or arbitration in
which the employee and the Township of Rochelle Park are parties;
29.Editor's Note: See § 27-14.
30.Editor's Note: See § 27-15.
31.Editor's Note: See § 27-16.
§ 27-18 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-19
26:105
§ 27-20. Conflicts of Interest.
(5) In a workers' compensation proceeding;
(6) To administer benefit plans;
(7) To an authorized health care provider;
(8) To first aid or safety personnel, when necessary; and
(9) To a potential future employer or other person requesting a
verification of your employment as described in § 27-72, Requests
for employment verification and reference.
A. Employees including Township of Rochelle Park officials must conduct
business according to the highest ethical standards of public service.
Employees are expected to devote their best efforts to the interests of
the Township of Rochelle Park. Violations of this policy will result in
appropriate discipline including termination.
B. The Township of Rochelle Park recognizes the right of employees to
engage in outside activities that are private nature and unrelated to
Township of Rochelle Park business. However, business dealings that
appear to create a conflict between the employee and the Township of
Rochelle Park's interests are unlawful under the New Jersey Local
Government Ethics Act. Under the Act, certain employees and officials
are required to annually file with the Township of Rochelle Park Clerk a
state mandated disclosure form. The Township of Rochelle Park Clerk
will notify employees and Township of Rochelle Park officials subject to
the filing requirements of the Act.
C. A potential or actual conflict of interest occurs whenever an employee
including a Township of Rochelle Park official is in a position to
influence a Township of Rochelle Park decision that may result in a
personal gain for the employee or an immediate relative, including a
spouse or significant other, child, parent, stepchild, sibling,
grandparents, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, grandchildren, niece,
nephew, uncle, aunt, or any person related by blood or marriage
residing in an employee's household. Employees are required to
disclose possible conflicts so that the Township of Rochelle Park may
assess and prevent potential conflicts. If there are any questions
whether an action or proposed course of conduct would create a
conflict of interest, immediately contact the Administrator to obtain
clarification.
D. Employees are allowed to hold outside employment as long as it does
not interfere with their Township of Rochelle Park responsibilities.
Employees are prohibited from engaging in outside employment
activities while on the job or using Township of Rochelle Park time,
supplies or equipment in the outside employment activities. The
Administrator may request employees to restrict outside employment if
the quality of Township of Rochelle Park work diminishes. Any
§ 27-19 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-20
26:106
§ 27-21. Political activity.
Employees have exactly the same right as any other citizen to join political
organizations and participate in political activities, as long as they maintain
a clear separation between their official responsibilities and their political
affiliations. Employees are prohibited from engaging in political activities
while performing their public duties and from using Township of Rochelle
Park time, supplies or equipment in any political activity. Any violation
of this policy must be reported to the supervisor, department head,
Administrator or the Township attorney.
§ 27-22. Employee evaluation.
The department head will complete a written evaluation and appraisal
form32 for every employee to measure progress and to encourage selfimprovement
at least once a year. The evaluation will also record additional
duties performed, educational courses completed as well as a plan to
correct any weak points using the Employee Counseling form.33 After
completing the evaluation, the supervisor or department head will review
the results with the employee and return the form(s) with the signed
acknowledgement to the Administrator. After review by the Administrator,
the form(s) are to be forwarded to the Administrator for inclusion in the
employee's official personnel file. As a part of the evaluation, employees
have the right to request a conference with the Administrator.
§ 27-23. Employee discipline.
employees who holds an interest in, or is employed by, any business
doing business with the Township of Rochelle Park must submit a
written notice of these outside interests to the Administrator.
E. Employees may not accept donations, gratuities, contributions or gifts
that could be interpreted to affect their Township of Rochelle Park
duties. Under no circumstances may an employee accept donations,
gratuities, contributions or gifts from a vendor doing business with or
seeking to do business with the Township of Rochelle Park or any
person or firm seeking to influence Township of Rochelle Park
decisions. Meals and other entertainment valued in excess of $100 are
also prohibited. Employees are required to report to the Administrator
any offer of a donation, gratuity, contribution or gift including meals
and entertainment that is in violation of this policy.
A. An employee may be subject to discipline for any of the following
reasons:
(1) Falsification of public records, including attendance and other
personnel records.
32.Editor's Note: Said form is included as an attachment to this chapter.
33.Editor's Note: Said form is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 27-20 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-23
26:107
(2) Failure to report absence.
(3) Harassment of coworkers and/or volunteers and/or visitors.
(4) Theft or attempted theft of property belonging to the Township of
Rochelle Park, fellow employees, volunteers or visitors.
(5) Failure to report to work day or days prior to or following a
vacation, holiday and/or leave, and/or any other unauthorized day
of absence.
(6) Fighting on Township of Rochelle Park property at any time.
(7) Being under the influence of intoxicants (e.g., liquor) or illegal
drugs (e.g., cocaine or marijuana) on Township of Rochelle Park
property and at any time during work hours.
(8) Possession, sale, transfer or use of intoxicants or illegal drugs on
Township of Rochelle Park property and at any time during work
hours.
(9) Insubordination.
(10) Entering the building without permission during nonscheduled
work hours.
(11) Soliciting on Township of Rochelle Park premises during work time.
This includes, but is not limited to, distribution of literature or
products or soliciting membership in fraternal, religious, social or
political organizations, and/or sales of products, such as those from
Avon, Amway, etc.
(12) Careless waste of materials or abuse of tools, equipment or
supplies.
(13) Deliberate destruction or damage to Township of Rochelle Park or
suppliers' property.
(14) Sleeping on the job.
(15) Carrying weapons of any kind on Township of Rochelle Park
premises and/or during work hours, unless carrying a weapon is a
function of your job duties.
(16) Violation of established safety and fire regulations.
(17) Unscheduled absence, and chronic or excessive absence.
(18) Chronic tardiness.
(19) Unauthorized absence from work area, and/or roaming or loitering
on the premises, during scheduled work hours.
(20) Defacing walls, bulletin boards or any other Township of Rochelle
Park or supplier property.
§ 27-23 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-23
26:108
(21) Failure to perform duties, inefficiency or substandard performance.
(22) Unauthorized disclosure of confidential Township of Rochelle Park
information.
(23) Gambling on Township of Rochelle Park premises.
(24) Horseplay, disorderly conduct and use of abusive and/or obscene
language on Township of Rochelle Park premises.
(25) Deliberate delay or restriction of your work effort, and/or
incitement of others to delay or restrict their work effort.
(26) Conviction of a crime or disorderly persons offense.
(27) Violating any Township of Rochelle Park rules or policies.
(28) Conduct unbecoming a public employee.
(29) Violation of Township of Rochelle Park policies, procedures and
regulations.
(30) Violation of federal, state or Township of Rochelle Park laws, rules,
or regulations concerning drug and alcohol use and possession.
(31) Misuse of public property, including motor vehicles.
(32) Unauthorized use of computers, Internet, and e-mail.
(33) Other sufficient cause.
B. Major disciplinary action includes termination, disciplinary demotion or
suspension or fine exceeding five working days. Minor discipline
includes a formal, written reprimand or a suspension or fine of five
working days or less. Employees who object to the terms or conditions
of the discipline are entitled to a hearing under the applicable
grievance procedure. In every case involving employee discipline,
employees will be provided with an opportunity to respond to charges
either verbally or in writing.
C. In cases of employee misconduct, the Township of Rochelle Park
believes in corrective action for the purpose of correcting undesirable
behavior and preventing a recurrence of that behavior. The corrective
action taken will be related to the gravity of the situation, the number
and kind of previous infractions and other circumstances. In every case,
employees will be given an opportunity to state the situation from their
point of view.
D. In order to correct undesirable behavior, supervisors and managers
may utilize the following corrective tools: verbal reprimand;
Administrator review; written reprimand; suspension; fines, and,
dismissal. At the discretion of Township of Rochelle Park, action may
begin at any step, and/or certain steps may be repeated or bypassed,
§ 27-23 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-23
26:109
§ 27-24. Employee termination.
§ 27-25. Resignation.
An employee who intends to resign must notify the Department Head in
writing at least two weeks in advance. After giving notice of resignation,
employees are expected to assist their supervisor and co-employees by
providing information concerning their current projects and help in the
training of a replacement. During the last two weeks, the employee may
not use paid time off, except paid holidays. The Department Head will
prepare an employee action form34 showing any pay or other money owed
the employee. The Administrator will conduct a confidential exit interview
depending on the severity and nature of the infraction and the
employee's work/disciplinary record.
E. Neither this manual nor any other Township of Rochelle Park
guidelines, policies or practices create an employment contract.
Employment with Township of Rochelle Park may be terminated at any
time with or without cause or reason by the employee or Township of
Rochelle Park.
A. An employee may be terminated depending upon the circumstances for
any of the following:
(1) Incompetence, inefficiency or failure to perform duties;
(2) Conviction of a crime;
(3) Conduct unbecoming a public employee;
(4) Violation of Township of Rochelle Park policies, procedures and
regulations;
(5) Falsification of public records including personnel records;
(6) Violation of federal, state or Township of Rochelle Park regulations
concerning drug and alcohol use and or possession;
(7) Chronic or excessive absenteeism or lateness;
(8) Misuse of public property, including motor vehicles; and
(9) Other sufficient cause.
B. Major disciplinary action includes termination, disciplinary demotion or
suspension or fine exceeding five working days. Minor disciplinary
includes a formal, written reprimand or a suspension or fine of five
working days or less. Employees who object to the terms or conditions
of the discipline are entitled to a hearing under the applicable
grievance procedure.
34.Editor's Note: Said form is on file in the Township offices.
§ 27-23 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-25
26:110
to discuss benefits including COBRA options, appropriate retirement issues
and pay due. A COBRA notification letter will be sent to the employee's
home address. The exit interview will also include an open discussion with
the employee. On the last day of work, and prior to receiving the final
paycheck, the employee must return the employee identification card, all
keys and equipment. At this time, the employee will sign the termination
memo designating all money owed and this memo will be retained in the
official personnel file.
§ 27-26. Work force reduction.
The Township of Rochelle Park may institute layoff actions for economy,
efficiency or other related reasons, but will first consider voluntary
alternatives. Seniority, lateral or other reemployment rights for employees
will be determined by the Administrator.
§ 27-27. Driver's license requirements.
A. Any employee whose work requires that the operation of Township of
Rochelle Park vehicles must hold a valid New Jersey State driver's
license.
B. All new employees who will be assigned work entailing the operating of
a Township of Rochelle Park vehicle will be required to submit to a
Department of Motor Vehicles driving records check as a condition of
employment. A report indicating a suspended or revoked license status
may be cause to deny or terminate employment.
C. Periodic checks of employee's driver's licenses through visual and
formal Department of Motor Vehicles review checks shall be made by
department heads or division supervisors. Any employee who does not
hold a valid driver's license will not be allowed to operate a Township of
Rochelle Park vehicle until such time as a valid license is obtained.
D. Any employee performing work which requires the operation of a
Township of Rochelle Park vehicle must notify the immediate supervisor
in those cases where a license is expired, suspended or revoked and/or
who is unable to obtain an occupational permit from the State
Department of Licensing. An employee that fails to report such an
instance, is subject to disciplinary action, including demotion or
termination. An employee who fails to immediately report such
revocation or suspension to their supervisor and continues to operate a
Township of Rochelle Park vehicle shall be subject to possible
termination.
E. Any information obtained by the Township of Rochelle Park in
accordance with this section shall be used by the Township of Rochelle
Park only for carrying out its lawful functions and for other lawful
purposes in accordance with the Driver's Privacy Protection Act (18
U.S.C. § 2721 et seq.)
§ 27-25 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-27
26:111

ARTICLE IV
Workplace Policies
§ 27-28. Job description.
A job description, including qualifications, shall be maintained for each
position (pursuant to New Jersey Department of Personnel guidelines. All
job descriptions must be approved by the Administrator. The Administrator
will make copies available upon request.
§ 27-29. Attendance.
All employees are expected to be at work and ready to assume their duties
at the beginning of the scheduled workday. Lateness and absence will be
tolerated only in emergencies or when the supervisor gives prior approval.
All absences must be reported to the supervisor prior to the start of the
normal workday. The normal working hours for administrative departments
are 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. The working hours for other departments are
established by departmental procedures and bargaining unit agreements.
§ 27-30. Early closing and delayed opening.
In the event of unsafe conditions, the Administrator may authorize
department heads to close operations earlier than the normal working
hours. If conditions exist prior to scheduled openings, the Administrator
shall notify department heads of a delayed opening and a new opening
time. Each department will have a calling system in place. If the employee
chooses not to report to work, a full vacation day or compensating time will
be charged. Sick time will only be charged for a legitimate illness. If work
is called off for the day, no time will be charged for the day. This provision
does not apply to the Department of Public Works, Police, Fire, Emergency
Services or any personnel who may be required to assist in an emergency.
§ 27-31. Breaks.
Administrative personnel are entitled to a one-hour lunch that is to be
arranged by the supervisor so that offices continue to function. All
employees are entitled to a fifteen-minute break in the morning and in the
afternoon. Administrative personnel must arrange breaks so that offices
continue to function. The supervisor will schedule breaks for other
employees.
§ 27-32. Dress code.
Dress, grooming and personal hygiene must be appropriate for the position.
Uniforms are required for certain jobs and are to be worn in accordance
with applicable departmental standards. All other employees are required
to dress in a manner that is normally acceptable in similar business
establishments and consistent with applicable safety standards. Employees
shall not wear suggestive attire, jeans, athletic clothing, shorts, sandals,
T-shirts, novelty buttons, baseball hats and similar items of casual attire
§ 27-28 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-32
26:113
that do not present a businesslike appearance. Hair, sideburns, moustaches
and beards must be clean, combed and neatly trimmed. Shaggy, unkempt
hair is not permissible regardless of length. Tattoos and body piercings,
other than earrings, may not be visible. With the advance approval of the
Administrator, the Township of Rochelle Park will make reasonable religious
accommodations that do not violate safety standards. Employees violating
this policy shall be required to take corrective action or will be sent home
without pay.
§ 27-33. No smoking.
The New Jersey Legislature has declared that in all governmental buildings
the rights of nonsmokers to breathe clean air supersedes the rights of
smokers. In accordance with state law, the Township of Rochelle Park has
adopted a smoke-free policy for all buildings. Township of Rochelle Park
facilities shall be smoke-free and no employee or visitor will be permitted
to smoke anywhere in Township of Rochelle Park buildings. Employees are
permitted to smoke only outside Township of Rochelle Park buildings and
such locations as not to allow the reentry of smoke into building entrances.
Smoking inside vehicles owned by the Township of Rochelle Park and near
equipment that may be sensitive to smoke is also prohibited. This policy
shall be strictly enforced and any employee found in violation will be subject
to disciplinary action.
§ 27-34. Use of Township vehicles.
§ 27-35. Telephone usage.
Township of Rochelle Park telephones are for official business and
employees may make a personal call only to inform their family of
unexpected overtime. Charges for all other personal calls must be
reimbursed to the Township of Rochelle Park. The use of hand-held cell
phones while driving Township of Rochelle Park vehicles or while driving on
Township of Rochelle Park business is prohibited.
§ 27-36. Communication media.
A. Unless an employee receives permission from the Administrator,
Township of Rochelle Park owned vehicles shall be used only on official
business and all passengers must be on Township of Rochelle Park
business.
B. Vehicles may be taken home only with the advance approval of the
Administrator. When an employee takes home a Township of Rochelle
Park vehicle, it is to be used only for official Township of Rochelle Park
business; any other use is not permitted. At no time shall children be in
the Township of Rochelle Park vehicle when responding to an
emergency. Any violation of this policy constitutes cause for disciplinary
action.
§ 27-32 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-36
26:114
A. The Township of Rochelle Park's communication media are the property
of the Township of Rochelle Park and, as such, are to be used for
legitimate business purposes only. For purposes of this section
"communication media" includes all electronic media forms provided by
the Township of Rochelle Park, such as cell phones, smart phones,
computers, electronic tablets, access to the internet, voicemail, e-mail,
and fax. Employees are restricted from accessing or using the
company’s communication media for personal purposes during
company time on company equipment without prior authorization from
the Administration to do so.
B. All data stored on and/or transmitted through communication media is
the property of the Township of Rochelle Park. For purposes of this
policy, "data" includes electronically-stored files, programs, tables, data
bases, audio and video objects, spreadsheets, reports and printed or
microfiche materials which serve a Township of Rochelle Park business
purpose, regardless of who creates, processes or maintains the data, or
whether the data is processed manually or though any of the Township
of Rochelle Park mainframe, midrange or workstations; servers,
routers, gateways, bridges, hubs, switches and other hardware
components of the Township of Rochelle Park local or wide-area
networks.
C. The Township of Rochelle Park respects the individual privacy of its
employees. However, employee communications transmitted by the
Township of Rochelle Park communication media are not private to the
individual. All communication media and all communications and stored
information transmitted, received, or contained in or through such
media may be monitored by the Township of Rochelle Park. The
Township of Rochelle Park reserves the absolute right to access, review,
audit and disclose all matters entered into, sent over, placed in storage
in the Township of Rochelle Park communication media. By using the
Township of Rochelle Park equipment and/or communication media,
employees consent to have such use monitored at any time, with or
without notice, by Township of Rochelle Park personnel. The existence
of passwords does not restrict or eliminate the Township of Rochelle
Park ability or right to access electronic communications. However, the
Township of Rochelle Park cannot require the employee to provide its
password to his/her personal accounts.
D. All email, voicemail and Internet messages (including any technologybased
messaging) are official documents subject to the provisions of the
Open Public Records Act (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1). Employees of the Township
of Rochelle Park are required to use the assigned municipal email
account for all Township of Rochelle Park business and correspondence.
The use of private email accounts for any Township of Rochelle Park
business or during business hours is strictly prohibited. Employees are
hereby advised that if they conduct work-related business on their
personal e-mails, cell phones, or other personal communication media,
it is also subject to the provisions of the Open Public Records Act.
§ 27-36 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-36
26:115
However, nothing in this social media policy prevents employees from
using his/her own personal communication media during the
employee’s nonworking hours to engage or participate in protected
concerted activities pursuant to the National Labor Relations Act.
Protected concerted activities include when an employee addresses
group concerns with the employer; forms, joins or helps a labor
organization; initiates, induces or prepares for group action; or speaks
on behalf of or represents other employees. Nevertheless, employees
are encouraged to resolve workplace grievances internally by
discussing issues with their supervisor and/or the administration, and
are asked to refrain from posting comments or materials on
communication media that can be viewed as malicious, obscene,
threatening, intimidating, or that could create a hostile work
environment on the basis of race, sex, disability, religion or any other
status protected by law if the employee chooses to address their
grievances using communication media.
E. Employees can only use the Township of Rochelle Park communication
media for legitimate business purposes. Employees may not use
Township of Rochelle Park communication media in any way that is
defamatory, obscene, or harassing or in violation of any Township of
Rochelle Park rules or policy. Examples of forbidden transmissions or
downloads include sexually-explicit messages; unwelcome propositions;
ethnic or racial slurs; or any other message that can be construed to be
harassment or disparaging to others based on their actual or perceived
age, race, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, genetic information, disability, national origin, ethnicity,
citizenship, marital status or any other legally recognized protected
basis under federal, state or local laws, regulations or ordinances.
Further, discriminatory remarks, harassment, bullying, threats of
violence and similar behavior that is not tolerated in the workplace are
also not acceptable through communication media, whether same is
performed on the Township of Rochelle Park’s equipment or on the
employee’s own personal communication media.
F. All employees who have been granted access to electronically-stored
data must use a logon ID assigned by Township of Rochelle Park.
Certain data or applications that process data may require additional
security measures as determined by the Township of Rochelle Park.
Employees must not share their passwords; and each employee is
responsible for all activity that occurs in connection with their
passwords.
G. Information security is necessary to protect the Township of Rochelle
Park’s information (data and software) from accidental or intentional
unauthorized disclosure, modification, or loss. Information security is
managed under guidelines dealing with identification, authentication,
authorization, production environment, and ability to audit. All
employees should be familiar with such security measures adopted by
the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 27-36 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-36
26:116
H. All employees may access only data for which the Township of Rochelle
Park has given permission. All employees must take appropriate actions
to ensure that Township of Rochelle Park data is protected from
unauthorized access, use or distribution consistent with these policies.
Employees may not access or retrieve any information technology
resource and store information other than where authorized.All
Township of Rochelle Park data must be stored centrally as required by
Township of Rochelle Park. This provides greater security, and ensures
backup of all Township of Rochelle Park data is performed.
I. Employees may not install, modify or remove any hardware device,
software application, program code, either active or passive, or a
portion thereof, without the express written permission from the
Township of Rochelle Park. Employees must not disable antivirus and
other implemented security software for any reason, in order to
minimize the risk of introducing computer viruses into the Township of
Rochelle Park computing environment.
J. Employees may not install or modify any hardware device, software
application, program code, either active or passive, or a portion thereof,
without the express written permission from the Township of Rochelle
Park. Employees may not upload, download, or otherwise transmit
commercial software or any copyrighted materials belonging to parties
outside of the Township of Rochelle Park, or licensed to the Township of
Rochelle Park. Employees shall observe the copyright and licensing
restrictions of all software applications and shall not copy software
from internal or external sources unless legally authorized. Workstation
settings and configurations and network settings must not be modified
by unauthorized employees. Internet security settings (where
applicable) must not be changed. The foregoing includes but is not
limited to the systems network ID (or computer name), IP address,
Gateway and DNS addresses, etc.
K. Social media and its uses in government and daily life are expanding
each year however, information posted on a website is available to the
public; therefore, employees must adhere to the following guidelines
for their participation in social media.
L. Only those employees directly authorized by the Administrator may
engage in social media activity during work time through the use of the
Township of Rochelle Park Communication Media, as it directly relates
to their work and it is in compliance with this policy.
M. Employees must not reveal or publicize confidential Township of
Rochelle Park information. Confidential proprietary or sensitive
information may be disseminated only to individuals with a need and a
right to know, and where there is sufficient assurance that appropriate
security of such information will be maintained. Such information
includes, but is not limited to the transmittal of personnel information
such as medical records or related information. In law enforcement
operations, confidential, proprietary or sensitive information also
§ 27-36 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-36
26:117
includes criminal history information, confidential informant
identification, and intelligence and tactical operations files.
N. No Township of Rochelle Park employee shall post internal working
documents to social media sites. This includes, but is not limited to,
screenshots of computer stations, pictures of monitors and/or actual
documents themselves without the prior approval of the Administrator.
In addition employees are prohibited from releasing or disclosing any
photographs, pictures, digital images of any crime scenes, traffic
crashes, arrestees, detainees, people or job related incident or
occurrence taken with the Township of Rochelle Park communication
media to any person, entity, business or media or Internet outlet
whether on or off duty without the express written permission of the
Administrator. Except in emergency situations, employees are
prohibited from taking digital images or photographs with media
equipment not owned by the Township of Rochelle Park.
O. For purposes of this section, an "emergency situation" involves a
sudden and unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action, assistance or relief, and may
include accidents, crimes and flights from accidents or crimes and the
employee does not have access to the Township of Rochelle Park
communication media. If such situation occurs, employee agrees that
any images belong to the Township of Rochelle Park and agree to
release the image to the Township of Rochelle Park and ensure its
permanent deletion from media device upon direction from the
Township of Rochelle Park.
P. No media advertisement, electronic bulletin board posting, or any other
communication accessible via the Internet about the Township of
Rochelle Park or on behalf of the Township of Rochelle Park, through
the use of the Township of Rochelle Park communication media, may be
issued unless it has first been approved by the Township of Rochelle
Park’s administration. Specifically, employees are forbidden from using
the Township of Rochelle Park’s communication media to impersonate
the employer; to make statements on behalf of the employer without
authorization; and/or to make statements that can be construed as
establishing what the employer’s official position or policy is on any
particular issue. In addition, employees are prohibited from placing or
posting on the Internet through the employer’s communication media
or the employee’s own personal media, either during working or
nonworking hours, any employer-related confidential, sensitive or other
employer information of a proprietary nature, including but not limited
to employer records or documents, trade secrets, internal reports, tips
based on inside information that may be considered insider trading,
screenshots of computer stations, pictures of monitors and/or actual
documents of the employer, any photographs, pictures, digital images
of any crime scenes, traffic crashes, arrestees, detainees, people or jobrelated
incidents or occurrences.
§ 27-36 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-36
26:118
Q. Because authorized postings placed on the Internet through use of the
Township of Rochelle Park Communication Media will display on the
Township of Rochelle Park return address, any information posted on
the Internet must reflect and adhere to all of the Township of Rochelle
Park standards and policies.
R. All users are personally accountable for messages that they originate or
forward using the Township of Rochelle Park's communication media.
Misrepresenting, obscuring, suppressing, or replacing a user's identity
on any Communication Media is prohibited. "Spoofing" defined as
constructing electronic communications so that it appears to be from
someone else without a legitimate authorized purpose and authorized
by the Administrator, is prohibited.
S. Employees must respect the laws regarding copyrights, trademarks,
rights of public Township of Rochelle Park and other third-party rights.
Any use of the Township of Rochelle Park name, logos, service marks or
trademarks outside the course of the employee's employment, without
the express consent of the Township of Rochelle Park, is strictly
prohibited. To minimize the risk of a copyright violation, employees
should provide references to the source(s) of information used and cite
copyrighted works identified in online communications.
T. Employees who choose to identify themselves as a Township of Rochelle
Park employee on their personal social media accounts, and even those
that do not, should be aware that he or she may be viewed as acting on
behalf of the Township of Rochelle Park; as such no employee shall
knowingly represent themselves as a spokesperson of the Township of
Rochelle Park, post any comment , text, photo, audio, video or other
multimedia file that negatively reflects upon the Township of Rochelle
Park, express views that are detrimental to the Township of Rochelle
Park’s mission or undermine the public trust or is insulting or offensive
to other individuals or to the public in regard to religion, sex, race or
national origin. Township of Rochelle Park employees are encouraged
to exercise extreme caution posting photographs of themselves in
uniform or in situations where they can be readily identified as
Township employees.
U. To the extent that employees use social media outside their employment
while engaging in protected concerted activities as defined above,
employees will not be subject to discipline or retaliation for expressing
views, opinions, and/or facts surrounding the Township of Rochelle
Park’s employment policies. For all other communications by employees
on personal social media sites in which matters related to the Township
of Rochelle Park are discussed, employees must add a disclaimer on the
front page stating that the posting does not express the views of the
Township of Rochelle Park, and that the employees are expressing their
own personal views. For example: “The views expressed on this
website/web log are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect the views
of my employer.” The disclaimer must be placed in a prominent position
and repeated for each posting that is expressing an opinion related to
§ 27-36 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-36
26:119
the Township of Rochelle Park or the Township of Rochelle Park’s
business, with the exception of postings and social media
communications by employees engaging in protected concerted
activities. Employees are advised that if they post information on social
media that is in violation of either the terms and conditions of the within
social media policy, or in violation of federal, state, or local laws, the
disclaimer will not shield them from disciplinary action. However, no
retaliation or discipline will result if and when employees are engaging
in protected concerted activity, and/or choose to report inappropriate
social media activities to the Township of Rochelle Park administration.
V. Nothing in these policies is designed to interfere with, restrain, or
prevent social media communications by employees engaging in
protected concerted activities regarding wages, hours, or other terms
and conditions of employment pursuant to the National Labor Relations
Act. All Township of Rochelle Park employees have the right to engage
in or refrain from such activities.
W. Use of Internet.
(1) The Township of Rochelle Park provides Internet access to its
employees in order to make available a vast array of information
resources and to allow participation in and access to increasing
county and state resources.
(2) Employees must comply with all policies adopted by the local unit,
including but not limited to policies regarding prohibition of
discrimination and harassment and all applicable federal, state and
local laws, including laws governing the transmission and
dissemination of information while accessing the Internet.
(3) Employees who are using Internet may not:
(a) Use the network to make unauthorized entry into other
computational, informational or communication services or
resources;
(b) Distribute unsolicited advertising;
(c) Invade the privacy of others;
(d) Make any attempt to damage computer equipment or software;
(e) Engage in any activity that is harassing or defamatory;
(f) Use the Internet for any illegal activity, including violation of
copyright or other rights of third parties, or in a manner
inconsistent with the Township’s tax-exempt status or its
proper operation; and/or
(g) Download unauthorized software, fonts, templates or scripts.
§ 27-36 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-36
26:120
§ 27-37. Video surveillance.
(4) As stated in the Communications Policy above, the Township of
Rochelle Park reserves the right to monitor the employee’s Internet
usage. In addition, the Township of Rochelle Park has the right to
restrict access to specific types of prohibited content through the
use of a content filtering system.
X. To the extent that employees use social media outside of their
employment, and in so doing employees identify themselves as
Township of Rochelle Park's employees, or if they discuss matters
related to the Township of Rochelle Park on a social media site,
employees must add a disclaimer on the front page, stating that it does
not express the views of the Township of Rochelle Park, and the
employee is expressing only their personal views. For example: "The
views expressed on this website/web log are mine alone and do not
necessarily reflect the views of my employer." Employees must place
the disclaimer in a prominent position and repeat it for each posting
that is expressing an opinion related to the Township of Rochelle Park
or the Township of Rochelle Park's business. Employees must keep in
mind that, if the post information on a social media site that is in
violation of the Township of Rochelle Park's policy and/or federal, state
of local laws, the disclaimer will not shield them from disciplinary
action.
Y. Nothing in these policies is designed to interfere with, restrain or
prevent employee communications regarding wages, hours or other
terms and conditions of employment. Township of Rochelle Park
employees have the right to engage in or refrain from such activities.
A. The Township of Rochelle Park may install video surveillance camera
systems within public buildings and throughout public areas within the
Township of Rochelle Park, primarily as visual deterrents of criminal
behavior and for the protection of employees and municipal assets. In
implementing these video camera systems, the Township of Rochelle
Park will ensure compliance with federal, state and local laws
governing such usage.
B. The Township of Rochelle Park video surveillance camera systems are a
significant tool to which the employees of the Township of Rochelle Park
will avail themselves in order to complete the goals and objectives of
the Township of Rochelle Park. Employees are only permitted to use the
video surveillance camera systems for a legitimate purpose and with
proper authorization. The Township of Rochelle Park's designee will be
responsible for authorization of users. The improper use of these
systems can result in discipline up to and including termination.
C. No employee is permitted to view, continually watch, search, copy or
otherwise use one of the Township of Rochelle Park's video surveillance
camera systems or tamper with access, archive, alter, add to, or make
copies of any data that has been recorded and stored within any of
§ 27-36 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-37
26:121
§ 27-38. Bulletin boards.
The bulletin boards located in the Township of Rochelle Park administrative
building and other facilities are intended for official notices regarding
policies, procedures, meetings and special events. Only personnel
authorized by the Administrator may post, remove, or alter any notice.
§ 27-39. Employee dating.
these systems without a specific legitimate purpose and permission for
the designee of the Township of Rochelle Park.
D. The Township of Rochelle Park shall designate a person to be
responsible for the maintenance and administration of the video
surveillance camera system. Such designee will be responsible for
maintaining a user access log detailing the date and name of individuals
who view/access a stored recording.
E. Any employee who becomes aware of any unauthorized disclosure of a
video record in a contravention of this policy and/or a potential privacy
breach has the responsibility to ensure that Administrator of the
Township of Rochelle Park is immediately informed of such breach.
A. The Township of Rochelle Park recognizes the right of employees to
engage in social relationships with each other, including relationships
of a romantic or intimate nature. However, the municipality also
recognizes that such relationships can be a problem in the workplace.
They may result in favoritism, discrimination, unfair treatment, friction
among coworkers, or the perception that they generate such problems.
B. To try to achieve a balance between employee rights and workplace
needs, the Township of Rochelle Park has adopted the following policy
on the subject of supervisor/subordinate dating. If such a relationship
exists or develops, both parties involved shall report the fact to their
immediate supervisor or human resources.
C. For the purposes of this policy, a supervisor/subordinate status means a
situation where one employee, irrespective of job title, makes or has the
authority to make decisions or to take action concerning another
employee's compensation, promotion, demotion, discipline, daily tasks,
or any other terms, conditions or privileges of employment with the
municipality. If the employees involved in the relationship are also in a
supervisor/subordinate status, management may take any action which
it deems appropriate, up to and including transferring one of the parties
so that there is no longer a supervisor/subordinate relationship
between them. In addition, management reserves the right to address
any workplace issues that may result from that relationship in the
manner it deems appropriate.
D. Any employee who violates this policy will be subject to disciplinary
action, up to and including discharge. The municipality regards a
§ 27-37 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-39
26:122
violation of this policy as particularly serious because such workplace
relationships can cause favoritism, discrimination, unfair treatment for
other interference with municipal operations.
E. Nothing in this policy alters an employee's at will status.
§ 27-39 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-39
26:123

ARTICLE V
Paid and Unpaid Time Off Policies
§ 27-40. Scope.
These policies cover nonunion employees. They also cover union employees
to the extent that their collective bargaining agreements do not cover these
issues.
§ 27-41. Paid holidays.
§ 27-42. Vacation leave.
A. Employees are entitled to the following paid holidays:
(1) New Year's Day.
(2) Martin Luther King's birthday.
(3) President's Day.
(4) Good Friday.
(5) Memorial Day.
(6) Independence Day.
(7) Labor Day.
(8) Columbus Day.
(9) Veterans Day.
(10) Thanksgiving Day.
(11) Day after Thanksgiving.
(12) Christmas Day.
(13) Two floating days for Election Day and Lincoln's birthday.
B. A holiday falling on a Saturday will be observed on the preceding
Friday, and a holiday falling on a Sunday will be observed on the
following Monday. The Township Committee may, by resolution, grant
such additional holidays as deemed appropriate and may substitute any
of the days in the year in place of holidays with the above listed.
A. All full-time employees not covered contractually shall receive annual
paid vacations. Vacations may be taken at any time during the calendar
year and 60 days into the following year, both with the approval of the
department head and Administrator.
B. After six months of continuous full-time employment vacations will be
computed as follows:
§ 27-40 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-42
26:125
§ 27-43. Personal leave.
Employees are entitled to two personal days per year and any unused days
are forfeited at the end of each calendar year.
§ 27-44. Sick leave.
§ 27-45. Bereavement leave.
Employees are entitled to three consecutive calendar days leave of absence
for each death of an employee's immediate relative but could be extended
up to five consecutive days at the discretion of the Administrator.
"Immediate relative" includes spouse or significant other, civil union
partner, child, parent, stepchild, sibling, grandparents, daughter-in-law,
son-in-law, grandchildren, niece, nephew, uncle, aunt, or any person related
by blood or marriage residing in an employee's household. Employees are
paid for all working days during the bereavement leave.
(1) Six months, but less than two years: five working days.
(2) Two years, but less than five years: 10 working days.
(3) After five years, but less than 15 years: 15 working days.
(4) After years 15 and over: 20 working days.
C. After the first six months, vacations are computed on the yearly date of
employment.
D. Any employee leaving employment of the Township of Rochelle Park
during the course of a year shall be entitled to have their vacation
benefits based upon the period of service in that year.
A. Sick leave is to be used only in cases where the employee is ill and
unable to work. Employees absent on sick leave for three or more
consecutive working days must submit a doctor's verification of illness
or injury. After the tenth day of absence on sick leave in one calendar
year, a doctor's verification must be submitted for all sick leave
absences, regardless of duration. Prior to the return to work, the
Township of Rochelle Park may require an employee to be examined by
a physician designated by the Township of Rochelle Park to verify
fitness to return to normal duties. An employee will not be permitted to
return to work until the verification is received.
B. Sick leave policy will remain the same as contractual agreements,
which is based on past practice of unlimited time.
C. In the event that an employee is absent on sick leave on the day before
or the day after a paid holiday, a doctor's verification shall be required.
§ 27-42 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-46
26:126
§ 27-46. Jury duty.
An employee required to render jury service shall be entitled to be absent
from work during that service and will be paid the difference between any
payment received for jury duty and the employee's regular salary.
§ 27-47. Leave of absence.
§ 27-48. Family and Medical Leave Act.
A. Employees may be granted a personal leave of absence for up to six
months at the sole discretion of the Administrator if the leave does not
cause undue operational disruption. The leave must include the use of
any accrued vacation and sick leave time, regardless of the length of
leave requested. The portion of the leave that runs beyond the
exhaustion of vacation and sick leave will be without pay or longevity
credit. In exceptional circumstances, the Administrator may extend a
leave of absence for an additional six months, if such extension is
considered in the best interests of the Township of Rochelle Park.
B. Personal leaves are not granted for the purpose of seeking or accepting
employment with another employer, or for extended vacation time.
Employees on personal leave of absence for more than two weeks in any
month will not receive holiday pay, and will not accrue personal leave,
sick leave or vacation time for that month. Health benefits may also be
impacted. Refer to the Township of Rochelle Park Health Benefits
Policy. A personal leave is granted with the understanding that the
employee intends to return to work for the Township of Rochelle Park. If
the employee fails to return within five business days after the
expiration of the leave, the employee shall be considered to have
resigned.
A. Employees may be eligible for an unpaid family and medical leave
under the federal Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA). Employees
also may be eligible for family and/or medical leave pursuant to the
New Jersey Family Leave Act (FLA). In order to be eligible for such
leave, employees must have: one year of service with Township of
Rochelle Park; and, at least 1,000 hours of work (for New Jersey leave)
and 1,250 hours of work (for federal leave) during the previous 12
months and is employed at a worksite where 50 or more employees are
employed by the employer within 75 miles of the worksite (for federal
leave). Eligible employees may receive up to 12 weeks of leave per year
(FMLA) or 12 weeks every 24 months (FLA).
B. During the leave period, the employee's health benefits will be
continued on the same conditions as coverage would have been
provided had the employee been employed continuously during the
entire leave. The employee will not continue to accrue vacation, sick or
personal days for the period of the leave. The employee will receive
seniority credit for the time that the employee has been on leave under
this section. At the conclusion of the leave period, an eligible employee
§ 27-46 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-48
26:127
is entitled to reinstatement to the position the employee previously held
or to an equivalent one with the same terms and benefits that existed
prior to the exercise of leave.
C. Upon written notice, eligible employees are entitled to a family or
medical leave for up to 12 weeks to care for a newly born or adopted
child or a seriously ill immediate family member, including civil union
partner, or for the employee's own serious health condition that makes
the employee unable to perform the functions of the employee's
position. Eligible employees who take leave under this policy must use
all accrued available vacation and personal days during the leave. The
use of accrued time will not extend the leave period. After exhausting
accrued time, the employee will no longer be paid for the remainder of
the leave.
D. The period of leave must be supported by a physician's certificate. An
extension past 12 weeks can be requested, but medical verification of
the need must be submitted prior to the expiration of the leave. The
Township of Rochelle Park reserves the right to deny any request for
extended leave. Additional information concerning the family leave
policy and eligibility requirements are available from the Administrator.
E. Commencing July 1, 2009, Family Temporary Disability (FTD),
payments for up to six weeks in a twelve-month period will become
available for eligible employees who are caring for a seriously ill
immediate family member who is incapable of self-care or care of a
newborn or adopted child. To be eligible, the employee must have
worked at least 20 weeks at minimum wage within the last 52 weeks or
earned 1,000 times the minimum wage. The weekly benefit is 2/3 of
weekly compensation, up to a maximum of $524 per week (this amount
is subject to change). FTD will run concurrently with FMLA and/or FLA
leaves and there is a one week waiting period. Employees may also be
required to use accrued sick, vacation or personal leave for up to two
weeks.
F. Employees taking paid family leave in connection with a family
member's serious health condition may take leave intermittently or
consecutively. Intermittent leave is not available for the care of a
newborn or adopted child. Intermittent leave may be taken in
increments necessary to address the circumstances that precipitated
the need for leave. An employee seeking intermittent paid family leave
is required to provide the Township of Rochelle Park with 15 days'
notice unless an emergency or other unforeseen circumstance
precludes prior notice. The employee seeking intermittent leave shall
make a reasonable attempt to schedule leave in a nondisruptive
manner. Employees requesting such leave shall provide the Township of
Rochelle Park with a regular schedule of days for intermittent leave.
G. Employees may also be eligible for an unpaid leave for up to 26
workweeks in a year to care for a family member on active duty in the
military or a covered veteran (a covered veteran is an individual who
§ 27-48 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-48
26:128
was discharged or released under conditions other than a dishonorable
discharge at any time during the five-year period prior to the first
date the eligible employee takes FMLA leave to care for the covered
veteran) with a serious injury or illness incurred in the line of duty
on active duty for which the service member is undergoing medical
treatment, recuperation, or therapy, is otherwise in outpatient status,
or is otherwise on the temporary disability retired list, or up to 12
weeks in a year for a qualifying exigency. A qualifying exigency occurs
when a military member is called to covered active duty (requires
deployment to a foreign country there is a short-notice deployment, and
a close member of his/her family must attend official ceremonies or
family support or assistance meetings, to attend to childcare matters,
attend to financial and/or legal matters, or counseling. A serious injury
or illness means an injury or illness incurred by a covered service
member in the line of duty on active duty that may render the service
member medically unfit to perform the duties of his or her office, grade,
rank, or rating.
H. Serious injury or illness.
(1) A serious injury or illness also means an injury or illness that was
incurred by the covered veteran in the line of duty on active duty in
the Armed Forces or that existed before the veteran's active duty
and was aggravated by service in the line of duty on active duty,
and that is either:
(a) A continuation of a serious injury or illness that was incurred
or aggravated when the veteran was a member of the Armed
Forces and rendered the service member unable to perform
the duties of the service member's office, grade, rank, or
rating; or
(b) A physical or mental condition for which the veteran has
received a United States Department of Veterans Affairs
Service-Related Disability Rating (VASRD) of 50% or greater,
and the need for military caregiver leave is related to that
condition; or
(c) A physical or mental condition that substantially impairs the
veteran's ability to work because of a disability or disabilities
related to military service, or would do so absent treatment; or
(d) An injury that is the basis for the veteran's enrollment in the
Department of Veterans Affairs Program of Comprehensive
Assistance for Family Caregivers.
(2) Any one of these definitions meets the FMLA's definition of a
serious injury or illness for a covered veteran regardless of whether
the injury or illness manifested before or after the individual
became a veteran.
§ 27-48 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-48
26:129
§ 27-49. Maternity leave.
§ 27-50. Domestic violence leave.
I. Upon employer's request, an employee must provide a copy of the
covered military member's active duty orders to support request for
qualifying exigency leave. In addition, upon an employer's request,
certification for qualifying exigency leave must be supported by a
certification containing the following information:
(1) Statement or description of appropriate facts regarding the
qualifying exigency for which leave is needed;
(2) Approximate date on which the qualifying exigency commenced or
will commence;
(3) Beginning and end dates for leave to be taken for a single
continuous period of time;
(4) An estimate of the frequency and duration of the qualifying
exigency if leave is needed on a reduced scheduled basis or
intermittently; and
(5) If the qualifying exigency requires meeting with a third party, the
contact information for the third party and description of the
purpose of the meeting.
J. Eligible employees may also take leave to care for a military member's
parent who is incapable of self-care when the care is necessitated by
the member's covered active duty. Such care may include arranging for
alternative care, providing care on an immediate basis, admitting or
transferring the parent to a care facility, or attending meetings with
staff at a care facility.
K. Employees who request qualifying exigency leave to spend time with a
military member on rest and recuperation may take up to a maximum of
15 calendar days. Upon an employer's request, an employee must
provide a copy of the military member's rest and recuperation leave
orders, or other documentation issued by the military setting forth the
dates of the military member's leave.
A. For a normal pregnancy, benefits are usually payable for four weeks
before the expected delivery date and six weeks after the actual
delivery date (eight weeks if you delivered by Cesarean section).
B. A doctor may certify that you are disabled for a longer period if:
(1) You experience specific complications related to pregnancy.
(2) You have another simultaneous disability.
(3) You are physically unable to do your regular job.
§ 27-48 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-50
26:130
A. The New Jersey Security and Financial Empowerment Act, also known
as the "NJ SAFE Act," provides protection for employees and their
family members who have been the victim of domestic violence or
sexual assault. Employees are entitled to 20 days of unpaid protected
leave from work to:
(1) Seek medical attention for physical or psychological injuries;
(2) Obtain services from a victim services organization, pursue
psychological or other counseling;
(3) Participate in safety planning for temporary or permanent
relocation;
(4) Seek legal assistance to ensure health and safety of the employee
or the employee's relative; or
(5) Attend, participate in, or prepare for a criminal or civil court
proceeding relating to an incident of domestic or sexual violence.
B. To be eligible for the leave, an employee must meet the following
criteria:
(1) The employee or their child, parent, spouse or domestic partner
must be a victim of domestic violence or a sexually violent offense;
(2) The employee must have worked for the employer for at least 12
months and for at least 1,000 hours during the twelve-month period
immediately preceding the requested leave; and
(3) The twenty-day leave must be taken within one year of the
qualifying event.
C. Employees may take leave on an intermittent basis but such leave can
not be shorter than one full day. To the extent the leave is foreseeable,
employees must provide advance notice. In addition, employee seeking
leave must provide proof that they qualify for the leave. Such proof may
include restraining order, letter from a prosecutor, proof of conviction,
medical documentation or a certification from an agency or
professional involved in assisting the employee.
D. In certain circumstances, the basis for the leave may also qualify under
the federal Family and Medical Leave Act and/or the New Jersey Family
Leave act. If so, the Township of Rochelle Park will treat the leave
concurrently with the leave under those statutes. Employees may be
required to use accrued paid vacation leave, personal time or sick leave
concurrently.
E. The Township of Rochelle Park shall protect the privacy of employees
who seek leave by holding the request for leave, the leave itself or the
failure to return to work in the strictest confidence.
§ 27-50 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-50
26:131
§ 27-51. Military leave.
§ 27-51.1. Earned sick leave. [Added 7-24-2019 by Ord. No.
1143-19]
F. The Township of Rochelle Park shall not retaliate, harass or
discriminate against any employee exercising his/her right to take the
leave provided by this policy.
A. When a full-time employee (either permanent or temporary) who is a
member of the reserve component of any United States armed force or
the National Guard of any state including the Naval Militia and Air
National Guard is required to engage in field training or is called for
active duty, the employee will be granted a military leave of absence for
the duration of the service. The first 30 workdays of the leave shall be
with full pay, except that a member of the New Jersey National Guard
shall receive full pay for the first 90 days. Thereafter, the employee
shall be paid the difference between military salary and the employee's
regular salary. The paid leave will not be counted against any available
time off including but not limited to vacation, sick or personal time. A
full-time temporary employee who has served less than one year shall
not be entitled to paid leave but shall be granted nonpaid military leave
without loss of time.
B. Employees on military service will also continue to receive paid health
insurance coverage during the period of the paid leave, plus an
additional 30 calendar days after the paid leave is exhausted. After this
period has expired, employees may continue coverage for themselves or
their dependents under the Township of Rochelle Park group plan by
taking advantage of the COBRA provision. Members of the stateadministered
retirement systems (PERS and PFRS) will continue
accruing service and salary credit in the system during the period of
paid leave.
C. Pursuant to the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment
Rights Act, any employee released from active duty under honorable
circumstances shall return to work without loss of privileges or
seniority within the following time limits: for service less than 31
calendar days, the employee must return to work on the beginning of
the first regularly scheduled workday, or eight hours after the end of
military duty, with reasonable allowances for commuting; for service of
31 to 180 calendar days, the employee must submit an application for
reinstatement within 14 calendar days after completing military duty;
for service greater than 180 calendar days, the employee must submit
an application for reinstatement within 90 calendar days after
completing military duty.
A. The Township adheres to the current statutory provisions set forth in
the New Jersey Earned Sick Leave Law35 (the "law") with respect to the
35.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 34:11D-1 et seq.
§ 27-50 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-51.1
26:132
accrual, use, and carryover of earned sick leave and has not elected to
expand them. These provisions are:
(1) Eligible employees earn up to a maximum of 40 hours paid leave
per calendar year (the "benefit year") at the statutory ratio of one
hour of leave earned for every 30 hours worked, and leave is paid at
the same rate of pay as the employee normally earns, as computed
in accordance with the law;
(2) The paid leave shall only be used for the reasons permitted under
the law and which are:
(a) The employee's need for diagnosis, care, treatment, or
recovery from a mental or physical illness, injury, or health
condition or preventive medical care;
(b) The employee needs to care for a family member during
diagnosis, care, treatment, or recovery from a mental or
physical illness, injury or health condition, or the family
member requires preventive medical care;
(c) The employee or a family member has been the victim of
domestic violence or sexual violence and needs time for
treatment, counseling, or to prepare for legal proceedings;
(d) The employee needs to attend school-related conferences,
meetings, or events regarding their child's education or to
attend a school-related meeting regarding the child's health;
(e) The employee's employer's business closes due to a public
health emergency or the employee needs to care for their child
whose school or child care provider closed due to a public
health emergency.
(3) A maximum of 40 hours shall be subject to carry forward from one
benefit year to the next, and a maximum of 40 hours shall be
eligible for use in any benefit year.
(4) No payment for accrued and unused earned sick leave shall be
made to an employee or his estate upon termination of
employment, voluntary or involuntary, including resignation,
retirement, or discharge.
(5) Use of leave may also be counted toward leave entitlements under
other laws as concurrent leave including but not limited to the
FMLA and the NJFLA.
B. An employee is required to provide advance notice of the need to take
sick leave as soon as practicable in an emergency, and shall also be
required to provide notice to the employer in advance for the
foreseeable need to use leave at a future date (doctor's appointments or
other appointments scheduled in advance that qualify for leave) seven
days in advance of the leave, and shall schedule such leave in a manner
§ 27-51.1 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-51.1
26:133
such that the employer's needs are duly recognized and disruptions are
minimized. Advance notice for unforeseeable or emergency leave shall
require the employee to provide notice of the intention to use the leave
and its duration.
C. Undue disruption or failure to give the required advance notice to the
employer may be a cause to refuse foreseeable leave in the period
requested. The Administrator may post notice of certain dates when use
of foreseeable leave will not be permitted. Reasonable documentation,
which shall not require the medical reason for the leave, shall be
required in accordance with the law for any leave that lasts for three or
more consecutive days or is taken during any period that has been
restricted by the Administrator. The notice provided for any and all
requests to use any leave shall indicate the duration and the reason for
the leave, and such notice may be provided by the employee
telephoning his or her supervisor. No leave will be permitted for any
reason not included in the law, and misuse or abuse of the earned sick
leave benefit will be subject to disciplinary action as permitted by that
law and which can include discharge for cause.
D. The Township reserves its options with respect to the provisions of the
New Jersey Earned Sick Leave Law, including but not limited to the
options available for advance crediting of sick leave and repurchases of
leave, upon recommendation of the Administrator. Employees may
contact the Administrator in his role as Personnel Officer should they
have any questions regarding this benefit, or access the New Jersey
Department of Labor Website at mysickdays.nj.gov.
E. The law exempts the Township as a public employer from compliance
with the Earned Sick Leave Law for those employees who are provided
sick leave at full pay pursuant to any law or rule of New Jersey other
than the Earned Sick Leave Law, and with respect to employees of the
Township who are full time and eligible for sick pay, they are not also
eligible under the Earned Sick Leave Law as employees of the
Township.
F. Eligible employees under the law are those who are part time or
seasonal employees, who may also qualify. All such employees
employed by the Township on October 29, 2018, accrue earned sick
leave from that date, and may utilize such earned accrued sick leave on
February 26, 2019, and all such other eligible employees may use
earned sick leave the 120th calendar day after being employed, which
is accrued during their employment with the Township.
G. Seasonal employees or eligible employees who are rehired within six
months of their separation from employment will be provided with any
prior accrued earned sick leave credit upon their return to employment.
H. For the purposes of interpreting who may qualify as a family member,
the Earned Sick Leave Law recognizes the following as an employee's
family member: Child of the employee (biological, adopted, or foster
§ 27-51.1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-51.1
26:134
child, stepchild or legal ward of an employee, or child of a domestic
partner or civil union partner of the employee); grandchild of the
employee; sibling of the employee; spouse of the employee; domestic
partner of the employee; civil union partner of the employee; parent
of the employee (biological, adoptive, or foster parent, stepparent, or
legal guardian of an employee or of the employee's spouse, domestic
partner, or civil union partner, or a person who stood in loco parentis of
the employee or the employee's spouse, domestic partner, or civil union
partner when the employee, spouse, or partner was a minor child);
grandparent of the employee; spouse, domestic partner, or civil union
partner of a parent or grandparent of the employee; sibling of a spouse,
domestic partner, or civil union partner of the employee; any other
individual related by blood to the employee or whose close association
with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship. Note:
For the purpose of the definition of "family member," an individual
whose close association with the employee is equivalent of a family
relationship shall include any person with whom the employee has
a significant personal bond that is, or is like, a family relationship,
regardless of biological or legal relationship.
§ 27-51.1 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-51.1
26:135

ARTICLE VI
Compensation and Employee Benefits Policies
§ 27-52. Scope.
These policies cover nonunion employees. They also cover union employees
to the extent that their collective bargaining agreements do not cover these
issues.
§ 27-53. Payroll.
§ 27-54. Overtime compensation.
A. Salary ranges are established by ordinance,36 and the salary must fall
within the minimum and maximum ranges for the employee's title.
Employees are paid every two weeks, with overtime being held back for
two weeks in order to compute payment of the amount due. Employees
who are going on vacation and would like their checks in advance must
make a written request at least two weeks in advance of the vacation.
B. The Township of Rochelle Park will not accept responsibility for any
employee's personal finances. The Township of Rochelle Park will
acknowledge judgments against an employee's pay, but will not act as a
mediator between the employee and creditors.
A. Under the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act, certain employees in
managerial, supervisory, administrative, computer or professional
positions are exempt from the provisions of the Act. There are also
employees who may be exempt because their compensation exceeds
$100,000 per year depending upon their job duties. The Administrator
shall notify all exempt employees of their status under the Act. Exempt
employees are not eligible to receive overtime compensation and are
required to work the normal workweek and any additional hours
needed to fulfill their responsibilities. Time off consideration for large
amounts of additional hours may be provided with the Administrator's
prior approval and at the sole discretion of the Administrator.
B. All other employees are classified as nonexempt and are subject to the
provisions of the Act. Depending on work needs, Nonexempt employees
may be required to work overtime. Nonexempt employees are not
permitted to work overtime unless the overtime is budgeted and
approved by the Department Head and the Administrator. Nonexempt
employees working overtime without prior approval will be subject to
disciplinary action.
C. Nonexempt employees will receive overtime compensation for hours
worked in excess of forty in a weekly period at the rate of one and onehalf
times the regular rate of pay. Employees may choose overtime
compensation in the form of overtime pay at their regular hourly salary
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 39.
§ 27-52 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-54
26:137
§ 27-55. Timesheets.
§ 27-56. Health insurance.
or compensating time off. The maximum number of hours that an
employee may accrue for future compensating time off is 60 days.
Once this maximum has been accumulated, all additional hours will
be compensated by overtime pay. Accrued and taken overtime
compensating hours must be noted on the employee's time sheet.
Nonexempt employees will receive one and one-half hours of overtime
compensation for each hour worked in excess of forty hours in a weekly
period. For purposes of overtime compensation, hours worked are
computed to the nearest one-half hour per day. Previously scheduled
vacation time and holiday time are considered time worked for
purposes of determining overtime compensation, but sick time and
personal time are not.
D. In addition to the requirements of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act,
nonexempt employees will also receive overtime compensation for work
in excess of 35 hours but not greater than 40 hours in a weekly period.
This other compensation will be one hour for each hour worked in
excess of 35 hours. If a nonexempt employee works on Sunday or a paid
holiday, the employee will receive overtime compensation of 1/2 hour
for each hour worked, less the number of hours of overtime
compensation received under any other provision of the policy. If a
nonexempt employee not on regular callout duty is required to return to
work in an emergency or because of unusual circumstance, the
employee will receive overtime compensation of the greater of 1/2 hour
or the actual number of hours worked, less the number of hours of
overtime compensation received under any other provision of this
policy.
E. Employees must make a request to their supervisor at least two days in
advance when they want to take compensating time off. The supervisor
will approve the request if the absence does not cause undue hardship
to the department.
A. Nonexempt employees are required to accurately record their work
time on the designated time record, sign it and return into his/her
supervisor. Nonexempt employees and exempt employees are required
to report their sick time, vacation time and holiday time on the
designated time record. Nonexempt and exempt employees should turn
the time record into his/her supervisor.
B. The supervisor shall review the record for accuracy and approve it and
submit it to the designated payroll representative.
A. Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey.
(1) Employees and their immediate family members, including civil
union partner, are provided health insurance coverage
§ 27-54 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-56
26:138
§ 27-57. Retirement.
Under state law, all employees must enroll in the New Jersey Public
Retirement System or the Police and Fire Fighters Retirement System as
applicable. The employee's contribution to the Plan will be deducted from
the employee's pay. An employee who has completed the required number
of years and who has reached the required age under the Plan may retire
by notifying the Department Head in writing. The state retirement plans
request six months' advance notice to process the application. After giving
notice of retirement, employees are expected to assist their supervisor and
coemployees by providing information concerning their current projects
and help in the training of a replacement. The department head will prepare
an Employee action form37 showing any pay or other money owed the
employee. The Administrator will conduct a confidential exit interview to
discuss benefits including COBRA options, appropriate retirement issues
and pay due. A COBRA notification letter will be sent to the employee's
home address. The exit interview will also include an open discussion with
administered by the Township of Rochelle Park. The complete
benefit plan is on file in the Clerk's office and a summary plan
description will be provided to all employees. Benefit levels for
nonunionized employees are subject to change at the discretion of
the Township of Rochelle Park.
(2) Health insurance coverage for employees on a leave of absence or
who cease Township of Rochelle Park employment will terminate at
the end of the month in which the leave begins or employment is
terminated except coverage will continue for up to 12 weeks for
employees on leave pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act
and up to 30 weeks for employees on Military Leave. Upon
termination of coverage, employees may extend health insurance
coverage for themselves or their dependents by taking advantage
of the Public Health Services Act provision for a period of up to 18
months to 36 months. All newly hired employees and their spouses
shall receive a notice of COBRA rights upon being hired. For more
information, consult the Clerk's office.
(3) Employees who retire with 25 years of service to the Township of
Rochelle Park may continue to receive paid health insurance
coverage. Employees receiving retiree health benefits must notify
the Administrator in writing, with proof of enrollment, when they
become eligible for Medicare Parts A and B. For more information,
consult the Administrator.
B. Dental Benefits. Delta Dental Plan of New Jersey.
C. Drug Prescription Benefit. IDA Insurance Design Administrators.
D. Deferred compensation. AXA Equitable.
37.Editor's Note: Said form is on file in the Township offices.
§ 27-56 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-57
26:139
the employee. On the last day of work, and prior to receiving the final
paycheck, the employee must return the employee identification card, all
keys and equipment. At this time, the employee will sign the termination
memo designating all money owed and this memo will be retained in the
official personnel file.
§ 27-58. Workers compensation.
§ 27-59. Educational assistance and training.
§ 27-60. Conference and seminars.
Requests to attend a conference or seminar must be approved by the
department head and the Administrator. Requests shall be made sufficiently
in advance to take advantage of discounts for early registration, and must
be submitted to the department head at least 30 days before the event.
Requests must be in writing, including the conference schedule,
registration information and estimated costs. The department head is
A. Employees who suffer job related injuries and illnesses may be entitled
to medical expenses, lost income and other compensation under the
New Jersey Workers Compensation Act. The Township of Rochelle Park
covers workers compensation benefits through its membership in a
joint insurance fund with a self-insurance plan. Any occupational injury
or illness must be immediately reported to the supervisor or
Department Head. All required medical treatment must be performed
by a workers compensation physician appointed by the joint insurance
fund Township of Rochelle Park and payment for unauthorized medical
treatment may not be covered pursuant to the Act.
B. Unless explicitly provided for in a bargaining agreement, the Township
of Rochelle Park will only pay, either directly or through its workers'
compensation insurer, those benefits that are specifically provided for
under the Workers' Compensation Act and will not supplement these
benefits with additional benefits pursuant to N.J.S.A. 11A:6-8.
A. Subject to sufficient funds in the budget and upon approval of the
department head, employees may apply for reimbursement of tuition
expenses incurred for training or college courses directly related to the
employee's work. The Administrator will be the sole judge of whether a
particular course or program is directly related to the employee's work.
Employees are strongly urged to obtain this determination before
enrolling in a course or program.
B. Employees may receive reimbursement for up to 100% of the tuition
cost for training or college courses that they take on their own
initiative. The reimbursement must be repaid if the employee leaves
Township of Rochelle Park employment within 24 months of receipt.
When enrollment for short training courses or seminars is requested by
the Township of Rochelle Park, employees will receive full
reimbursement.
§ 27-57 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-60
26:140
responsible to detail all training requests during the budget formulation
process. Approval of any conference or seminar request is conditioned upon
the availability of funds.
§ 27-60 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-60
26:141

ARTICLE VII
Managerial and Supervisory Procedures
§ 27-61. Employment procedure.
A. Recruitment. The Administrator will coordinate the employment
recruitment process for all vacancies to ensure compliance with
contractual, legal, and equal opportunity requirements. When a
vacancy occurs, it is the responsibility of the department head to notify
the Administrator who will distribute notification of the vacancy to all
departments. The Administrator will undertake to recruit qualified
applicants in accordance with applicable federal and state law. Where
positions are advertised, the media or other periodical utilized must
have as wide circulation as possible to encourage applications from
candidates from diverse backgrounds and must prominently state that
the Township of Rochelle Park is an equal opportunity employer.
B. Applications. All candidates must fully complete an application form. A
resume will not be considered as a substitute for this form. The
application is a confidential document and will not be available to
anyone who is not directly involved in the hiring process, except as
required by law.
C. Interviews. The Administrator or department head will coordinate the
interview process including the scheduling of applicants, development
of interview questions and standards to measure candidate responses.
All questions must be in accordance with the New Jersey Division of
Civil Rights Guidelines for Pre-Employment Inquiries. The Township of
Rochelle Park will make reasonable accommodations to known physical
and mental limitations of all applicants with disabilities, provided that
the individual is otherwise qualified to safely perform the essential
functions of the job and also provided the accommodation does not
impose an unreasonable hardship on the Township of Rochelle Park.
D. Physical examinations. Pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act,
after an offer of employment is made and prior to commencing
employment, the Administrator may require applicants to pass a
physical examination in order to insure that they can perform the duties
of their position without injury to themselves or others. The same postoffer
physical examination must be performed on all applicants for a
particular position. The Administrator may require periodic physical
examinations to determine the employee's continued ability to perform
the duties of the position. All physical examinations must be performed
by a physician chosen by the Township of Rochelle Park at the expense
of the Township of Rochelle Park. All medical records of employees and
prospective employees are confidential and are to be maintained by the
Administrator separate from the employee's official personnel file.
Medical exams may include tests for drug and alcohol use.
E. Criminal background checks. Criminal background checks are required
of all candidates, whether paid or volunteer, that may work directly or
§ 27-61 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-61
26:143
§ 27-62. Background checks and procedures for candidates,
employees and volunteers.
indirectly with children/youth/minors in accordance with the
procedures outlined in § 27-61, Background checks and procedures for
candidates, employees and volunteers.
F. Job offers. The final decision will be made by the Township Committee
after all references and other information has been verified. Every
effort shall be made to offer reasonable accommodations to known
physical and mental limitations of all applicants with disabilities,
provided that the individual is otherwise qualified to safely perform the
essential functions of the job and also provided that the accommodation
does not impose an unreasonable hardship on the Township of Rochelle
Park. The employment offer must be made in a letter to the candidate
outlining all terms and conditions of the offer. The letter will also
establish a deadline for acceptance.
G. Acceptances and rejections. If the first offer is rejected, the Township of
Rochelle Park Administrator will decide to hire another candidate or
reopen the position. Once a candidate accepts the employment offer, all
other candidates will be notified in writing that they were not accepted
for the position.
H. Employability proof. After acceptance, but before starting employment,
all new employees shall be required to fill out an Employment
Verification, Form I938 and to provide acceptable proof of right to
employment in the United States.
I. Record retention. All applications, notes made during interviews and
reference checks, job offers and other documents created during hiring
process must be returned to the Administrator. Documents related to
the successful candidate will be placed in the employee's official
personnel file except medical records including physical examinations
must be maintained in a separate file. All records documents related to
other candidates must be retained for at least one year. Records and
documents created during the hiring process are confidential and must
be retained in a locked cabinet.
A. Background checks required. Criminal background checks are required
of all candidates over the age of 18, whether for paid or volunteer
positions, who will be working directly or indirectly with children/
youth/minors. Criminal background checks will also be performed every
three years for each employee or volunteer that works directly or
indirectly with children/youth/minors. The exact titles of employees
subject to background checks are (locally defined, but at a minimum
should include all recreational positions, crossing guards, library
positions, and maintenance and administrative positions pertaining to
such programs).
38.Editor's Note: Said form is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 27-61 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-62
26:144
B. Background check procedure.
(1) The Administrator will perform or initiate criminal background
checks and be the recipient of reports from outside agencies or
contractors. These reports shall include, but are not limited, to
court records; police department and corrections agency records;
registries or watch lists; state criminal record repositories; and the
Interstate Identification Index maintained by the FBI. The
Administrator will discuss potentially disqualifying information
received with the employee’s or volunteer’s department head, and
a determination that the information is disqualifying shall be made
based on whether the disqualification is job-related for the position
and is consistent with business necessity. . Written information
received as a result of a “request for criminal history record
information for a noncriminal justice purpose” will be destroyed
immediately after it has served its authorized purpose, as required
by the State Police. Such information will be kept confidential and
will not be published or disclosed in any manner not consistent with
the procedures listed herein. Such information will not be deemed
a public record under P.L. 1963, c.73 (C:47:1A-11 et seq.), as
amended and supplemented by P.L. 2001, c.404 (C:47:1A-5 et seq.).
(2) When a disqualification decision has been made as a result of the
employer’s targeted screening process described below, the
Administrator will inform the candidate, volunteer, or employee, in
writing, of any information that would disqualify the person from
working with children/youth. If the Township of Rochelle Park
contracts with an outside vendor to process the background
checks, that contractor may be authorized to inform the person in
writing of any information that would disqualify the person from
working with children/youth/minors. In addition, the individual
shall be advised that he/she has the opportunity to explain the
criminal record and to demonstrate why the exclusion based on the
employer’s targeted screening process should not apply to him/her
under the circumstances. This information may include evidence of
an error in the criminal record; facts surrounding the conviction;
age at the time of the conviction and/or release from prison;
evidence of a clean criminal and employment record since release;
rehabilitation efforts; positive references; and evidence that he/she
is bondable. Thereafter, the employer shall give the individual
further consideration. Existing employees or volunteers will be
placed on immediate suspension pending the outcome of a hearing
or appeal. Employee suspensions may be with our without pay at
the discretion of the Administrator.
C. Conditions under which an employee will be disqualified from working
with children/youth.
(1) A candidate, volunteer, or employee may be disqualified from
employment in a position that works with children/youth/minors if
that person's criminal record history background check reveals a
§ 27-62 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-62
26:145
record of conviction of any of the following crimes and disorderly
persons offenses as defined by New Jersey law or by analogous
laws in other states:
(a) Homicide (N.J.S.A. 2C:11).
(b) Assault, reckless endangerment, threats, stalking (N.J.S.A.
2C:12).
(c) Kidnapping (N.J.S.A. 2C:13).
(d) Sexual offenses (N.J.S.A. 2C:14).
(e) Offenses against the family, children and incompetents
(N.J.S.A. 2C:24).
(f) Controlled dangerous substances (N.J.S.A. 2C:35 except for
2C:35-10(a)4).
(g) Robbery (N.J.S.A. 2C:15).
(h) Theft (N.J.S.A. 2C:20).
(2) A disqualification from any position will be based only on a
conviction for one or more of the above disqualifying crimes and
offenses as a result of the employer’s targeted screening process,
by which the employer has taken into account the following factors:
(a) the nature and gravity of the offense or conduct, including the
consideration of (i) the harm caused by the crime; (ii) the legal
elements required to prove the crime; and (iii) the classification of
the crime (i.e., felony or misdemeanor, etc.); (b) the time that has
elapsed since the offense, conduct, and/or completion of the
sentence; (c) The nature of the job held or sought, including the
consideration of: (i) the job duties (not merely the job title); (ii) the
level of supervision to be provided; (iii) the working environment
(e.g., private home, outdoors, warehouse); (iv) interaction with
others, especially with vulnerable individuals such as children/
youth/minors; and (v) the relationship of the criminal history to the
job to be performed. An acquittal, a dismissal, successful
completion of pre-trial intervention (PTI), or an expungement of a
criminal offense, including a disqualifying criminal offense, is not a
disqualifying conviction. Further, an arrest record standing alone
may not be used to disqualify a candidate, volunteer, or employee
from an employment opportunity. However, the employer may
make a disqualification decision based on the conduct underlying
the arrest if the conduct makes the individual unfit for the position
in question, in which case the conduct, not the arrest, is relevant
for employment purposes.
D. Appeals process.
(1) The Appeals Committee will be comprised of an Administrator,
Police Chief or other designated superior officer.
§ 27-62 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-62
26:146
§ 27-63. Nepotism procedure (if any).
(2) Once a candidate, employee or volunteer has been notified of a
disqualifying conviction, the employee has 14 calendar days to file
a notice of appeal with the Township of Rochelle Park. Such notice
of appeal must be sent in writing to the Administrator. The notice of
appeal shall include a notice of rehabilitation and/or a Notice that
the information is inaccurate or incorrect, pursuant to N.J.A.C.
13:59-1.6.
(3) During the fourteen-day period listed above, and until the issuance
of the decision of the Appeals Committee, an employee will be on a
suspension with pay, pending the outcome of the notice of appeal.
(4) In making a determination on the appeal, the following information
will be considered:
(a) The nature and responsibility of the position which the
convicted individual would hold, has held, or currently holds,
as the case may be.
(b) The nature and seriousness of the crime or offense.
(c) The circumstances under which the crime or offense occurred.
(d) The date of the crime or offense.
(e) The age of the individual when the crime or offense was
committed.
(f) Whether the crime or offense was an isolated or a repeated
incident.
(g) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the
commission of the crime or offense.
(h) Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in
prison or in the community, counseling or psychiatric
treatment received.
(i) Acquisition of additional academic or vocational schooling,
successful participation in correctional work-release
programs, or the recommendation of those who have had the
individual under their supervision.
(j) The Township of Rochelle Park will issue a written
determination on the employee's appeal of their disqualifying
conviction, setting forth the reasons for the determination.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law or collective bargaining unit
agreements, immediate relatives shall not be hired, promoted or
transferred to a regular full-time or regular part-time position where:
§ 27-62 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-63
26:147
§ 27-64. Open Public Meetings Act procedure concerning personnel
matters.
§ 27-65. Processing and orientation of new employees procedure.
All new regular full-time and regular part-time employees will be scheduled
to meet with the Administrator and department head on their first day
for a general orientation. Copies of all forms and acknowledgements must
(1) One relative would have the authority to appoint, remove,
discipline or evaluate the performance of the other;
(2) One relative would be responsible for auditing the work of the
other; or
(3) Other circumstances exist that place the relatives in a situation of
actual or reasonably foreseeable conflict of interest.
B. For purposes of this policy, immediate relative includes spouse or
significant other, child, parent, stepchild, sibling, grandparents,
daughter-in-law, son-in-law, grandchildren, niece, nephew, uncle, aunt,
or any person related by blood or marriage residing in an employee's
household.
A. Discussions by the governing body or anybody of the Township of
Rochelle Park concerning appointment, termination, terms and
conditions of employment, performance evaluation, promotion or
discipline of any current or prospective officer or employee shall be in
closed session, with the right of the employee to be present, unless the
individual requests in writing that the discussion be held in open
session. Such request must be granted. Prior to the discussion by the
governing body or anybody of the Township of Rochelle Park
concerning such matters, the Clerk shall notify the affected person(s) of
the meeting date, time and place, the matters to be discussed and the
person's right to request that the discussion occur in open session. In
the event more than one person is affected by the discussion and one of
the affected persons does not request that the discussion be in open
session, then the discussion shall be in closed session.
B. Additionally, whenever the governing body or any public body of the
Township of Rochelle Park intends to act on a matter involving the
employment, appointment, termination of employment, terms and
conditions of employment, evaluation of performance of, promotion, or
disciplining of any specific prospective public officer or employee or
current public officer or employees employed or appointed by the
governing body or any public body of the Township of Rochelle Park,
then that governing body or that public body of the local unity type
must provide notice of said intended action to said prospective public
officer or employee or current public officer or employees. Prior to the
matter being acted on, the Clerk shall notify the affected person(s) of
the meeting date, time and place, the matters to be discussed.
§ 27-63 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-65
26:148
be returned to the Administrator for inclusion in the employee's official
personnel file. The orientation will include:
§ 27-66. Initial employment period.
§ 27-67. Employee handbook.
The Administrator, with the assistance of the municipal attorney, shall draft
an Employee Handbook for the approval of the Administrator. A separate
version of the handbook will be drafted for part-time and seasonal
employees, as well as for major bargaining groups, if appropriate. Once
approved, copies will be distributed and employees will be required to sign
an acknowledgement of receipt that will be placed in the official personnel
file. The handbook will be revised and redistributed whenever there is a
significant change in personnel practice or every two years.
A. A tour of the appropriate facilities to acquaint the new employee with
overall operations as they relate to the specific position;
B. The completion of all pertinent personnel, payroll, insurance and
pension forms;
C. A review of the Employee Handbook and acknowledgement of receipt;
D. A review of the Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual if the
employee is a manager or supervisor and acknowledgement of receipt;
E. A safety orientation and acknowledgement; and
F. Arrangements for the new employee to complete required PEOSHA
safety training.
A. Except where state requirements direct otherwise, new employees (or
present employees transferring to new positions) will be hired subject
to an initial employment period of not less than six months or as
determined by the Administrator. During this initial employment period,
the new employee or transferee will be provided with training and
guidance from the supervisor. At the end of the initial employment
period, the supervisor will conduct an employee evaluation (see
§ 27-67, Performance evaluation). New employees may be discharged at
any time during this period if the Administrator concludes that the
employee is not progressing or performing satisfactorily. Under
appropriate circumstances, the Administrator may extend the initial
employment period. Newly hired employees are not eligible for
payment of paid time off except holidays until the successful completion
of their initial employment period.
B. Nothing in the procedure set forth in this section shall alter the
Township of Rochelle Park's employment at will policy. Employment
with Township of Rochelle Park is at will and may be terminated at any
time with or without cause or notice by the Township of Rochelle Park
or the employee.
§ 27-65 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-68
26:149
§ 27-68. Performance evaluation.
A. Periodic evaluations are critical to create a formal record of an
employee's performance over time and establish a foundation for
personnel actions such as promotion and termination. In addition to
day-to-day feedback to the employee, a performance evaluation must be
conducted for all employees at least once a year. The completed
appraisal becomes part of an employee's permanent record.
B. Performance discussions must also provide employees with guidance
regarding their ability to meet job standards. Extraordinary skills or
abilities should be recognized in addition to areas for improvement.
Supervisors or department heads should review future training needs
and career planning. The reviewer should also encourage the employee
to make suggestions about how the department can improve. The
reviewer should ask employees for feedback regarding the employee's
skills as they relate to communication, team building, delegation, and
sensitivity to needs of subordinates. Open communication is the key to
improvement.
(1) Setting the stage. The reviewer must create a productive climate
for the discussion. In preparing the evaluation form, prior
evaluations should be reviewed to identify trends. Employees must
be notified in advance of the meeting and should be given a copy of
the blank evaluation form. The meeting should be private without
interruptions in a comfortable environment.
(2) Confirm expectations. The reviewer should start the discussion of
each performance area by reviewing expectations; ask the
employee to confirm the employee's understanding of job
requirements; and refer to the job description as appropriate.
(3) Rating. Continue the discussion by giving the employee's rating in
each performance area. The supervisor should be prepared to refer
to documentation. Employees should be evaluated based on set
standards, not as they compare to other employees. It is rare that
any person's rating in all areas is either high or low. The evaluation
should consider performance during the entire period, not just the
recent past. Care should be taken to avoid allowing one aspect of a
person's performance to overshadow all other performance factors
be it positive or negative. Ideally, each performance area should be
evaluated individually based on specific behaviors exhibited.
(4) Discussing future plans. This is where the reviewer should turn to
the discussion to the future performance and development of the
employee. A Counseling Action Plan form must be completed if any
item is rated "Needs Improvement" or "Does Not Meet Minimum
Standards." Specific performance goals must be established for the
next review period along with plans for achieving those goals.
§ 27-68 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-68
26:150
§ 27-69. Disciplinary action.
(5) Closing the discussion. When all performance areas have been
discussed, close the discussion by summarizing all of ratings in an
overall rating for the review period.
C. It is crucial that all reviewers complete the evaluation forms with care
and with complete candor. Although reviewers are encouraged to set
forth areas of strength and utilize tact in presenting criticism, it is
important that all performance issues of any significance be addressed
thoroughly and in unambiguous terms in the evaluation form, and
verbally with the employee.
(1) Exceeds expectations means consistently exceeds established
standards in most areas of responsibility. All requirements must be
met and objectives achieved above the established standards.
(2) Meets job requirements means all job requirements were met and
planned objectives accomplished within established standards.
There were no critical areas where accomplishments were less
than planned.
(3) Needs improvement means performance in one or more critical
areas does not meet expectations. Not all planned objectives were
accomplished within the established standards and some
responsibilities were not completely met.
(4) Does not meet minimum standards means performance is
unacceptable and important objectives have not been
accomplished; needs immediate improvement.
D. After completing the evaluation, the reviewer will return the form(s)
with the signed acknowledgement to the Administrator. After review by
the Administrator, the form(s) are to be forwarded to the Personnel
Administrator for inclusion in the employee's official personnel file. As a
part of the evaluation, employees have the right to request a conference
with the Administrator.
A. All employees are expected to meet the Township of Rochelle Park's
work performance standards. The intent of the disciplinary action
procedure is to formally document problems and provide the employee
with a reasonable time to improve performance. The process should
encourage development by providing employees with guidance in areas
that need improvement such as poor work performance, attendance
problems, personal conduct, general compliance with the Township of
Rochelle Park's policies and procedures and other disciplinary
problems.
B. Should a supervisor believe that an employee is not conforming to the
Township of Rochelle Park's policies and rules or to specific
instructions, or has acted improperly, the supervisor will first privately
discuss the matter with the employee to obtain the employee's view. If
§ 27-68 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-69
26:151
the supervisor determines that the employee has acted improperly,
the supervisor shall take one of the following actions depending upon
the gravity and the employee's past record. At the discretion of the
supervisor and the Administrator, action may begin at any step, and/or
certain steps may be repeated or by-passed.
(1) Verbal reprimand. Depending on the circumstances, the supervisor
may verbally notify the employee that the employee's actions have
been improper and warn the employee against further occurrences.
The supervisor will prepare a record of the verbal reprimand
including the date, time and what was discussed with the
employee. This record must be forwarded to the Administrator for
the employee's official personnel file.
(2) Administrator review. Should the supervisor consider the offense
sufficiently serious to warrant consideration by the Administrator,
the employee will be so advised and a meeting arranged with the
Administrator at the earliest possible date. All facts should be
detailed at this meeting and, if possible, a determination will be
made at that time of disciplinary action, if any.
(3) Written reprimand. When a supervisor determines that a written
reprimand is appropriate, the situation must be discussed with the
Administrator. The reprimand should clearly identify the problem
and outline a course of corrective action within a specific
timeframe. The employee should clearly understand both the
corrective action and the consequence (i.e., termination) if the
problem is not corrected or reoccurs. The employee should
acknowledge receipt of the warning and may include additional
comments. A copy of the written reprimand with the signed
acknowledgement and comments must be forwarded to the
Administrator for the employee's official personnel file.
(4) Suspension. Whenever an employee is recommended for
suspension, the Administrator will make the decision and may seek
the advice of the municipal attorney, if appropriate. Suspended
employees may request a hearing under the applicable grievance
procedure.
(5) Dismissal. Whenever an employee is recommended for dismissal,
the Township Committee will make the decision only after seeking
the advice of the municipal attorney. There must be a complete
review of the employee's personnel file and all other facts to
determine if there is sufficient cause for the dismissal. Terminated
employees may request a hearing under the applicable grievance
procedure.
C. The procedure set forth herein shall apply to all persons described in
§ 27-6 of the Township Code notwithstanding the existence of any other
specific disciplinary procedure set forth in any other code section.
[Added 10-23-2019 by Ord. No. 1148-19]
§ 27-69 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-69
26:152
§ 27-70. Personnel file.
§ 27-71. Employee complaint investigation.
Employees have the right to formally or informally report any statement,
act, or behavior by a co-employee, supervisor, elected official or visitor that
they believe to be improper.
(1) The Township Administrator shall be deemed the "Supervisor"
pursuant to the provisions of § 27-69 in the event of any disciplinary
action involving volunteers.
A. The official personnel files shall be maintained by the Administrator and
employee medical information will be maintained in a separate file. At
least annually, the Administrator will review files to make sure they are
up-to-date and will follow-up with the department heads as necessary.
B. The official file shall include at least the following:
(1) The original application signed by the employee;
(2) Notes from any preemployment interview and reference check;
(3) The original letter detailing an offer of employment and any
additional correspondence concerning the employee's hiring;
(4) A signed acknowledgement that the employee received a copy of
the employee complaint policy letter;
(5) A signed acknowledgement that the employee has received the
Employee Handbook;
(6) A signed acknowledgement that the employee received the safety
orientation;
(7) Annual written performance evaluations including documentation
that the evaluation was reviewed with the employee;
(8) Counseling action plans;
(9) Records relating to on-the-job accidents;
(10) Disciplinary actions including an acknowledgement that the
employee was notified of the proposed disciplinary action and was
given an opportunity to respond;
(11) Records relating to any other employment actions including
promotions, demotions, transfers, resignations, leaves, etc.;
(12) Educational transcripts; and
(13) Any other pertinent information.
§ 27-69 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-71
26:153
A. Reporting. Employees should be asked to report complaints in writing
utilizing the employee complaint form, but are not compelled to do so.
B. Identification/screening. The supervisor, department head,
Administrator or municipal attorney must report all written or verbal
complaints to the Administrator unless the complaint is against the
Administrator. Upon receipt, the Administrator will determine if the
complaint was made pursuant to the general antiharassment policy, the
antisexual harassment policy, the whistle blower policy, a grievance
procedure or is another form of complaint. A file will be established
including the written complaint, the investigation procedure followed
and the response action plan. As soon as possible, but no later than 10
days after receiving the complaint, the Administrator or investigator
appointed by the Administrator will interview the employee. If the
employee is reluctant to sign a written complaint, the Administrator or
investigator will prepare written notes of the date, time and place of the
complaint and the specific allegations. These notes will be read back to
the employee who will be asked to affirm, preferably in writing, the
information's accuracy.
C. Investigation. The Administrator will seek the advice of the municipal
attorney when planning the investigation. The investigation should be
conducted by the municipal attorney or county prosecutor if it involves
potential criminal charges. The investigation should establish the
frequency and nature of the alleged conduct and whether the complaint
coincides with other employment events, such as a poor performance
evaluation. The investigation should also determine if other employees
were subjected to similar misconduct. It is important to protect the
rights of both the person making the complaint and the alleged
wrongdoer.
D. Response plan: no corrective action required. The Administrator will
discuss the conclusions with the municipal attorney and render a
decision within 14 days after the investigation is complete. If the
validity of a complaint cannot be determined or the complaint is
groundless, the complaining employee should be notified in writing.
Care should be taken to avoid being too specific, confrontational or
accusatory, and to avoid any language that might be construed as
defamatory. A general statement is usually more appropriate that the
claim was thoroughly investigated, but could not be sufficiently
documented or confirmed to justify taking formal action. The employee
should be assured that future complaints will be investigated and that
the Township of Rochelle Park is committed to eliminating wrongful
employment practices when they are found to exist. If the investigation
reveals that the complainant intentionally and maliciously levied false
charges against the alleged wrongdoer, the complainant must be
notified of the seriousness of filing a false complaint, and the
appropriate disciplinary penalty under the circumstances, up to and
including termination.
§ 27-71 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-71
26:154
§ 27-72. Requests for employment verification and reference.
§ 27-73. Continuing education.
E. Response plan: corrective action required. If the investigation reveals
that the complaint is justified and substantiated, the Administrator will
formulate, with the advice of the municipal attorney, a corrective action
plan as well as possible disciplinary action. The complaining employee
will be notified, in writing that it appears that the complaint was
justified and an appropriate response plan has been formulated. A copy
of the response plan should be attached to the letter. The response plan
should provide for appropriate remedial action to prevent a recurrence
of the wrongful act or behavior.
A. Inquiries and written requests for references or employment
verification regarding a current or former employee must be referred to
the Administrator. No employee may issue a reference letter without
the permission of the Administrator. Under no circumstances should
any information be released over the phone.
B. In response to a request for information, the Administrator will only
verify an employee's name, dates of employment, job title, department
and final salary. No other data or information will be furnished unless
the Township of Rochelle Park is required to release the information by
law or the employee or former employee authorizes the Township of
Rochelle Park in writing to furnish this information and releases the
Township of Rochelle Park from liability.
A. The Township of Rochelle Park, in conjunction with the municipal
attorney, will arrange for employment practices seminars at least
annually to train all managerial/supervisory personnel. The Township of
Rochelle Park will also offer nonmandatory training to all other
employees with special emphasis on employee rights and protections
under various federal and state laws, as well as the Township of
Rochelle Park employment practices. Records will be maintained in the
official personnel files of all employees trained under this procedure.
B. Managerial and supervisory personnel will also update employees
periodically by department meetings and memos that should address
specific problems and concerns that may arise. Every effort will be
made to encourage employee suggestions about ways to avoid
employer-employee disputes and violations of employment rights.
§ 27-71 PAYROLL SERVICES § 27-73
26:155
Chapter 28
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14. Alarms — See Ch. 55.
§ 27-73 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 27-73
26:156
ARTICLE I
Establishment and Regulation
[Adopted 11-24-1924 by Ord. No. 19]
§ 28-1. Composition of Department; temporary employees;
compensation.
§ 28-1.1. Appropriate authority. [Added 10-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1023-10]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 there is hereby
established the "appropriate authority," which shall be a committee. The
membership of the committee shall be the Mayor, Township Administrator
and one member of the Township Committee who shall be designated as
Police Liaison.
A. The Police Department of the Township of Rochelle Park is hereby
established to consist of the following officers: [Amended 8-15-2001
by Ord. No. 836-01; 12-19-2001 by Ord. No. 845-01; 6-21-2006 by
Ord. No. 947-06; ; 6-17-2015 by Ord. No. 1087-15]
(1) One Chief of Police.
(2) One Captain of Police.
(3) Up to a maximum of four Lieutenants.
(4) Up to a maximum of five Sergeants.
(5) Up to a maximum of 14 patrol officers.
B. The Township Committee may employ officers and men regularly and
temporarily in the case of emergency for a term not exceeding one year
and discharge such temporary officers and men at the expiration of
such temporary employment. Such temporary officers and men or
special policemen shall not be members of the Police Department, and
their powers, rights and duties shall immediately cease and desist at
the expiration of the term for which they were appointed. Any such
appointment of special policemen or temporary officers and men may
be revoked at any time without cause and without hearing, and a fee
may be charged to any such officer for issuing a certificate of
appointment.
C. The salary, wage and compensation of the Chief of Police and the other
officers and members of the Police Department shall be fixed by the
Township Committee by ordinance.39
39.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 28-1 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-2
26:157
§ 28-2. Headquarters.
The office of the Chief of Police is hereby authorized as the headquarters of
the Police Department.
§ 28-3. Uniforms and badges.
The members of the Police Department shall, when on duty, wear such
uniforms and badges or signs of office as shall be from time to time
prescribed by the Township Committee.
§ 28-4. Applications for appointment; effective period for list of
applicants. [Amended 8-15-2001 by Ord. No. 836-01; 5-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 1031-11]
§ 28-5. Review of applications.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to examine carefully the education,
mental, moral and physical fitness of any person making application to be
appointed to the Police Department.
§ 28-6. Qualifications for appointment. [Amended 8-6-1973 by Ord.
No. 347]
Each applicant applying for a full-time position in the Township of Rochelle
Park shall be required to meet all of the following minimum qualifications
before being considered eligible for appointment to the Police Department
of the Township of Rochelle Park:
A. Applications for appointment to the Police Department shall be made to
the Chief of Police on the form of application which may be obtained
from the Police Department upon payment of the nonrefundable
application fee determined by the Police Department. The process and
procedure for employment shall be as set forth in Chapter 27 of the
Township Code and will, at all times, be subject to and in accordance
with the directions, supervision and control by the properly established
“appropriate authority” which has been appointed in accordance with
the provisions of state law.
B. Upon completion of the employment process and the hiring of a police
officer, the resume, records, evaluations and recommendations utilized
in that process shall remain in effect for a period of one year from the
date of the initial hiring. Subsequent hiring, within a period of one year,
may be made from the same list if the Township Committee and the
appropriate authority determine that it would be in the best interest of
the municipality to utilize the same list. The Township Committee and
appropriate authority may, however, commence the process from the
start if they believe it is advisable to do so.
A. No person shall be appointed a member of the Police Department
unless he possesses the requisite qualifications described by the
§ 28-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 28-6
26:158
applicable statutes of New Jersey relating to age, residence and other
eligibility requirement. All applicants must be at least 18 years old on
the date of the examination, either written or oral, whichever comes
first, and must not reach their 35th birthday prior to their appointment
date. [Amended 1-24-1996 by Ord. No. 710; 8-15-2001 by Ord.
No. 836-01]
B. Effective January 2002, in order to qualify to take the police
examination, an applicant must have: [Amended 8-15-2001 by Ord.
No. 836-01]
(1) A bachelor's degree signifying completion of the undergraduate
curriculum and graduation from an accredited college or
university; or
(2) Alternatively, an associate's degree or have 60 semester hours of
college credits from an accredited college or university, plus at
least two years of military experience and honorably discharged
from same or a minimum of two years full time police experience
(i.e., police dispatcher, auxiliary police officer, special police
officer); or
(3) Five years' full-time police officer experience.
C. Each candidate for appointment to the Police Department must
satisfactorily pass such physical, psychological and psychiatric
examinations as may be required before physicians, psychologists or
psychiatrists designated by the Township Committee. Such
examinations shall be designed to determine, according to accepted
medical and psychological standards, the candidate's fitness and ability
to perform the duties of a police officer without danger or impediment
to the health, safety and welfare of the candidates, fellow officers and
the public at large and the candidate's eligibility for inclusion in the
Police and Firemen's Retirement System. [Amended 5-5-1986 by
Ord. No. 519; 1-24-1996 by Ord. No. 710]
D. (Reserved)40
E. He shall be of good moral character and have a record free of any
conviction of any crime or indictable offense or any crime or offense
involving moral turpitude.
F. He shall be a holder of a valid New Jersey driver's license with no
history of a poor driving record.
G. He shall meet all the minimum requirements expressed from time to
time by the laws of the State of New Jersey. Should there be any conflict
between the requirements as set forth herein and the requirements of
40.Editor's Note: Original Subsection D, as amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519, which set
forth physical qualifications, was repealed 1-24-1996 by Ord. No. 710.
§ 28-6 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-6
26:159
§ 28-7. Additional requirements for appointment.
§ 28-8. Payroll preparation.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to prepare a payroll on the first
day of each month, certifying the number of policemen and the amount due
to each, which payroll shall be submitted to the Township Committee of
the Township of Rochelle Park, and if found to be correct by the Township
Committee and so certified to, the Treasurer of the Township of Rochelle
Park shall be authorized to pay the amount set forth in said certificate; and
in all cases where the Chief of Police shall have deducted any pay from the
salary of any policeman for absence from duty and any dispute shall arise
concerning the correctness of said deduction, the Township Committee of
the Township of Rochelle Park shall decide as to whether an allowance is to
be added to the amount due such policeman on the next payroll.
§ 28-9. Duties of Chief. [Amended 1-24-1996 by Ord. No. 710]
§ 28-9.1. Emergencies. [Added 1-24-1996 by Ord. No. 710]
the statutes of the State of New Jersey, the statutes of the State of New
Jersey shall apply.
A. Each applicant shall also be fingerprinted and the fingerprints filed with
the New Jersey State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
shall consent to a thorough background and character investigation
prior to appointment if required by the Chief of Police.
B. All applicants shall be required to be able to pass such written and oral
examination as selected and prepared by the Chief of Police and
approved by the Township Committee.41
A. The duties of the Chief of Police shall be as annunciated in N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118. In addition to the duties annunciated therein, the Chief
shall operate where there is a police emergency that presents a threat
to the safety and welfare of the persons within the Township of Rochelle
Park or a threat to structure or damage to property belonging to the
residents, individuals or businesses of the Township of Rochelle Park.
B. It is understood that the powers granted to the Chief herein relate to
police powers. All other matters relating to civil defense and disaster
control shall come under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Disaster
Control Director, whose duties are set forth in the State Emergency
Operations Plan of December 1990, N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33.1 et seq. The
power to declare an emergency shall be under the jurisdiction and
control of the Township Committee.
41.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, regarding the requirement of six months’ residency,
and Subsection D, regarding the residency requirement exception for county residents,
which immediately, respectively, followed this subsection, were repealed 5-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 1031-11.
§ 28-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 28-9.1
26:160
§ 28-9.2. Violations and penalties. [Added 1-24-1996 by Ord. No.
710]
Any person failing to heed the instructions or directions of the police
officers at the scene, as set forth above, shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 and/or incarceration for a term of not more than 90 days.
§ 28-10. Power of arrest.
Each and every policeman shall make complaint to the Municipal Court of
every person known to him to have violated an ordinance of the Township
of Rochelle Park and shall have the power to arrest in all criminal cases,
without warrant in case such policeman shall be an eyewitness to the
commission of the offense, and also to arrest all vagrants, drunkards,
prostitutes and all persons discharging firearms or exposing his or her
person in an indecent manner or exposing for sale any indecent book,
picture or print.
§ 28-11. Cause for removal from office; examination of charges.
[Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519; 1-25-1995 by Ord. No. 687]
No member of the Police Department shall be removed from office or
employment in such Police Department for political reasons or for any
other cause than incapacity, misconduct or disobedience of just rules and
regulations established or which may be established for the Police
Department in the Township of Rochelle Park; provided, however, that any
member of the Police Department who shall be absent from duty without
just cause for a term of five days continuously shall, at the expiration
of said five days, cease to be a member of the Police Department. No
person, whether an officer or employee of the Police Department, shall
A. "Emergency" shall be defined as a circumstance, situation or condition
of vehicular movement, unlawful activity, public gathering, a condition
which tends to endanger the welfare and safety of the public or a
disturbance of the peace which may reasonably tend to result in
damage to or destruction of property located within the Township.
B. In case of emergency, as declared by the Township Committee, the
Chief may take all lawful action which is necessary and reasonable to
curtail or reduce such emergency. This shall include:
(1) The redirection of traffic.
(2) The posting of EMERGENCY - NO PARKING signs and the
prohibition of parking on streets in such areas as are designated by
such signs, to include either one or both sides of each street area.
(3) Increasing normal police patrol activities or presence until such
time as the emergency has passed.
(4) Directing other agencies of the Township to render such assistance
as may be required to respond to the declared emergency.
§ 28-9.1 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-11
26:161
be removed from office or employment therein except after just cause as
herein provided and then only after written charge or charges of the cause
or Causes of the complaint have been preferred against such officer or
employee, signed by the person or persons making such charge or charges
and filed in the office of the Chief of Police, and a copy shall be served upon
the member or officer so charged with notice of a designated hearing before
the Township Committee or other appropriate authority as designated by
the Township Committee. Appropriate authority shall be the Mayor, the
entire Township Committee or a subcommittee of said body, including the
Township Administrator or an independent hearing officer. Said notice shall
provide for a designated hearing date within 30, but not less than 10 days
from the service of the complaint.
§ 28-12. Rules and regulations of Department. [Amended 1-25-1995
by Ord. No. 687; 1-24-1996 by Ord. No. 710; 3-20-2013 by Ord. No.
1055-13]
§ 28-13. Specific reasons for removal from office.
Any member of the Police Department may be removed from office as
provided by law, in addition to any other punishment to which he may
be subject by law, against whom any of the following charges may be
substantiated:
A. Each member of the Police Department shall be presented with a copy
of the printed rules and regulations of the Police Department. It shall be
the member’s duty to follow the provisions of these rules and
regulations and, where necessary, to enforce the provisions of these
rules and regulations against other members of the Department.
B. The rules and regulations of the Department have been adopted by the
“Appropriate Authority” and are hereby ratified and adopted.
C. Said rules and regulations shall be on file and available for inspection
during business hours in the office of the Chief of Police or the
Municipal Clerk.
A. Intoxication while on or off duty.
B. Willful disobedience of orders.
C. Indecent, profane or harsh language.
D. Disrespect to a superior.
E. Unnecessary violence to prisoners and citizens.
F. Leaving his beat without good reason.
G. Neglect in paying his just debts for rent or necessaries contracted while
on the force.
H. Immorality, indecency or lewdness.
§ 28-11 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 28-13
26:162
§ 28-14. Pensions.
The provisions of an Act entitled "An Act Providing For the Pensioning
of Police Officers and Policemen in Certain Municipalities of This State,"
Chapter 72 of the Laws of 1911, its amendments and supplements,42 are
hereby adopted relative to the pensions for the Police Department of the
Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 28-14.1. Promotional standards for promotion to rank of
Sergeant. [Added 9-18-2002 by Ord. No. 863-02]
I. Absence without leave.
J. Incompetency, lack of energy and incapacity, mentally or physically.
K. Entering, while on duty, a house of prostitution or assignation,
gambling houses or rooms or businesses where alcoholic beverages are
for sale, unless in the discharge of his duty. [Amended 5-5-1986 by
Ord. No. 519]
L. Sleeping on duty.
M. Neglect of duty.
N. Violating any criminal law or penal ordinance.
O. Making known any proposed movement of the Department.
P. Conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman.
Q. Conduct subversive of good order and the discipline of the Department.
R. Willful maltreatment of a prisoner or citizen.
S. Refusing to do duty of any kind, whenever necessity requires, whether
on patrol or elsewhere and whether in uniform or not.
A. Promotion policy. Promotion denotes vertical movement in the
organization hierarchy from one rank classification to another. Validity
of the promotional process can only be accomplished through clear and
concise procedures. A promotional process has been developed to
identify employees who possess the ability to assume greater
responsibilities combined with the necessary skills and knowledge to
perform competently at a higher organizational level. This policy is
established for the position of Sergeant.
B. Eligibility for promotion. In order to be eligible for promotion from
patrol officer to the rank of Sergeant, said officer must serve for a
period of seven full calendar years as a patrol officer within the
Township of Rochelle Park before the effective date of promotion.
42.Editor's Note: For current provisions, see N.J.S.A. 43:16-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 43:16A-1 et
seq.
§ 28-13 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-14.1
26:163
C. Promotional criteria. All candidates seeking promotion to the rank of
Sergeant shall be evaluated based upon the following criteria:
(1) Written examination: 20% of total score.
(2) Oral in-house examination: 20% of total score.
(3) Job performance evaluation: 20% of total score.
(4) Seniority: 20% of total score.
(5) Township Committee interview: 20% of total score.
(6) In addition to the foregoing, a psychological test shall be conducted
which a candidate must pass in order to be eligible for promotion.
The psychological testing shall be on a pass/fail basis.
(a) Written examination.
[1] All candidates for promotion shall submit to a written
examination. The written examination shall be
administered by the New Jersey State Chiefs of Police
Association, the State of New Jersey Department of
Personnel or any other standardized promotional
examination selected at the discretion of the Township
Committee.
[2] At least 60 days prior to the date a written examination is
scheduled, a notice shall be posted at the Police
Department that will set forth the following:
[a] Position available through promotion.
[b] Date die examination will be conducted.
[c] The location of the examination.
[d] The time the examination will begin.
[e] A list of study materials.
[3] The written examination shall be graded. The applicant
shall receive the following percentages towards overall
score based upon the score attained on the written
examination:
[a] Sixty-five to 70: 5%.
[b] Seventy-one to 80: 10%.
[c] Eighty-one to 90: 15%.
[d] Ninety-one to 100: 20%.
(b) Oral in-house examination.
§ 28-14.1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 28-14.1
26:164
[1] All candidates participating in the written examination
phase shall be eligible to participate in the oral in-house
examination phase. The in-house examination shall be
conducted by the Chief of Police, together with up to two
additional members of the Rochelle Park Police
Department to be selected by the Chief of Police.
[2] Candidates shall be notified by the Chief of Police of their
scheduled examination date at least 10 days prior to the
date.
[3] The in-house examination shall consist of a number of
questions, not to exceed 10, posed to the candidate to
which the candidate must provide oral answers. The same
questions shall be given to each of the candidates. The
Chief of Police and/or his committee shall provide the
following percentages towards the candidate's overall
score:
[a] Sixty to 70: 5%.
[b] Seventy-one to 80: 10%.
[c] Eighty-one to 90: 15%.
[d] Ninety-one to 100: 20%.
(c) Job performance.
[1] The job performance of each applicant shall be evaluated
based upon a standardized checklist to be developed by
the Chief of Police, and job performance evaluation shall
include attendance, awards received, ability to relate to
members of the public, ability to handle emergencies,
computer skills, knowledge of current law and arrest
procedures. The checklist shall also include such other
information as the Chief of Police shall deem appropriate.
[2] Upon evaluation of the standardized checklist, the Chief of
Police shall assign a percentage to the scores, which
percentage shall be counted towards the overall
evaluation score. The maximum score to be assigned shalt
be 20% and the minimum shall be 5%.
(d) Seniority. Seniority will be assessed as one of the stages of the
promotional process. Seniority shall be determined by the
number of years of service completed, commencing on the date
on which the employee was sworn in or the date first placed on
the payroll, whichever date first occurred. Seniority shall count
in the following percentages towards the overall score:
[1] From seven years through 12 years: 3%.
§ 28-14.1 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-14.1
26:165
[2] From 13 years through 15 years: 5%.
[3] From 16 years through 18 years: 10%.
[4] From 19 years through 20 years: 15%.
[5] Twenty-one and up: 20%.
(e) Personal interview by Township Committee. A personal
interview shall be conducted with all candidates for promotion.
The information to be viewed during the interview will come
from each candidate's personnel file. Each candidate shall be
given the opportunity to make a personal statement if he or she
chooses to do so. Each Township Committee member shall
grade each candidate based on the interview. The maximum
attainable score for the interview shalt be 20%, which shall be
determined based upon the average of each individual
Committee member's score. Factors to be considered by the
Township Committee in scoring the candidate's interview shall
include:
[1] Town volunteerism.
[2] Education.
[3] Department assignments.
[4] Training.
[5] Supervisory experience.
[6] Attitude.
[7] Use of sick time.
[8] Appearance and demeanor.
[9] Rapport with fellow employees and the public.
[10] Relevant life experience, including military or other job
experience.
[11] Such other information deemed relevant by the Township
Committee.
(f) Total evaluation score. [Amended 10-20-2010 by Ord. No.
1022-10]
[1] Each of the five foregoing criteria categories shall be
worth up to twenty percentage points. The total candidate
score shall be determined based upon adding the total
percentage points from each category.
[2] The total score shall be used in determining promotional
opportunity. The Township Committee reserves the right,
§ 28-14.1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 28-14.1
26:166
§ 28-14.2. Promotional standards for promotion to ranks of
Lieutenant, Captain and Chief of Police. [Added 3-21-2012 by Ord.
No. 1046-12]
however, to promote based upon their sole discretion,
notwithstanding the total evaluation score set forth herein.
The ultimate decision regarding promotion, therefore,
rests with the Township Committee. The total evaluation
score determined pursuant to this article shall be used for
consideration in the promotional process for a period of
three years from the date that the score is determined.
After three years, the process must be reinstituted.
A. Promotions.
(1) The Township Committee desires to promote the most qualified
candidates to positions of higher rank. This section establishes the
eligibility requirements and the process for promotion for all
higher ranks with the exception of promotion to the rank of
Sergeant which is controlled by the preceding section of this
article.
(2) The promotion process shall be on the basis of merit, experience,
education and demonstrated ability. In accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, no person shall be eligible for
promotion to be a superior officer unless he or she has previously
served as patrol officer in such department or force.
B. Promotional standards to rank of Lieutenant. Candidates for the
position of Lieutenant shall participate in a promotional procedure
administered by the Township Committee which shall consist of the
following:
(1) Interview with the appropriate authority, Township Committee and
Police Chief; interview to include review of leadership,
performance, seniority and education.
(2) Leadership evaluation: poise, alertness, ability to communicate
clearly and effectively, and ability to effect good work and public
relations and moral character.
(3) The candidate must either hold the rank of Sergeant or possess at
least 15 years' experience as a police officer.
C. Promotional standards for promotion to rank of Captain. The Township
of Rochelle Park requires that the Captain shall have held the rank of
Sergeant and/or Lieutenant with the Township of Rochelle Park Police
Department. Candidates for the position of Captain shall participate in
a promotional procedure administered by the Township Committee
which shall consist of the following:
§ 28-14.1 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-14.2
26:167
(1) Interview with the appropriate authority, Township Committee and
Police Chief; interview to include review of leadership,
performance, seniority and education.
(2) Leadership evaluation: poise, alertness, ability to communicate
clearly and effectively, and ability to effect good work and public
relations and moral character.
(3) Candidate shall possess a minimum of five years' supervisory and
management experience in law enforcement as a Lieutenant or
Sergeant.
D. Chief of Police qualifications. Candidates for the position of Chief of
Police shall participate in a promotional procedure administered by the
Township Committee and the appropriate authority. The Township
Committee and appropriate authority shall consider the following:
(1) The candidates' knowledge of criminal law and procedure, police
science and police administration, leadership and management,
ability, general knowledge of local government and N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118, the candidates' poise, alertness, ability to
communicate clearly and effectively, ability to effect good working
and public relations and moral character.
(2) Candidates should have at least five years' supervisory experience
in the rank of Captain or Lieutenant.
§ 28-14.2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 28-14.2
26:168
ARTICLE II
Fees For Services
[Adopted 8-5-1974 by Ord. No. 360]
§ 28-15. Schedule of fees for services.
There is hereby established and fixed a schedule of fees and charges for
services rendered by the Police Department of the Township of Rochelle
Park, as follows:
A. Copy of any report or record form: $3.
B. Each individual set of fingerprints consisting of from one to three cards
taken for the benefit of other than law enforcement or governmental
agencies: $10 per set. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
C. Letters attesting to length of residence, character, criminal record
check and the like: $15 per copy. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
D. Each police photograph: $10 each. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
E. Photocopies of police reports. [Added 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 582;
amended 7-26-2000 by Ord. No. 807-00]
(1) The following fees will be charged for photocopying of all police
reports from the Rochelle Park Police Department:
(a) If a citizen appears in person for a copy of an accident report:
[1] First page to 10th page: $0.75 per page.
[2] Eleventh page to 20th page: $0.50 per page.
[3] All pages over 20: $0.25 per page.
(b) If copies are requested other than in person, the following fee
will apply (accident or case report):
[1] First three pages: $5.
[2] Each additional page thereafter: $1 per page.
(c) Any rule, regulation, resolution or ordinance which establishes
a fee in excess of these amounts is automatically superceded
by state law N.J.S.A. 39:4-131.1.
(2) The above fee schedule applies to public records only. This does not
create a right of citizens to have investigatory reports.
§ 28-15 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-16
26:169
§ 28-16. Collection of fees. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
The Chief of Police or his designee shall be responsible for the collection
of the aforesaid fees and shall maintain an accurate accounting thereof and
shall turn these funds over to the Township Treasurer as prescribed by
state requirements. The Township Treasurer then shall present a monthly
accounting report to the Township Committee.
§ 28-16.1. Reimbursement by private contractors. [Added 2-21-2001
by Ord. No. 823-01; amended 10-15-2003 by Ord. No. 897-03]
A. Police services. Members of the Police Department shall be available for
services as traffic direction or security personnel for private
contractors only at such time as will not interfere with the efficient
performance of regularly scheduled or emergency duty for the
Township, with the approval of the Chief of Police. The applications for
such services shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police. The
application by the private contractor shall set forth pertinent
information concerning the type of work to be engaged in, the name
and address of the prospective private contractors and the estimated
duration of such service. The application for such services shall be
reviewed by the Chief of Police to determine if there is any reasonable
probability that such outside employment will interfere with a
member’s performance or compromise a member’s position with the
Township through a conflict of interest or if there is any reasonable
probability that the particular service requested would reflect
unfavorably upon the policeman involved or upon the Police
Department.
B. Payment.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for such services and approval of
same by the Chief of Police, the private contractor shall execute a
“private contractor’s agreement for police coverage in the form
provided by the Township which shall provide, inter alia, for the
private contractor to pay to the Treasurer of the Township a certain
amount in cash, check or money order as is set forth herein or as
may be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Township
Committee as compensation for such services.
(2) The rate of compensation to the Township shall be determined
based upon the hourly rate of pay for the particular officer assigned
to this duty together with an additional 20% surcharge of the total
amount billed to cover administration, insurance, equipment and
other related costs. [Amended 10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 976-07]
C. Escrow. An escrow for the estimated cost of police services shall be paid
to the Treasurer of the Township in accordance with the police services
anticipated, as identified in the application, before any work on the
proposed project shall begin.
§ 28-16 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 28-16.1
26:170
§ 28-17. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the aforementioned provisions and fees, at no time shall
a fee be charged for the above-described services to any governmental
agency.
D. In the event that the compensation for police services exceeds the
escrow mentioned, then the Police Chief shall prepare and submit an
invoice to the Chief Financial Officer, who in turn shall submit the same
to the private contractor, accounting for the total cost for such off-duty
work supplied, which amount shall be paid in full within 15 days of
receipt by the private contractor.
§ 28-16.1 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-17
26:171

ARTICLE III
Dispatchers
[Adopted 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 684]
§ 28-18. Positions created.
There are hereby created the positions of dispatchers for assignment to the
Rochelle Park Police Department.
§ 28-19. Dispatchers considered civilian employees.
The dispatchers assigned to the Police Department shall not be members
thereof and shall be considered civilian employees of the Township of
Rochelle Park.
§ 28-20. Duties.
The duties of the dispatchers shall be such as may, from time to time, be
established by regulations promulgated by the Police Chief of the Township
with the prior consent of the Township Committee.
§ 28-21. Salary.
The dispatchers shall be paid such wages as shall, from time to time, be
established under an appropriate ordinance of the Township.43
§ 28-22. Rules and regulations. [Added 9-20-1995 by Ord. No. 696]
There are hereby established by the Township of Rochelle Park rules and
regulations concerning communications dispatchers, effective August 1995,
and incorporated by reference herein. Said rules and regulations are
available for inspection at the Rochelle Park Police Department and at
the Municipal Clerk's office in Rochelle Park. Copies of said rules and
regulations shall be available for review by the dispatchers in the office of
the Chief of Police.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 39, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 28-18 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-22
26:173

ARTICLE IV
Auxiliary Police Organization/OEM
[Adopted 2-19-2003 by Ord. No. 877-03]
§ 28-23. Authority.
This article is passed, promulgated, and shall be interpreted in accordance
with Chapter 251 of the Laws of 1942, as amended and supplemented by
N.J.S.A. 59, Appendix A:9-45, Governor's Executive Order No. 101, dated
December 17, 1980, Directive No. 28 (Governor's Proclamation of Auxiliary
Police Powers), Directive No. 30 (Governor's Regulation for Training
Auxiliary Policemen or Regular Police Force) and all information bulletins
and regulations and executive orders promulgated pursuant to the authority
of law by the Governor of the State of New Jersey in furtherance of the
Emergency Management Organization (Civil Defense or Civil Defense
Disaster Control) of the State of New Jersey.
§ 28-24. Establishment.
There is hereby established an organization known as the "Auxiliary Police
for the Township of Rochelle Park, County of Bergen and State of New
Jersey."
§ 28-25. Membership qualifications.
A. The Auxiliary Police shall consist of not more than 20 active members.
The organization may also include a number of additional life members,
as may be determined in the organization's constitution and bylaws.
B. As a condition for membership and continued membership in the
organization, each member shall:
(1) Be a citizen of the United States, resident of the Township of
Rochelle Park or live within five miles of the town borders.
(a) Preference shall be given to the residents of the Township of
Rochelle Park to fill any available membership.
(2) Be between the ages of 18 and 65 years of age;
(3) Be of good moral character and physically qualified to perform the
duties assigned.
(4) Possess a current and valid New Jersey driver's license.
(5) Pass a criminal background check.
(6) Be able to speak and understand the English language.
(7) Pass a physical examination and drug screening by the Police
Department's Physician.
(8) Complete the required basic Auxiliary Police training course.
§ 28-23 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-25
26:175
(9) Appointed personnel must be registered as a member of the local
Emergency Management Organization and must take a loyalty
oath.
OATH OF ALLEGIANCE
I, _________________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I
will support the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of New Jersey, and that I will bear faith
and allegiance to the same, and to the Governments established
in the United States and in this State, under the authority of the
people, so help me, God.
C. Procedures for new members. Any person who wants to join the
Rochelle Park Auxiliary Police must meet the standards of Subsection B.
He/she shall then complete the following:
(1) Submit in writing a request for membership to the Rochelle Park
Police Department Chief, requesting an application for the
Auxiliary Police.
(2) The Rochelle Park Police Department will mail or deliver the
Auxiliary Police application to the applicant.
(3) The application will be completed by the applicant and returned to
the Chief or Liaison of the Rochelle Park Police Department.
(4) The Chief or Liaison, upon receiving the application shall then date
and time-stamp said application.
(5) The Rochelle Park Police Department Chief or Liaison will then
conduct a criminal background check, Division of Motor Vehicles
check and further background check as needed, to satisfy the
requirements of becoming an Auxiliary Police member.
(6) Upon completion of the background check, the Rochelle Park Police
Department Chief or Liaison will then conduct an interview with
the applicant.
(7) The applicant is then required to pass a physical examination and
drug screening by the Rochelle Park Police Department's
Physician.
(8) Pending the results of the applicant's physical examination and
drug screening, the process will continue.
(9) If the applicant has satisfactorily completed all the requirements of
becoming an Auxiliary Police member, the Rochelle Park Police
Department Chief will submit in writing a request to the Rochelle
Park Mayor and Committee to have him/her appointed to the
organization.
§ 28-25 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 28-25
26:176
§ 28-26. Training.
§ 28-27. Implementation procedures.
D. All appointments to and termination from the organization shall be
submitted to the Rochelle Park Mayor and Committee for their review
and approval.
A. All members of the Auxiliary Police organization are required to
complete the basic Auxiliary Police course as prescribed by the State
Police Advisory Committee within one year of his/her appointment.
Members who fail to complete the basic training course without good
cause within one year of appointment will be terminated from the
organization.
B. Members may be assigned to the Chief of Police or his/her designee, for
the purpose of training, as prescribed by executive order and
directives.
A. The precise implementation of the local Auxiliary Police will be the
responsibility of the Rochelle Park Chief of Police or his/her designee
and the Emergency Management Coordinator for the Township of
Rochelle Park.
B. The assignment(s) of the Auxiliary Police to an emergency, disaster, or
training mission will be requested by the Chief of Police or his/her
designee or the Rochelle Park OEM Coordinator.
C. Auxiliary Police detailed for duty must adhere to the following
procedures before assuming his/her assignments:
(1) Report to Rochelle Park Police headquarters personally and log in
his/her name, date, and time of reporting and specific assignment
in the Auxiliary Police docket;
(2) Upon completion of assignment, whether an emergency or training
mission, signs out personally in the Auxiliary Police docket at police
headquarters (date and time completed and signature). Should any
unusual incident occur during his/her tour of duty, he/she will notify
the Rochelle Park Police Department's Tour Commander and fill out
an incident report.
D. Auxiliary Police properly summoned and assigned to duty are covered
by state statutes. Furthermore, the Auxiliary Officer will be covered by
insurance provided by the Township of Rochelle Park, in case of injury
or death while in the performance of his/her duties.
E. In the event of an extreme emergency or disaster, every effort will be
made to comply with all rules and regulations pertaining to the
Auxiliary Police activities, but if action has to be taken immediately,
verbal approval should be obtained from the Rochelle Park Chief of
§ 28-25 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-27
26:177
§ 28-28. Powers; duty assignments.
Police, the Rochelle Park OEM Coordinator, or the person in charge of
the Rochelle Park Police Department at the time of the emergency.
F. All members of the Auxiliary Police, when properly assigned, must
follow and comply with all rules and regulations, policies and
procedures of the Rochelle Park Police Department, as prescribed by
the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
A. Auxiliary Police as defined in N.J.S.A. App. A:9-45 (see Directive No. 28,
revised 10-8-1957 re: Chapter 251. P.L. 1942 amended by Chapter 86,
P.L. 1939). Personnel properly enrolled, trained, and certified according
to the orders, rules and regulations of N.J.S.A. App. A:9-45 as an
Auxiliary Police Member shall have the powers of a regular police
officer during a designated emergency or properly assigned training
mission.
B. All assignments of the Rochelle Park Auxiliary Police will be approved
by the Chief of Police, OEM Coordinator of the municipality or authority
having this responsibility during an emergency, disaster, or training
mission.
C. Auxiliary Police may be used for the following assignments:
(1) Vehicular and pedestrian traffic control.
(2) Receive and disseminate warnings.
(3) Disseminate information and instruction to the public as directed.
(4) Security of governmental buildings within the municipality, federal,
state, county, or local, as directed.
(5) Security of essential industries, power sources, waterways, and
communications.
(6) Assist in staffing and operating an emergency operations center.
(7) Enforcement of law and order as required and/or directed.
(8) Documentation of all tasks initiated or completed and unusual
incidents encountered during assigned duty.
(9) Assist any Township of Rochelle Park agency in any emergency.
(10) Assist the Rochelle Park Police Department with motor vehicle
accidents as needed.
(11) Assist any agency outside the Township of Rochelle Park in time of
their disaster or emergency. However, this must be authorized by
the Rochelle Park Chief of Police and/or the OEM Coordinator.
§ 28-27 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 28-28
26:178
§ 28-29. Use of firearms.
Auxiliary Police are not authorized to carry firearms while on their tour of
duty.
§ 28-30. Officers, powers and duties.
The officers of the Auxiliary Police shall consist of one Captain, one
Lieutenant, two Sergeants and Secretary, all of whom shall be active
members of the Auxiliary Police Organization at the time of their election
and throughout the period during which they hold such office.
(12) Assist the Rochelle Park Police Department in locating any
disabled, endangered, or juvenile missing person within the
Township of Rochelle Park.
A. Captain. The Captain is the highest commanding officer who has direct
control over all Auxiliary Police members within his/her command.
(1) He/she is responsible for the direction and control of the personnel
under his/her command to assure the proper performance of duties
and adherence to established rules, regulations, and procedures.
(2) He/she shall be responsible for the punctual attendance of all
personnel within his/her command and keep accurate and complete
records of every member, attendance, training, and scheduling.
(3) He/she is also responsible for the morale and discipline within his/
her command.
(4) He/she is responsible for communication of information through
the chain of command as required.
(5) He/she is responsible for the proper use and maintenance of the
organization equipment, supplies, and material used.
(6) He/she will insure that all members under his/her command have
knowledge of the equipment.
(7) He/she will make sure that all the members under his/her command
wear the organization's uniform at the time the uniform is required.
(8) He/she will coordinate all work details between the Lieutenant and
the Auxiliary Officers. The Captain will compile and certify, in the
form of a yearly written report, all activities performed by the
Auxiliary Police on a yearly basis and forward the report to the
Police Department Liaison, as well as monthly reports.
B. Lieutenant. The Lieutenant is second-in-command and will be
responsible for conducting operations of the Auxiliary Police in the
absence of the Captain.
§ 28-28 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-30
26:179
(1) He/she is responsible for proper assignments of duty and the
performance of those under his/her command.
(2) He/she will be responsible for making sure all Auxiliary Police
members are covered with the proper insurance provided by the
Township of Rochelle Park.
(3) Make sure all members are signing in and out in the logbook and
keep accurate records of the details.
(4) Will direct and oversee the activities and functions of the Auxiliary
Police Sergeants and give guidance when necessary.
(5) Will perform evaluations of Auxiliary Police Officers and their
performance and forward the report to the Auxiliary Police
Captain.
(6) Report any disciplinary problems under his command to the
Auxiliary Police Captain.
C. Sergeant. The Sergeants will be assigned to a squad. The organization
consists of two Sergeants. The senior Sergeant will be known as the
First Sergeant. The First Sergeant will act as Lieutenant in his/her
absence and shall perform his/her duties. Active members can only be
appointed to the rank of Sergeant after completing the basic Auxiliary
Police course.
D. Captain. The Captain shall be the chief administrative officer of the
organization and shall preside at all of its meetings. He/she will make
appointments to committees. The Captain is a member of all
committees and has no voting rights, except that in the case of a tie he/
she will cast the deciding vote.
E. Lieutenant. The Lieutenant shall perform the duties of the Captain in
his/her absence.
F. Secretary. The Secretary shall maintain the records of the organization,
including all meetings, and correspondence to and from the
organization.
G. Auxiliary Police Officer. The Auxiliary Police Officer shall complete a
tour of duty as assigned by his/her supervisor(s).
(1) He/she shall perform a minimum of 10 hours per calendar quarter.
(2) He/she will be assigned a squad, and perform to the best of his/her
ability.
(3) He/she will follow all departmental policies and procedures, and
rules and regulations of the organization.
(4) Attend monthly meetings and training courses.
§ 28-30 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 28-30
26:180
§ 28-31. Election of officers; succeeding terms; vacancies in office.
§ 28-32. Expulsion or suspension of members.
H. Police Liaison. The Police Liaison is a Rochelle Park Police Department
member who is assigned by the Chief of Police. The Liaison shall be
responsible for the operations of the Rochelle Park Auxiliary Police.
Responsible, also, for appointing a training officer to see that all the
Auxiliary Officers are properly trained. The Liaison has the authority to
suspend or expel any members of the organization for just cause. He/
she has the responsibility of preparing the organization's yearly budget.
(Note: In addition to the foregoing, the officers shall have such
additional powers and duties as may be set in the bylaws of the
organization).
I. Life Member. Any active member retiring or resigning after completing
a period of not less than 10 years of active service may apply for life
member. Any active member who becomes physically handicapped
before the completion of 10 years of service may also apply for life
membership. Such application shall be voted upon by the Township
Committee. Life members shall be entitled to all social rights and
privileges of the organization, except voting.
J. Probationary member. Any new member shall be on probation for the
period of time it takes him/her to complete the basic Auxiliary Police
course prescribed by the State Police Advisory Committee.
Probationary members may hold the office of Secretary.
A. The election of the officers shall take place at the November meeting by
closed ballot, with no proxy voting permitted, and election to any office
shall be by a majority of the votes cast.
B. The officers so elected shall enter upon the duties of their office the first
day of January following their elections. They shall serve for a period of
one year and until their successors are elected.
C. Officers may be elected to succeed themselves, provided that after an
officer shall have served two consecutive full terms in office, such
officer shall not be eligible to serve again in that office until 12 months
have passed. However, that limitation shall not apply to the office of the
Secretary or Sergeant.
D. In the event of a vacancy in any office, the unexpired term shall be filled
at the next regular meeting of the Auxiliary Police. Each member of the
Auxiliary Police shall receive a written notification at least 48 hours in
advance, advising of the vacancy. At such meeting an election will be
held to fill vacancies and shall be by ballot in the same manner
described above.
A. Failure to obey a lawful order of a line officer, negligent or willfully
improper conduct in his/her duties, and violation of the provisions of
§ 28-30 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-32
26:181
§ 28-33. Bylaws, rules and regulations.
this chapter, or any other applicable ordinance or statute, or any rule or
regulation adopted thereunder of the bylaws shall constitute grounds
for suspension and/or expulsion from the organization.
B. If the Rochelle Park Police Department's Liaison, auxiliary Police
Captain, or any line officer has reason to believe that there are grounds
for expulsion or suspension of any member of the organization for any
reason set out in Subsection A above, he/she shall prepare a written
statement of the charges against such a member. If such charges are
made by a line officer, other than the Liaison or Auxiliary Police
Captain, they shall submit the written charges to the Police Liaison.
C. The Police Chief shall fix a date, time, and place when such charges
against the member shall be heard and served upon that member in
written copy. At that meeting, the Police Department Chief and Liaison
will hear the charges made against such member by the line officer
making such charges.
D. If any member is suspended from the organization, such member may
appeal such suspension to the Rochelle Park Chief of Police. Such
appeal shall be made by giving notice to the Rochelle Park Police
Department Auxiliary Liaison within 10 days after notice of suspension
is given to such member. The Rochelle Park Chief of Police shall hear
the matter and may affirm such suspension if he/she finds the member
guilty, or if he/she finds the member guilty but believes the penalty
imposed to be unduly severe, he/she may reduce such penalty or, if he/
she finds the member not guilty, he/she shall forthwith reinstate him/
her as an active member of the organization.
E. If any member is expelled from the organization, such member may
appeal such expulsion to the Rochelle Park Mayor and Committee. Such
appeal shall be made by giving a written notice to the Secretary of the
Auxiliary Police within 10 days after notice of the expulsion. The
Secretary of the organization will forward copies of the appeal to the
Township Administrator, and the Police Department's Liaison. The
Rochelle Park Mayor and Committee shall hear the matter and may
affirm such expulsion if they find the member guilty, or if they find the
member guilty but believe the penalty imposed to be unduly severe,
they may reduce such penalty or, if they find the member not guilty,
they shall forthwith reinstate him/her as an active member of the
organization.
A. The Auxiliary Police Organization is hereby authorized and empowered
to adopt, amend, and supplement bylaws, rules, and regulations which
shall provide for the administration and operation of the organization,
and prescribe the duties and rules of conduct of the members therefor,
and shall contain such other matters as are necessary or useful for the
proper functioning of the organization. Said bylaws, rules, and
§ 28-32 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 28-33
26:182
§ 28-34. Duty uniform.
The Township of Rochelle Park shall provide the Auxiliary Police Officer with
a uniform. This uniform will be the property of the Township of Rochelle
Park and must be returned at time of termination or resignation from the
organization. The specific uniform worn will be outlined in the organization
bylaws.
§ 28-35. Office of emergency management.
regulations shall not become effective until first presented to and
approved by the Rochelle Park Mayor and Committee.
B. Said bylaws, rules, and regulations, and any amendments or
supplements thereto, may be adopted by a 2/3 vote of the active
membership present and voting at a meeting of the membership of the
organization. Notice of such proposed bylaws, rules, regulations,
amendments, and supplements thereto shall be given by mail to each
member at least seven days prior to the date of such meeting.
C. Parliamentary procedure. Roberts' rules manual for parliamentary
procedure, except as provided in this article, shall be standard for
parliamentary law in the absence of a rule governing the organization.
A. Anytime OEM is stated in this article, it is known as the Office of
Emergency Management.
B. All reference to Civil Defense or Civil Defense and Disaster Control
shall be interpreted to mean Emergency Management, by authority of
New Jersey State, Executive Order No. 101, (EMSP 4-81) Revised 1991.
C. The Auxiliary Police Captain and Lieutenant shall be the Liaisons to the
Rochelle Park OEM. They will attend all OEM meetings and bring back
to the Auxiliary Police membership all vital information regarding the
OEM meetings and drills/training classes.
D. All Auxiliary Police Officers in time of a declared emergency will be
under the supervision of the Rochelle Park OEM Coordinator or his/her
designee.
§ 28-33 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-35
26:183

ARTICLE V
Internal Affairs Policy and Procedures
[Adopted 5-18-2011 by Ord. No. 1030-11]
§ 28-36. Adoption of state policy.
A. The Township hereby adopts, by reference, the Internal Affairs Policy
and Procedures issued by the State of New Jersey Office of the Attorney
General, Division of Criminal Justice, as the same is currently in effect.
Any amendments to said procedures by the Office of Attorney General
shall be deemed to be amendments to the within article as the same is
amended from time to time.
B. The Internal Affairs Policy and Procedures of the Police Management
Manual shall be on file in the office of the Township Clerk and the office
of the Rochelle Park Police Department.
§ 28-36 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-36
26:185

ARTICLE VI
Special Law Enforcement Officers
[Adopted 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 1107-17]
§ 28-37. Positions Created.
There is hereby created the position of special law enforcement officer for
the Rochelle Park Police Department.
§ 28-38. Qualifications.
In order to be appointed a special law enforcement officer, said individual
must meet the qualifications as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10.
§ 28-39. Duties.
The duties of such special law enforcement officers shall be as set forth in
the Special Law Enforcement Officers Act44 as directed by the Police Chief
of the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 28-40. Wages.
The special law enforcement officers shall be paid such wages as shall, from
time to time, be established under the appropriate salary ordinance of the
Township.45
§ 28-41. Rules and Regulations.
The specific rules and regulations concerning special law enforcement
officers shall be promulgated by the Chief of Police and shall be set forth
in the general order of the Chief of Police as he or she deems appropriate
from time to time which rules and regulations shall be consistent with the
provisions of the aforementioned state law.
44.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.
45.Editor's Note: The currently effective Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 28-37 PAYROLL SERVICES § 28-41
26:187
Chapter 31
PUBLIC WORKS, SUPERINTENDENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 97. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 161.
§ 31-1. Office created; tenure in office. [Amended 1-25-1995 by Ord.
No. 68646; 2-17-2016 by Ord. No. 1095-16]
§ 31-2. Duties in connection with Department of Public Works.
The Superintendent appointed pursuant hereto shall supervise the
operation of the sewer pumping station and attend to the care and operation
of same and perform such other duties and such other work in connection
with the Department of Public Works of the Township of Rochelle Park as
the Township Committee may from time to time direct by resolution.
§ 31-3. Supervision of road construction and repair. [Amended
5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works shall supervise the
erection and construction of all new roads, the repair and alteration of
existing roads and the removal of snow from said roads, have charge of
any and all street openings, be in charge of cleaning said roads and all
appurtenances thereto, such as storm drains and sanitary sewer lines, and
perform such other duties and do such other work in connection with the
roads as the Township Committee may from time to time direct.
§ 31-4. Division of Recycling. [Added 2-20-1990 by Ord. No. 583]
A. There is hereby created the office of Superintendent of the Department
of Public Works of the Township of Rochelle Park, County of Bergen and
State of New Jersey.
B. The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works shall be
appointed by the Township Committee and shall, at all times, serve at
the pleasure of the Township Committee.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:9-154:6, tenure in said office is
hereby authorized upon completion of five years in the position;
provided, however, that the Township Committee adopts a resolution
upon completion of five years of service authorizing and granting
tenure in the position.
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the tenure of the present Superintendent
of Public Works, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6.
§ 28-41 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 31-4
26:188
A. There is hereby established within the Department of Public Works a
Division of Recycling under the direction of the Recycling Coordinator.
B. The Recycling Coordinator shall be under the supervision and authority
of the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and shall have
the following duties:
(1) Establish, perform and publicize educational programs in
furtherance of the township's anti-littering and recycling efforts.
(2) Coordinate various industrial, business, civil and volunteer
organizations to aid in the township's anti-littering and recycling
efforts.
(3) Act as liaison between the township and state and county antilittering
and recycling programs.
(4) Recommend to the Township Committee the adoption of
resolutions and ordinances, as appropriate, to carry out the
township's anti-littering and recycling efforts.
(5) Encourage and cooperate with all local voluntary and state and
county anti-littering and recycling programs to focus public
attention on the township's anti-litter and recycling programs.
(6) Investigate and report to the Township Committee on the
availability of funds from any private or public sources to be used in
the township's anti-littering and recycling efforts.
(7) Upon the approval or at the direction of the Township Committee,
apply for funds from any private or public sources to be used in the
township's anti-littering or recycling efforts.
(8) Investigate and report to the Township Committee any successful
methods of anti-littering, litter pickup and removal or recycling
programs in other municipalities and in other states and evaluate
their possible incorporation into the township's anti-littering and
recycling efforts.
(9) Identify and investigate and report to the Township Committee all
potential locations and markets for the disposal or sale of
recyclables, including leaf disposal.
(10) Subject to the approval of the Township Committee, assist the
Township Attorney in the negotiation of contracts for the disposal
or sale of recyclables, including leaf disposal.
(11) Compile, prepare and submit recycling tonnage reports to the New
Jersey Office of Recycling in accordance with rules and regulations
adopted by the Department of Environmental Protection therefor
and to the Bergen County Utilities Authority.
§ 31-4 PAYROLL SERVICES § 31-4
26:189
§ 31-5. Division of Shade Trees. [Added 3-19-1990 by Ord. No. 585]
Chapter 34
RECORDS
(12) Pursuant to § 112-15D of the Rochelle Park Code, prepare an
annual registration form and semiannual recycling collection forms
for use by the owners, lessees and/or occupants of all commercial
and/or industrial property in the township and compile and
maintain said forms.
(13) Receive and handle complaints and inquiries from the public
respecting the anti-littering and recycling efforts and report
thereon to the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works.
(14) Perform such other duties as may be required by law or from time
to time prescribed by the Township Committee.
A. There is hereby established within the Department of Public Works a
Division of Shade Trees under the direction of the Superintendent of
the Department of Public Works.
B. Subject to regulations adopted by the Township Committee, the
Superintendent of public Works shall be responsible for the care,
maintenance, planting and removal of shade and ornamental trees and
shrubbery now located or which may hereafter be planted in any public
street, park or public place within the Township of Rochelle Park, other
than that which is within the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Department
of Transportation or the County of Bergen.
§ 31-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 31-5
34:190
ARTICLE I
Retention and Destruction
[Adopted 5-20-1998 by Ord. No. 774-98]
§ 34-1. Schedule established by Bureau of Archives and History.
The Bureau of Archives and History in the Department of Education has
established a records retention and disposal schedule which sets forth the
records, title and description of public records and the dates agencies must
retain said records.
§ 34-2. Schedule adopted by township.
The Township of Rochelle Park hereby adopts the records retention and
disposal schedule as promulgated by New Jersey statutes.
§ 34-1 RECORDS § 34-2
34:191
Chapter 36
RECREATION COMMITTEE; USE OF RECREATION
FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 39.
§ 36-1. Committee created; appointment.
There is hereby created a Recreation Committee, the members of which
shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Township Committee.
§ 36-2. Number of members; designation.
Said Committee shall consist of seven members together with two alternate
members who shall serve in the absence of regular members. All said
members shall be residents of the Township of Rochelle Park. The Secretary
to the Recreation Committee may be appointed as a regular or alternate
member of the Committee.
§ 36-3. Terms of office; reimbursement for expenses.
The members of the Recreation Committee first appointed shall hold office
for one, two, or three years, respectively, as fixed by the Chairman of the
Township Committee, arid, thereafter, all appointments shall be for a term
of three years and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
The sixth and seventh member shall hold office for two and three years,
respectively, and, thereafter, all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term only. Members of the Recreation Committee shall serve until their
successors are appointed and qualified. The members of the Recreation
Committee shall receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed for their
actual expenses. In the event, however, that the Secretary of the Recreation
Committee is appointed as a member of the Committee, that member shall
receive compensation for services as Secretary in accordance with the
Township's Salary Ordinance.47
§ 36-4. Annual appropriation; base of operations.
The Township Committee may, in its sole discretion, provide an annual
appropriation for any expenses necessary for the operation of the
Recreation Committee, and the Committee shall be provided with suitable
quarters for the conduct of its operation.
47.See Ch. 39, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 34-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 36-5
34:192
§ 36-5. Use of Carlock Field. [Added 6-17-2009 by Ord. No. 1005-09]
At all times when the Recreation Committee Summer Camp is in session,
the field, playground and other areas in and around Carlock Field shall be
reserved solely for the use of the Summer Camp. The hours of Summer
Camp shall be determined by the Recreation Committee as it may
determine, from time to time. In the absence of such a specific
determination, the hours shall be 9:00 a.m. through 2:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday for the time period during which Summer Camp is in
operation. Provisions of this section may be enforced by the Rochelle Park
Police Department, and all penalties shall be in accordance with the general
penalty provision of the Township Code.
§ 36-6. Fees for recreation services. [Added 6-15-2011 by Ord. No.
1035-11]
The Township Committee may establish, by resolution, any fees for
participation in recreation programs or use of recreation facilities.
Chapter 39
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 42
(RESERVED)
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 52
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 112. Burning of waste material — See Ch. 185,
§ 185-130D(8)(b).
§ 52-1. Findings; declaration of policy.
A. Pollution of the atmosphere by smoke, cinders, soot, fly ash, gases,
fumes, vapors, odors, dust and other contaminants is a menace to the
health, welfare and comfort of the residents of the Township of Rochelle
Park and a cause of substantial damage to property.
B. For the purpose of controlling and reducing atmospheric pollution, it is
hereby declared to be the policy of the Township of Rochelle Park to
minimize air pollution as herein defined and prohibit excessive emission
§ 36-5 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 52-1
39:193
§ 52-2. Definitions.
The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this chapter,
shall have the respective meanings assigned to them:
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or
more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are or tend to be
injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant life or to property
or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property
throughout the Township of Rochelle Park as shall be affected thereby, and
excludes all aspects of employer-employee relationship as to health and
safety hazards.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Any furnace, boiler, water heater, device,
mechanism, stoker, burner, stack, oven, stove, kiln, still or other apparatus,
or a group or collection of such units, in the process of fuel-burning for the
generation of heat or power. Refuse-burning equipment shall be considered
incinerators as herein defined and not as "fuel-burning equipment" under
this definition. Ovens, stoves or ranges used exclusively for domestic
cooking purposes are not included herein.
INCINERATOR — Any device, apparatus, equipment or structure used for
destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substance,
including but not limited to refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris or scrap, or
facilities for cremating human or animal remains.
ODOR — A property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPEN BURNING — Any fire wherein the products of combustion are
emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or
chimney.
OPERATOR — Any person who has care, custody or control of a building
or premises or a portion thereof, whether with or without knowledge of the
owner thereof.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, or who shall have charge, care or control of any
premises or part thereof, including but not limited to a dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as a fiduciary, including but not
limited to executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or guardian, or as a
mortgagee in possession regardless of how such possession was obtained.
Any person who is a lessee or sublessee of all or any part of any premises,
of the same, to establish standards governing the installation,
maintenance and operation of equipment and appurtenances relating
to combustion which are a source or potential source of air pollution,
and in furtherance of this purpose, to cooperate and coordinate these
efforts with the State Department of Environmental Protection, Air
Pollution Control Program.
§ 52-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 52-2
52:194
including but not limited to a dwelling or dwelling unit, shall be deemed to
be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility with the
owner over the premises or portion thereof so leased or subleased.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies as well as individuals.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except body wastes,
and shall include but not be limited to garbage, rubbish, yard trimmings,
leaves, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and
solid market and industrial wastes.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Ringelmann's Scale for Grading the
Density of Smoke, published by the United States Bureau of Mines, or any
chart, recorder, indicator or device for the measurement of smoke density
which is approved by the State Department of Environmental Protection of
the State of New Jersey as the equivalent of said Ringelmann's Scale.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive, and
shall include but not be limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets,
wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, tin
cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS — Any business, trade or industry engaged in
whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material,
including but not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping containers or
drums.
SMOKE — Small gasborne and airborne particles arising from a process of
combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid materials or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade
or industry, and shall include but not be limited to plastic products, cartons,
paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and
other forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
§ 52-3. Open burning.
The prohibitions of open-air burning are as follows: No person shall cause,
suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or plant life nor conduct a
salvage operation by open burning, except for the open burning of trade
waste, which is not prohibited because there is no other known method
of disposal that can be used without hazard to health or property, and
provided the required affidavit has been filed with and approved by the
Commissioner of the New Jersey State Department of Environmental
Protection in accordance with Chapter II, Section 1.4, of the New Jersey Air
Pollution Control Code.
§ 52-4. Smoke emission from fuel-burning equipment.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any fuelburning
equipment, the shade or appearance of which is darker than
No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air.
§ 52-2 AIR POLLUTION § 52-4
52:195
§ 52-5. Regulation of incinerators.
§ 52-6. Prohibition of air pollution.
No person or owner of property and no person having possession or control
of property shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to smoke emitted during
the cleaning of a firebox or the building of a new fire, the shade or
appearance of which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart, for a period or periods aggregating no more than three minutes
in any 15 consecutive minutes.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any
incinerator, the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 of
the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air or
emissions of such opacity within a stack or chimney or, exclusive of
water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree
greater than the emission designated as No. 1 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to smoke emitted during
the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not
darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period of no
longer than three consecutive minutes nor to emissions of such opacity
within a stack or chimney or, exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity
leaving a stack or chimney to a degree which is not greater than the
emission designated as No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a
period no longer than three consecutive minutes.
C. Visible particles. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the
emission of particles of unburned waste or ash from any incinerator
which are individually large enough to be visible while suspended in the
atmosphere.
D. Odors. No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any
incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell
in any area of human use or occupancy.
E. Limitation on time of operation. No person shall operate, and no owner
or operator of any building in the Township of Rochelle Park shall
permit the operation of, an incinerator prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00
p.m. of any day, and all operation shall be completely terminated by
5:00 p.m., including complete extinction of the fire and removal of
material in a safe manner from the firebox to a noncombustible
container; provided, however, that by special permit the Township of
Rochelle Park may, because of exceptional circumstances, permit
different hours of operation under such conditions as it shall deem
necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public or of persons
in the vicinity.
§ 52-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 52-6
52:196
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ 52-7. Inspections of premises.
A. All buildings and premises subject to this chapter are subject to
inspection from time to time by the Township of Rochelle Park or its
duly authorized representatives. All rooms and areas in the building
shall be available and accessible for such inspection, which shall be
made during usual business hours if the premises are used for
nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that inspections may be
made at other times if:
(1) The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection; or
(2) There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the
premises which can only be apprehended and proved by inspection
during other than prescribed hours; or
(3) There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is
an immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
B. Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the
Township of Rochelle Park has reason to believe that a condition exists
which poses an immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such
procedure shall take place only where the time required to apply for
and secure the issuance of a warrant would render ineffective the
immediate action necessary to abate the condition. Emergency
inspections may also be authorized by the Governor in times of air
pollution emergencies in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:2C-32. Where the
Township of Rochelle Park or the duly authorized representative is
refused entry or access or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the
owner, occupant or operator from conducting an inspection of the said
premises, such person shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to
the penalties hereunder.
C. Search warrant or access warrant.
(1) The Township of Rochelle Park may, upon affidavit, apply to the
Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township of Rochelle Park for a
search warrant, setting forth factually the actual conditions and
circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a
nuisance or violation of the chapter may exist on the premises,
including one or more of the following:
(a) That the premises require inspection according to the cycle
established by the Township of Rochelle Park for periodic
inspections or premises of the type involved.
§ 52-6 AIR POLLUTION § 52-7
52:197
§ 52-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who
shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof shall
be punishable as for a misdemeanor under the applicable provisions of
Title 26.48 The violation of any section or subsection of this chapter shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
§ 52-9. Interpretation.
This chapter is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes herein
described. Nothing herein is to be construed as repealing or abridging
the emergency powers of any agency of government except to the extent
expressly set forth herein.
Chapter 55
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 28.
§ 55-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar and other emergency alarm equipment,
whether by producing a visual or audible signal or whether by direct line,
radio, telephone or other means activating a device requiring a response
thereto by the Township of Rochelle Park Police Department.
(b) That observation of external conditions (for example, smoke,
ash, soot, odors) of the premises and its public areas has
resulted in the belief that violations of this chapter exist.
(c) Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning
equipment and/or system, types of incinerator, particular use
of premises or other factor which renders systematic
inspections of such building necessary in the interest of public
health and safety.
(2) If the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township of Rochelle
Park is satisfied as to the matters set forth in the said affidavit, he
shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting access
to and inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance
or violation may exist.
48.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:2C-1 et seq.
§ 52-7 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 55-2
52:198
§ 55-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to alarm businesses and to any
person who operates, maintains or owns any alarm device, dial alarm or
local alarm designed to produce a visual or audible signal of an emergency
or designed to summon the police or other municipal agencies of the
Township of Rochelle Park to any location in response to any type of alarm
signal.
§ 55-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — Equipment or a device or any assembly of equipment
and devices designated to signal the presence of an emergency or hazard
to which the Police Department, Fire Department, ambulance or other
municipal agencies may be expected to respond. In this chapter, the term
"alarm system" shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the
terms "local alarm," "digital transmitter alarms," "direct wire alarms" and
"automatic dialer alarms."49[Amended 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 683A]
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Township of Rochelle Park
or his designated representative.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — The designated representative of the
Chief of Police to perform a function required or permitted by this chapter.
Designated representative shall be limited to members of the Township of
Rochelle Park Police Department.
DIAL ALARM — Any type of alarm system using telephone lines transmitting
an alarm directly through the police switchboard providing warning of
intrusion or other peril.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm or signal of an alarm system actuated by
inadvertence, negligence or any intentional or unintentional act of a person
other than an intruder or the use of the alarm system for other than its
intended purpose, including any alarm or signal caused by mechanical
failure, malfunctioning or improper installation of the alarm
system.[Amended 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 683A]
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Fire Department of the Township of Rochelle
Park.[Added 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 683A]
LICENSEE — The person who holds the license to install, operate and
maintain the alarm console pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm system which, when activated, produces a
signal not connected to the alarm console or the police switchboard, such as
store burglar alarms actuating bell devices providing warning of intrusion
or other peril. The local alarm shall not include an alarm system on a motor
vehicle, provided that said motor vehicle alarm is not interconnected with
49.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "alarm console," which immediately preceded this
definition, was repealed 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 683A.
§ 55-2 AIR POLLUTION § 55-3
52:199
an alarm device, a dial alarm or local alarm. The term local alarm shall also
not include equipment designed to signal solely within the building or series
of buildings if owned by the same person on which it is located and which
is not designed to emit signals visible or audible to persons outside such
buildings or building.
PERMITTEE — Any person who owns an alarm device who has obtained a
permit according to the provisions of this chapter.
PERSON — Any natural person or individual or any firm, partnership,
association, limited partnership, sole proprietorship or corporation or any
business entity.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Township of Rochelle Park Police
Department.
TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Township Clerk of the Township of Rochelle
Park.
WRITTEN NOTICE — Notice by certified mail.
§ 55-4. Dial alarms. [Amended 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 683A]
A. No dial alarm shall be permitted unless it shall have first been
registered with the Chief of Police as hereinafter required and
approved by the Chief of Police and approval thereof by the New Jersey
Bell Telephone Company and a test conducted by the alarm owner or on
his own behalf.
B. No dial alarm shall be coded to dial the general police number. All dial
alarms shall be coded to dial a neighbor, relative or other third party.
C. All dial alarms shall be capable of being disconnected to allow a call to
police headquarters in the event of a false alarm.
D. All permittees will be required to register their alarm system with the
Chief of Police on a form that shall include, among other data, the
name, address and twenty-four-hour telephone number of the alarm
installer or person responsible for its maintenance; the name, address
and telephone number of three persons, other than the permittee, to be
contacted in the event of an alarm; the person responsible to remit any
fees or fines assessed under this chapter; and all other information as
may be required by the Chief of Police. The fee for new alarms for
commercial, industrial, retail and multifamily premises shall be $100.
The fee for new single-family residence alarms shall be $25. [Amended
11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1043-11]
E. Owners of dial alarms shall be governed by the false alarm procedures
and penalties set forth in this chapter.
F. Except as provided hereunder, or as otherwise permitted by the
Township Committee, no person shall be permitted to have any direct
leased telephone line with the Police Department headquarters for an
alarm system.
§ 55-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 55-5
52:200
§ 55-5. False alarms. [Added 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 683A50]
§ 55-6. Use of alarms. [Added 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 683A52]
§ 55-7. Automatic dialer alarms and digital transmitter alarms.
[Added 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 683A53]
In addition to the general requirements specified in this chapter, automatic
dialer alarms and direct digital transmitter alarms located in the Township
of Rochelle Park shall be subject to the following requirements:
§ 55-8. General regulations. [Added 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 683A54]
A. If three false alarms occur in a calendar year (January 1 to December
31), the permittee shall, within three working days after written notice
to do so, complete a written notice to the Chief of Police setting forth
the cause of the false alarms, if known, the corrective action taken,
whether the alarm system has been inspected by an alarm service
company and such other information as the Chief of Police may
reasonably require.
B. (Reserved)51
C. If a permittee fails to pay the service fee called for above, this shall be a
violation of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any local alarm to ring or put forth any other
sound for a period of longer than 20 minutes. In addition to the penalty
for violating this provision, any violation of this requirement shall
constitute a false alarm and be subject to the service charges specified
above.
B. All persons owning an audible intrusion, panic or fire alarm that is not
monitored by an alarm company shall locate the audible service device
on the outside of the structure in plain view. If used for fire alarm, the
device shall be red in color and shall be labeled "Fire Alarm." All other
audible devices shall be any other color with the exception of red.
A. Automatic dialer alarms and digital transmitter alarms shall be coded to
dial a central alarm station or other monitor, other than the Township of
Rochelle Park Police Department.
B. Any alarms received by the Rochelle Park Police Department from an
automatic dialer alarm or digital transmitter alarm shall be subject to
the charges provided for false alarms.
50.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 55-5, Registration of systems.
51.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding notice and penalties for more than three
false alarms, was repealed 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1043-11.
52.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 55-6, Licensing of alarm console, as
amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519.
53.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 55-7, False alarms.
§ 55-5 AIR POLLUTION § 55-8
52:201
§ 55-9. Additional rules and regulations. [Added 11-21-1994 by Ord.
No. 683A55]
The Chief of Police may from time to time promulgate rules and regulations
supplementing this chapter in order to provide for the efficient management
of said system, provided that the Mayor and Township Committee must first
approve said rules or any changes thereto.
§ 55-10. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-21-1994 by Ord. No.
683A56; amended 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1043-11]
Any person found guilty of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for
not more than 30 days, or both, exclusive of any other fees which may have
been imposed under § 55-12. The fees imposed by § 55-12 shall be payable
in addition to any fine imposed under this section.
§ 55-11. Exempt alarms. [Added 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 683A57]
The following alarms are exempt from the false alarm charge and alarm fees
imposed by this chapter:
A. Every permittee shall, by acceptance of the permit, be deemed as
having consented to inspection of the premises on which said alarm
devices are located at reasonable hours by the Chief of Police or his
designated representative.
B. Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Chief of
Police or his designated representative for noncompliance with this
chapter. Any person maintaining or installing unauthorized equipment
shall be prosecuted for violation of this chapter.
C. Any permittee utilizing the services of any alarm company shall provide
for a representative to be on call at all times, and such service shall be
provided immediately, when necessary, after notification by the Police
Department of any malfunction of any equipment or false alarm.
D. The Chief of Police may revoke any license or permit 10 days after
written notice has been served upon the alarm owner for failure to
make the proper repairs or comply with this chapter after previous
written notice has been served by the Chief of Police requesting said
repairs or compliance for a violation. If, within the ten-day period, the
alarm owner furnishes sufficient proof, as may be required by the Chief
of Police, that the alarm system has been repaired and the violation(s)
corrected, the Chief of Police may rescind the revocation order.
54.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 55-8, Testing of alarms.
55.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 55-9, General regulations.
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 55-10, Hearing after notice of
violation.
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 55-11, Additional rules and
regulations.
§ 55-8 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 55-11
52:202
§ 55-12. False alarm charges. [Added 11-21-1994 by Ord. No.
683A58; amended 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1043-11]
Chapter 58
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food establishments — See Ch. 107.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 143.
Tobacco — See Ch. 171.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 194.
A. Lifeline alarms.
B. Alarms in the public schools located in the Township of Rochelle Park.
C. Alarms in the municipally owned buildings located in the Township of
Rochelle Park.
A. The charges for false alarms at commercial/industrial, office or
multifamily property shall be as follows:
(1) Second false alarm in a calendar year: $100.
(2) Third false alarm in a calendar year: $250.
(3) Fourth false alarm in a calendar year: $500.
(4) Fifth and subsequent false alarms in a calendar year: $1,000/alarm.
B. Charges for false alarms for one- and two-family residences shall be as
follows:
(1) Second and subsequent false alarms: $50/alarm.
58.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 55-12, Violations and penalties.
§ 55-11 AIR POLLUTION § 55-12
52:203

ARTICLE I
Regulation and Control
[Adopted 9-8-1970 by Ord. No. 319]
§ 58-1. License fees. [Amended 9-21-1970 by Ord. No. 322; 4-1-1974
by Ord. No. 352; 3-17-1975 by Ord. No. 367; 11-16-1981 by Ord. No.
453; 2-21-1983 by Ord. No. 468; 4-2-1984 by Ord. No. 483]
§ 58-2. Number of licenses permitted. [Amended 9-8-1970 by Ord.
No. 320; 5-6-1974 by Ord. No. 355; 6-21-2006 by Ord. No. 949-06]
Not more than two plenary retail consumption licenses and not more than
six plenary distribution licenses shall be issued and outstanding in the
Township of Rochelle Park at the same time. All licenses, however, which
are issued and outstanding as of the date of the adoption of this section shall
be allowed to continue in operation.
§ 58-3. Hours of business. [Amended 3-18-1998 by Ord. No. 767-98;
5-20-1998 by Ord. No. 773-98; 4-17-2002 by Ord. No. 847-02;
10-18-2002 by Ord. No. 871-02; 2-19-2003 by Ord. No. 876-03;
10-15-2008 by Ord. No. 993-08]
A. The annual license fee for a plenary retail consumption license in the
Township of Rochelle Park, New Jersey, shall be $1,790. [Amended
4-17-1996 by Ord. No. 718; 8-18-2010 by Ord. No. 1020-10]
B. The annual license fee for a plenary retail distribution license in the
Township of Rochelle Park, New Jersey, shall be $1,194. [Amended
4-17-1996 by Ord. No. 718; 8-18-2010 by Ord. No. 1020-10]
C. The annual license fee for a club license in the Township of Rochelle
Park, New Jersey, shall be $150. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
A. No sale, service or delivery of alcoholic beverages at retail shall be
made by any duly licensed licensee between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on any day, except that on New Year's Day alcoholic
beverages may be sold by said licensee between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 3:00 a.m. The closing time for licensed premises, therefore, is
hereby established at 1:30 a.m.
B. Notwithstanding the above, however, and although no alcoholic
beverages may be sold or served between the above referenced hours,
patrons will be permitted to remain within the licensed premises for an
additional thirty-minute period until 1:30 a.m. on any day. The licensee
shall be required to announce, to all patrons, that no further alcoholic
beverages shall be sold or served after 1:00 a.m. and that all patrons
will be required to leave the premises no later than 1:30 a.m. The
licensee shall also have the following responsibilities with regard to
same:
§ 58-1 AIR POLLUTION § 58-3
52:205
§ 58-3.1. Hours of business for hotel/motel licensees. [Added
6-21-2006 by Ord. No. 949-06]
(1) No patrons shall be allowed to enter the premises after 1:00 a.m.
(2) Houselights shall be required to be turned on at 1:00 a.m.
(3) A member of the licensee's staff shall be placed at all entrances to
the licensed premises in order to prevent additional persons or
patrons to enter the premises after 1:00 a.m.
(4) The licensed premises must be completely vacated by all customers
and patrons by 1:30 a.m., without exception.
(5) The closing time for licensed premises, is therefore, established at
1:30 a.m.
C. Plenary retail distribution establishments. No licensee shall allow,
permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage
at retail in its original container for consumption off the licensed
premises or allow, permit or suffer the removal of any alcoholic
beverage in its original container from the retail licensed premises
before 7:00 a.m. and after 10:00 p.m. on any day of the week.
A. No sale, service or delivery of alcoholic beverages at retail shall be
made by any duly licensed licensee with a hotel/motel license between
the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the next day, except that on
New Year's Day, alcoholic beverages may be sold by said licensee
between said hours of 11:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The closing time for
licensed premises, therefore, is hereby established at 12:00 midnight.
B. Notwithstanding the above, however, and although no alcoholic
beverages may be sold or served between the above-referenced hours,
patrons will be permitted to remain within the licensed premises for an
additional thirty-minute period until 12:00 midnight on any day. The
licensee shall be required to announce, to all patrons, that no further
alcoholic beverages shall be sold or served after 11:30 p.m. and that all
patrons will be required to leave the premises no later than 12:00
midnight. The licensee shall also have the following responsibilities
with regard to same.
(1) No patrons shall be allowed to enter the premises after 11:30 p.m.
(2) Houselights shall be required to be turned on at 11:30 p.m.
(3) A member of the licensee's staff shall be placed at all entrances to
the licensed premises in order to prevent additional persons or
patrons from entering the premises after 11:30 p.m.
(4) The licensed premises must be completely vacated by all customers
and patrons by 12:00 midnight, without exception.
§ 58-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 58-3.1
52:206
§ 58-4. Compliance with zoning regulations.
No license shall be issued hereunder for premises which do not comply with
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the Township or any amendments
and supplements thereto.59
§ 58-5. Unrestricted view of premises; exception.
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold in any place which shall be concealed
by screens or otherwise from public view, nor in any place to which the
public is not admitted, but this section shall not apply to club-licensed
premises.
§ 58-6. Lighting of premises.
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption on premises which
shall not be sufficiently lighted at all times to give a full view of the interior
thereof.
§ 58-7. Toilet facilities.
All premises upon which alcoholic beverages are sold under a plenary
retail consumption license or a seasonal retail consumption license shall be
furnished, supplied or equipped with separate toilets for men and women
which shall meet with the approval of the Health Inspector of the Township.
Any licensee now holding a plenary retail consumption license or a seasonal
retail consumption license for premises which are not now equipped with
separate toilets for men and women shall cause the same to be installed
within 90 days after the passage thereof.
§ 58-8. Sales to certain minors prohibited. [Amended 5-5-1986 by
Ord. No. 519]
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, or allow, permit or suffer the service
or delivery of, any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any person
(5) The closing time for licensed premises is therefore established at
12:00 midnight.
C. For the purposes of this section, a hotel/motel license shall be a plenary
retail consumption license issued under the hotel/motel exception as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 33: l -12.20 or which license is designated as a "36"
license pursuant to the rules, records and regulations of the State of
New Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control Regulations.
D. The provisions of § 58-3 entitled "Hours of business" shall be applicable
only to plenary retail consumption licenses designated as "33" licenses
and club licenses designated as "31" licenses pursuant to State of New
Jersey Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control Regulations.
59.Editor's Note: See Ch. 185, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 58-3.1 AIR POLLUTION § 58-8
52:207
under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages, or allow, permit or
suffer the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any such person upon the
licensed premises.60
§ 58-9. Persons and activities excluded from premises.
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises
any known criminals, gangsters, racketeers, pickpockets, swindlers,
confidence men, prostitutes, female impersonators or other persons of ill
repute; nor shall any licensee allow, permit or suffer the licensed premises
or the licensed business to be used in furtherance or aid of or in connection
with any illegal activity or enterprise.
§ 58-10. Nuisances prohibited. [Amended 4-17-2002 by Ord. No.
847-02; 2-19-2003 by Ord. No. 876-03]
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer in or upon the licensed premises
any disturbances, loudness, immoral activities, brawls or unnecessary
noises, or allow, permit or suffer the licensed place of business to be
conducted in such a manner as to become a nuisance. In the event that
a licensee allows, permits or suffers in or upon the licensed premises
recurrent or multiple nuisances or disturbances, the same will be grounds
for disciplinary action against the licensee which may include, without
being limited to, suspension or revocation of the license.61
§ 58-11. Private lotteries prohibited. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord.
No. 519]
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer any private lottery to be conducted,
or any ticket or participation right in any private lottery to be sold or offered
for sale, on or about the licensed premises.
§ 58-12. Gambling on or about premises.
No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer any pool selling,
bookmaking or any playing for money at faro, roulette, rouge et noir or
any unlawful game or gambling of any kind, or any device or apparatus
designed for any such purpose, or any machine or device commonly known
as "bagatelle" or "pinball machine," on or about the licensed premises.
§ 58-13. Slot machines.
No licensee shall possess, allow, permit or suffer on or about the licensed
premises any slot machine or device in the nature of a slot machine which
may be used for the purpose of playing for money or other valuable thing.
60.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 171, Tobacco, Art. I, Sale to Minors; Vending Machines.
61.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 143, Peace and Good Order.
§ 58-8 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 58-14
52:208
§ 58-14. Opening of containers on retail distribution premises.
No retail distribution licensee shall permit any alcoholic beverages sold by
him to be consumed on the licensed premises, nor shall he permit their
containers to be opened on the licensed premises.
§ 58-15. Obscene material.62
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer on or about the licensed premises
or have in his possession or distribute or cause to be distributed any matter
containing any obscene, indecent, filthy, lewd, lascivious or disgusting
printing, writing, picture or other such representation.
§ 58-16. Intoxicated persons not to work on premises.
No licensee shall allow, permit or suffer himself or any other person to
work in any capacity on the licensed premises while actually or apparently
intoxicated.
§ 58-17. Types of entertainment restricted.
No licensee shall employ, allow, permit or suffer in and upon the licensed
premises any female persons to perform for hire and for the entertainment
of patrons any dances, ballet, acrobatics or public performances of any
kind in which body movement constitutes the principal or integral part of
such performance; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prevent a
licensee from employing, allowing, permitting or suffering female persons
playing musical instruments as a member of a band, orchestra or musical
group or performing as a singer accompanied by a band, orchestra or
musical group, and provided further that nothing in this section shall be
construed as permitting any conduct which would otherwise be a violation
of any other section of this article.
§ 58-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable,
upon conviction, by a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for no
more than 90 days, or both. Each and every day such violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 58-19. Improper entertainment prohibited.
No licensee shall engage in or shall allow, permit or suffer any person
employed to perform dancing or other entertainment in or upon the licensed
premises or to carry on any part of such dancing or other entertainment in
a lewd, licentious, lascivious or improper manner.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 136, Obscene Material Display.
§ 58-14 AIR POLLUTION § 58-20
52:209
§ 58-20. Attire of performers.
No licensee shall engage in or shall allow, permit or suffer any person
to appear on the premises of any establishment licensed for the sale and
distribution of alcoholic beverages in any act, scene, sketch or other form of
entertainment, including dancing for the benefit of patrons, with either or
both breasts or the lower part of the torso uncovered or so thinly covered
or draped as to appear uncovered.
§ 58-21. Attire of waitresses.
No licensee shall employ, allow, permit or suffer any waitress or any other
person who comes in contact with or is likely to be in the presence of
the patrons of any establishment licensed for the sale and distribution of
alcoholic beverages to appear in the presence of such patrons with either or
both breasts or the lower part of the torso uncovered or so thinly covered
or draped as to appear uncovered.
§ 58-22. Underage entertainers prohibited.
No licensee shall engage, employ, allow, permit or use entertainers under
the age of 21 years.
§ 58-20 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 58-22
52:210
ARTICLE II
Consumption in Public Places
[Adopted 8-18-1980 as Ord. No. 439]
§ 58-23. Prohibited areas for consumption.
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages, as the same is defined in Title
33 of the New Jersey Statutes, or have in his or her possession, custody or
control any open container having therein unconsumed alcoholic beverage,
in, on or upon any of the public streets, sidewalks, parks, alleyways,
recreation areas which are open to the public at large, whether publicly
or privately owned, or roadways, pathways, playgrounds, outdoor facilities
or shopping plazas at any hour of the day or night unless said person
has obtained a special permit as provided herein; provided, however, that
this article shall not affect or be applicable to persons who are lawfully
transporting such beverages under the authority of any federal or state
governing body or subdivision thereof, or persons transporting same in
closed containers which are not easily accessible or which are not in such
close proximity as to easily facilitate the consumption of said beverage.
§ 58-24. Consumption in automobiles.
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or have in his possession any
opened alcoholic beverage container with unconsumed alcoholic beverage
therein while in any automobile, whether in motion or parked, on any of the
public streets, parking lots which are open to the public at large, whether
publicly or privately owned, roadways, highways, pathways, playgrounds,
outdoor facilities owned or operated by the Board of Education of the
Township of Rochelle Park, parks, shopping plazas or other thoroughfares
open to general vehicular traffic in the Township of Rochelle Park; provided,
however, that this article shall not prevent the transportation of said open
alcoholic beverage containers in the closed trunk or storage areas of said
motor vehicle which is properly locked or secured.
§ 58-25. Special permits.
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in §§ 58-23 and 58-24, a special
permit may be issued by the Township Clerk upon the recommendation of
the Chief of Police of the Township of Rochelle Park for the consumption of
alcoholic beverages in specified public and quasi-public areas, which permit
shall include such terms and conditions as may be reasonably established
by the governing body to ensure the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare. The permit shall provide for the proper disposal (including a
certification that the areas used will properly be maintained and cleaned
by the applicant) of the containers for the alcoholic beverages and unused
alcoholic beverages to ensure that persons who are under the legal drinking
age, as established by the Legislature, will not gain possession thereof and
have the opportunity to consume such alcoholic beverages contrary to law
and public policy and to ensure that the containers do not become a hazard
to the public health, welfare and safety. The hours for which the permit is
§ 58-23 AIR POLLUTION § 58-25
52:211
granted shall be stated thereon so that the public safety and peace may be
preserved and the Police Department, Fire Department, Health Department
and Department of Public Works may be able to better provide for same.
Specific locations shall be provided so as to reasonably notify the holders
of the permit of the area in which the aforesaid conduct shall be allowed,
and such designation shall also take into consideration that such designated
area and such permit and persons using said permit shall not obstruct
the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles or engage in activities which
would disturb a person of ordinary sensibilities so as to cause him to react
immediately in such a way as to threaten by physical violence the peace
and order of the public nor be conducive to conduct that will cause an
immediate physical violent reaction that will threaten the peace and order
of the public or obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any
public place.
§ 58-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject,
for a first offense, to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500 or imprisonment
in the county jail for a period of not more than 30 days, or both, at the
discretion of the court before whom the matter is tried.
§ 58-25 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 58-26
52:212
ARTICLE III
Consumption on Private Property
[Adopted 11-13-2000 by Ord. No. 812]
§ 58-27. Minors possessing or consuming alcoholic beverages on
private property.
A. It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age for consumption of
alcoholic beverages to possess or consume alcoholic beverages on
private property, unless the possession or consumption is in connection
with a religious observance, ceremony or rite. This article shall not
apply to an underage person possessing or consuming that beverage in
the presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or
relative who is of legal age.
B. An underage person who is employed by alcoholic beverage licensees,
such as waiters, waitresses, bus boys or stock boys in restaurants or
liquor stores, may legally possess the alcoholic beverages they are
delivering to a customer or placing on display for sale.
C. Violations and penalties. Penalties shall be as set forth in § 58-26 above.
In addition thereto, the court may suspend or postpone for six months
the driving privileges of a defendant. If the defendant, at the time of the
offense, is less than 17 years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege
of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years. If a person, at the time of the
imposition of a sentence, has a valid driver's license issued in any other
state, the court shall suspend or postpone the nonresident driving
privilege of the person, based upon the age of the person, and submit to
the Division of Motor Vehicles the required report. The municipal court,
in accordance with the statute, shall file the appropriate reports with
the Division of Motor Vehicles. (See L. 2000, c. 33.
§ 58-27 AIR POLLUTION § 58-27
52:213
Chapter 61
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bingo and raffles — See Ch. 66. Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 77.
§ 61-1. License required.
Within the limits of the Township of Rochelle Park, no person, firm or
corporation shall conduct or carry on the business of the operation, storage,
maintenance or exhibition of any mechanical game of skill or entertainment
which is operated or set in motion by deposit therein of a coin, token, slug,
wafer, disk or other like article, or work in, occupy or, directly or indirectly,
in any manner whatsoever, utilize any place or premises in or at which
such business is conducted or carried on, unless and until there shall be
granted by the Township Committee, after written application therefor, in
accordance with the terms of this chapter, and shall be in force and effect,
a license to conduct said business for the place or premises in or at which
said business shall be conducted and carried on.
§ 61-2. Application for license.
Said license shall be applied for in writing, signed by the applicant,
addressed to the Township Committee and filed with the Township Clerk.
Such application shall set forth the full name and address of the applicant,
a particular description of the mechanical game or games to be operated,
stored, maintained or exhibited and the location of the place and premises
in or at which the business is to be conducted or carried on. Said application
shall also be accompanied by a deposit in cash to cover the license fee for
the current year in the amount hereinafter provided.
§ 61-3. License fee. [Amended 5-4-1981 by Ord. No. 447; 2-27-1984
by Ord. No. 480]
The license fee for said business and/or the place or premises in or at which
the same is to be conducted or carried on shall be the sum of $500 per
location, regardless of the number of machines at that location. All licenses
shall expire on December 31 of each year.
§ 61-4. Investigation of application. [Amended 10-16-1978 by Ord.
No. 415; 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
Before any license is issued hereunder, upon the filing of said application
the same shall be investigated and the premises investigated by the Chief
of Police or such person as may be designated by the Township Committee,
who shall render a report of such investigation to the Township Committee.
Said application shall be submitted to the Township Clerk, who, in addition
§ 58-27 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 61-4
61:214
to the submission of the same to the Chief of Police, shall submit it to
the Fire Official. The Fire Official shall inspect the premises to determine
whether said premises comply with the existing fire regulations of the
Township of Rochelle Park. Upon completion of the inspection, the Chief of
Police and Fire Official shall attach to said application their reports thereon
in writing.
§ 61-5. Consideration of application; grant or refusal of license.
[Amended 10-16-1978 by Ord. No. 415]
Upon the receipt of such report, the Township Committee shall act upon
said application and may refuse to grant a license in any and all cases
where the Township Committee shall determine that a person who has
been convicted of a crime is interested, either directly or indirectly, in the
application for such license or in the operation of said business or the place
or premises in or at which said business is proposed to be conducted and
carried on under such license. The Township Committee shall proceed to
consider said application and either approve or disapprove the issuance of
the license to the applicant. Consideration by the Township Committee shall
consist of the recommendations of the Chief of Police and the Construction
Official or any and all other public policy considerations which it deems
necessary and just to consider.
§ 61-6. Execution of license; display.
All licenses granted by the Township Committee shall be signed by the
Township Clerk and shall be impressed with the seal of the Township of
Rochelle Park and shall set forth on the face of the license the amount
of the fee paid, the name and address of the licensee, the address of the
place or premises where the business is to be conducted or carried on and
the number and kind of mechanical games or skill or entertainment to be
operated, stored, maintained or exhibited at such premises. Such license
shall at all times be prominently displayed by the licensee at the place or
premises where the licensed business is conducted or carried on.
§ 61-7. Transfer of license.
Licenses issued hereunder shall, with the consent of the Township
Committee, be transferable from one place or premises to another;
provided, however, that any licensee desiring permission to effect such
transfer shall first make application in writing, setting forth the facts, to the
Township Committee.
§ 61-8. Revocation of license. [Amended 10-16-1978 by Ord. No.
415]
The Township Committee may revoke any license for sufficient cause after
notice of hearing. It shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of any such
license when such mechanical games of skill shall be used for the purpose
§ 61-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 61-8
61:215
of gambling, wagering or betting, with or without the knowledge of the
licensee thereof.
§ 61-9. Placement of devices on premises. [Added 5-4-1981 by Ord.
No. 447]
Hereafter, all mechanical games which are licensed by the Township of
Rochelle Park must be located in a room which shall constitute the main
room or main area of the licensed premises and said games shall not
be located in a separate and distinct room on the premises. In addition,
henceforth, all applications for a license for a mechanical game shall also
contain a sketch or drawing by the applicant showing the exact location of
the game or games on the premises and shall also show the location of all
other permanent fixtures on the premises and shall also show all entrances
and exits to the licensed premises, and upon the granting of a license, the
mechanical game shall not be located at a different location from that shown
on the sketch without the prior written approval or authorization of the
Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park. A violation of this
provision of the chapter shall also constitute sufficient reason or cause for
the revocation of such license by the governing body of the Township of
Rochelle Park.
§ 61-10. Renewal of licenses. [Added 5-4-1981 by Ord. No. 447]
All applications for renewal of a license must be filed with the Township
Clerk no later than January 1 of each year, and failure to comply with this
provision shall cause the existing license to expire and terminate, in which
event the mechanical games on the premises will be impounded by the
Police Department and will be removed from the premises and stored and
said removal and storage shall be at the cost and expense of the applicant,
and in the event the mechanical game is not reclaimed within 30 days, the
Police Department is authorized to sell the mechanical game at a public
auction.
§ 61-11. Number of devices on premises. [Added 10-16-1978 by Ord.
No. 415]
No more than five mechanical games as hereinabove described in this
chapter shall be licensed for operation on or at any one business premises.
§ 61-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any term or provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to imprisonment in
the county jail or in any place provided by the Township of Rochelle Park
for the detention of prisoners, for a term not exceeding 90 days, or to a fine
not exceeding $500, or both. Any person so convicted may, in the discretion
of the Judge by whom he was convicted, in default of the payment of any
fine, be imprisoned in the county jail or place of detention provided by the
§ 61-8 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 61-12
61:216
Township of Rochelle Park for any term not exceeding 90 days. Each day
that a violation of a term or provision of this chapter shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 64
BASKETBALL HOOPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 161.
§ 64-1. Permitted locations.
The attached list of premises shall be the only locations upon which
structures protruding in the roadway, commonly referred to as "basketball
hoops," shall be allowed as of June 12, 1996.63
§ 64-2. Use of streets prohibited; transfer of title.
Any further use of the streets for basketball at locations other than those
attached hereto is forbidden in the Township of Rochelle Park. Should title
to any of the premises set forth on the attached list be transferred, then in
that event, the right to the use of said basketball hoops shall cease.
§ 64-3. Reinstallation of hoops prohibited.
Except for the seasonal removal of the basketball hoops, should any of the
basketball hoops, as set forth in the attached list, be damaged, destroyed or
removed, the Township of Rochelle Park hereby prohibits the reinstallation
or re-erection of said hoops at that location.
§ 64-4. Intent.
It is the intent of the Township of Rochelle Park to prohibit the further
proliferation of basketball hoops which use, as part of their playing
surfaces, the roadways of Rochelle Park.
§ 64-5. Alteration of premises between sidewalk and curb.
No owner of premises shall be allowed to construct, remove or in any
way alter the area of the premises located between the sidewalk and the
curb without first obtaining a permit from the Township Construction Code
Department.
Chapter 66
63.Editor's Note: The List of Permitted Locations for Basketball Hoops (Appendix A) is
located at the end of this chapter.
§ 61-12 BASKETBALL HOOPS § 64-5
64:217
BINGO AND RAFFLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 61. Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 77.
§ 66-1. License required.
A license shall be required for any bona fide organization or association
of veterans of any war in which the United States has been engaged,
churches of religious congregations and religious organizations, charitable,
educational and fraternal organizations, civic and service clubs, volunteer
fire companies and volunteer first aid or rescue squads to hold and operate
games of chance of and restricted to the specific kind of game of chance
commonly known as "bingo" or "lotto," or the specific kind of game or games
of chance commonly known as a "raffle" or "raffles" played by drawing
for prizes or the allotment of prizes by chance by the selling of shares or
tickets or rights to participate in such game or games and by conducting the
game or games accordingly, when the entire net proceeds of such games of
chance are to be devoted to educational and charitable, patriotic, religious
or public-spirited uses and for any such organization or association, church,
congregation, society, club, company or squad.
§ 66-2. Application for license.
Each applicant for such license shall file with the Clerk of the municipality a
written application therefor, stating the name and address of the applicant,
the names and addresses of its officers, the specific kind of games of chance
intended to be held, the place or places where and the date or dates and
the time or times when such games of chance are intended to be held,
the specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such games of
chance are to be devoted and in what manner, and containing a statement,
executed by the applicant and by a member or members so designated, that
he or they will be responsible for the holding, operation and conduct of
such games of chance in accordance with the provisions of the rules and
regulations governing the holding, operation and conduct of such games as
described in the aforementioned New Jersey statutes.64
§ 66-3. License fee. [Amended 4-19-1995 by Ord. No. 689;
2-20-2008 by Ord. No. 978-08]
The licensing municipality shall charge a fee equal to or greater than
the amount charged by the schedule set forth by the Legalized Games of
Chance Control Commission; however, there shall be no fee charged to any
organization which has applied for and received tax exempt status pursuant
64.Editor's Note: The preamble of Ord. No. 353 recited that pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.
and N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq., municipalities are authorized to license organizations to
conduct games of bingo and raffles within the municipality under the conditions and
restrictions set forth in each of the statutes.
§ 64-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 66-3
64:218
to the Internal Revenue Code and provides proof of that status at the time
of making the application required by the previous section.
§ 66-4. Duration of license.
No license for the holding, operation and conduct of any game or games
of chance shall be issued under this chapter which shall be effective for a
period of more than one year.
§ 66-5. Games on Sunday.
Raffle licenses may be issued to organizations designated in § 66-1 for
the conduct of any raffle to be conducted on the first day of the week,
commonly known and designated as "Sunday," pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-58.
Bingo games shall not be permitted on the first day of the week, commonly
known as "Sunday."
Chapter 68
BIRDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cats and other animals — See Ch. 73. Dogs — See Ch. 88.
§ 66-3 BIRDS § 66-5
68:219

ARTICLE I
Feeding or Congregating of Migratory Waterfowl
[Adopted 10-20-1993 as Ord. No. 661]
§ 68-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MIGRATORY WATERFOWL — Includes those species of birds, not otherwise
defined as a "domesticated animal" in this chapter, commonly known as
"swans," "geese," "brants," "river and sea ducks" and any other waterfowl.
§ 68-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person:
§ 68-3. Enforcement.
Whenever the Board of Health becomes aware that migratory waterfowl are
being fed in violation of this chapter or that a congregation or congestion of
migratory waterfowl as prohibited by this chapter exists:
A. To feed any migratory waterfowl.
B. To create any condition or allow any condition to exist which results in a
congregation or congestion of migratory waterfowl which:
(1) Results in an accumulation of waterfowl feces or droppings.
(2) Results in damage to flora, fauna or private or public property.
(3) Results in a threat or nuisance to the public health, safety or
welfare.
(4) Results in a threat to the health, safety or welfare of said migratory
waterfowl.
A. It shall give notice of the nuisance to the owner or occupant of the
premises upon which the nuisance exists or the feeding is occurring.
Notice shall be deemed sufficient if it shall have been served either
personally or by posting such notice upon the property in question or by
mailing such notice through the United States mail, mailed notice to be
deemed served upon proof that such notice was deposited in the United
States mail, first-class postage prepaid and addressed, in the case of an
individual, to his business address, residence address or such address
as the records of the Assessor shall reveal to be his address for tax
purposes or, in the case of a corporation, to the registered office or
agent of such corporation as the records shall reveal. Such notice shall
order the nuisance to be immediately abated and/or that such feeding
shall immediately stop.
§ 68-1 BIRDS § 68-3
68:221
B. The Board of Health shall have all powers necessary, upon application
by a citizen or at its own discretion, to disperse or remove any
congregation or congestion of migratory waterfowl by any lawful
means.
C. The Board of Health shall have the power to issue summonses for
violations of this chapter. The violator shall be subject to a fine of $25
for the first offense and $50 for each subsequent offense. Said fines may
be payable through the office of the Violations Clerk of the Municipal
Court.
§ 68-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 68-3
68:222
Chapter 70
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 150.
Trimming of shade trees — See Ch. 157.
Removal of grass and weeds from
streets — See Ch. 161, Art. II.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 199.
§ 70-1. Height of shrubs, hedges, grass and weeds. [Added
8-20-2014 by Ord. No. 1073-1465]
§ 70-2. Cutting by Township.
Upon the failure of any such owner or tenant to cut the brush, hedges or
any other plant life required by the notice after proper service thereof and
after the expiration of 10 days therefrom, same shall be cut by or under the
supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works.
A. Height of shrubs and hedges. All shrubs and hedges growing within 10
feet of any roadway and within 20 feet of the intersection of two
roadways shall, where it is necessary and expedient for the
preservation of the public safety, be cut to a height of no more than 2 1/
2 feet by the owner or tenant of lands lying within the Township of
Rochelle Park within seven days after notice to cut the same, which
notice shall be given by or at the direction of the Property Maintenance
Department, Building Department or Department of Public Works.
B. Height of grass and weeds.
(1) All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches. All noxious weeds
shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual
plants and vegetation other than trees or shrubs; provided,
however, that this term shall not include cultivated flowers and
gardens.
(2) Prior to the issuance of a violation or summons pursuant to this
section, the owner, agent having charge of a property or tenant
shall be served with a notice of violation and shall be provided with
a period of seven days to abate or cure the violation and the
opportunity to cut the growth to the above length. Upon passage of
the seven-day period without abating the condition, a summons
may be issued.
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 70-1, Cutting by owner or tenant of
lands.
§ 68-3 BIRDS § 70-3
68:223
§ 70-3. Costs of removal by Township.
In all cases where brush, hedges and other plant life are cut from any lands
as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26 by the Township, the Superintendent of
Public Works shall certify the cost thereof as required by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.27
and the proper officials of the Township of Rochelle Park shall proceed as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.27.
§ 70-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519; 8-20-2014 by Ord. No. 1073-14]
Any violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as
follows:
§ 70-5. Continuing violations.
Every twenty-four-hour period that any owner or tenant of lands shall refuse
or neglect to cut the brush, hedges and other plant life in the manner and
within the time prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26 and in violation of this
chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and be punishable
as such.
Chapter 73
CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Birds — See Ch. 68. Dogs — See Ch. 88.
A. For the first offense in any calendar year, by a fine of $75.
B. For the second offense in any calendar year, by a fine of $150.
C. For the third offense in any calendar year, by a fine of between $250 and
$500. A court appearance shall be mandatory for a third offense.
D. For the fourth offense, by a fine up to $1,000, and/or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. A court
appearance shall be mandatory for a fourth offense.
E. If the owner of any property who is charged with violating this chapter
chooses to enter a plea of guilty for a first, second or third offense, he or
she shall be entitled to pay the fine without the necessity of a court
appearance.
F. Separate violation. Except as otherwise provided, every day that the
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate violation.
G. This chapter may be enforced by the Department of Public Works,
Health Department, Police Department, Building Department or
Property Maintenance Department.
§ 70-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 70-5
68:224
ARTICLE I
Registration and Vaccination of Cats
§ 73-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — Any quadruped other than a dog.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species.
NEUTER or SPAYED — Rendering an animal permanently incapable of
reproduction as certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — Includes any person who shall have in their keeping a dog or cat,
including feeding or harboring a dog or cat.[Amended 2-10-1993 by Ord.
No. 642]
§ 73-2. Vaccination.
§ 73-3. Licensing requirements.
A. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain any cat over seven
months of age within the Township of Rochelle Park unless such cat is
vaccinated and licensed; provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to cats held by a state or federal licensed research facility or a
veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept for
diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments or licensed animal
shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
B. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in
accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and
Recommendations for Immunization, published by the National
Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as provided in
Subsection D.
C. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each animal
vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
D. Any cat may be exempt from the requirements of such vaccination for a
specified period of time by the Rochelle Park Health Officer, upon
presentation of a veterinarian's certificate that because of an infirmity
or other physical condition, or regimen of therapy, the inoculation of
such cat is deemed inadvisable.
A. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a cat which has attained the
age of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth within
the Township of Rochelle Park shall annually apply for and procure from
the Township Health Officer or his/her designee a license and official
registration tag with license number or a registration sleeve for each
cat so owned, kept or harbored and shall place on such cat a collar or
other device with the license number securely fastened or displayed
§ 73-1 BIRDS § 73-3
68:225
thereon. Acceptable methods of displaying license numbers include, but
shall not be limited to, breakaway or elastic collars. License tags or
sleeves are not transferable.
B. The owner of any newly acquired cat which has attained the age of
seven months or possesses a set of permanent teeth or of any cat which
attains the age of seven months or which obtains a set of permanent
teeth shall make application for a license tag or sleeve for such cat
within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment. This
requirement shall not apply to a nonresident keeping a cat within the
Township of Rochelle Park for 90 days or less.
C. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township of
Rochelle Park any cat licensed in another state for the current year and
bearing a registration tag or sleeve and who shall keep the same or
permit the same to be kept within the Township of Rochelle Park for a
period of more than 90 days shall immediately apply for a license and
registration tag or sleeve for each such cat. Any person who shall bring
or cause to be brought into the Township of Rochelle Park any
unlicensed cat which has attained the age of seven months or which
possesses a set of permanent teeth and who shall keep the same or
permit the same to be kept within the Township of Rochelle Park for a
period of more than 10 days shall immediately apply for a license and
registration tag or sleeve for each such cat.
D. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the cat for which the license and registration are sought and whether it
is of a long- or short-haired variety; also the name, street and post office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat.
The information on said application and the registration number issued
for the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the
Township Health Officer.
E. License form and official tags and sleeves shall be furnished by the
Township of Rochelle Park and shall be numbered serially and shall
bear the year of issuance and the name of the Township of Rochelle
Park.
F. The Township Health Officer shall not grant any such license or any
official registration tag or sleeve for any cat unless the owner thereof
provides evidence that the cat to be licensed and registered has been
inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and
administered in accordance with the recommendations of the United
States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of
Human Services or who has been certified exempt as provided in § 73-2
of this chapter. The rabies inoculation shall be administered by a duly
licensed veterinarian or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to
do the same.
G. A license shall be issued after payment of an annual fee of $10 for each
unneutered or unspayed cat and $7 for each neutered or spayed cat.
§ 73-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 73-3
68:226
§ 73-4. Interference.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duties under this chapter.
§ 73-5. Impoundment; notice.
H. Licenses from other municipalities within New Jersey shall be accepted.
The person applying for the license and registration tag and/or sleeve
shall pay the fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the renewal of a license
and registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for the original, and
said license, registration tag or sleeve or renewal thereof shall expire
on January 31 in the following year. Only one license and registration
tag or sleeve shall be required in any licensing year for any cat within
the Township of Rochelle Park. Any valid New Jersey license tag or
sleeve issued by a New Jersey municipality shall be accepted by
Rochelle Park as evidence of compliance.
I. If the license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the Township
Health Officer may issue a duplicate license and/or registration sleeve
for that particular cat for a fee of $4.
J. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person owning, keeping,
maintaining or harboring a cat upon the request of any health officer,
police officer, animal control officer or other authorized person.
K. Should any person who owns, keeps or harbors a cat which is required
to be licensed pursuant to borough ordinance fail to obtain a license by
January 31, there shall be included in the cost of said license fee a late
charge of $5. Should a license not be obtained before February 15 of a
given year, then a summons will be issued which will require the
applicant to pay not only the cost of the license but a fine in the amount
of $25 plus court costs for each violation. Said summons may be paid
through the Violations Bureau of the Municipal Court. [Added
10-20-1993 by Ord. No. 663; amended 10-16-1996 by Ord. No.
735]
A. The Animal Control Officer, members of the Police Department or any
other person appointed for such purpose by the Township Committee of
the Township of Rochelle Park shall take into custody and impound or
cause to be taken into custody and impounded:
(1) Any cat off the premises of the owner or the person keeping or
harboring said cat which said official or his agent or agents have
reason to believe is a stray cat.
(2) Any cat off the premises of the owner or the person keeping or
harboring said cat without a current registration tag on his collar.
(3) Any cat or other animal which is suspected to be rabid.
§ 73-3 BIRDS § 73-5
68:227
(4) Any cat or other animal off the premises of the owner reported to or
observed by a certified animal control officer to be ill, injured or
creating a threat to public health, safety or welfare or otherwise
interfering with the enjoyment of property.
B. If any animal so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed
thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag or the owner or the person keeping or harboring said
animal is known, any person authorized by the Township Committee
shall forthwith serve on the person whose address is given on the collar
or on the owner or the person keeping or harboring said animal, if
known, a notice, in writing, stating that the animal has been seized and
will be liable to be offered for adoption or destroyed if not claimed
within seven days after the service of the notice.
C. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
D. Any person authorized by the Township Committee may cause an
animal to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible
and consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:22-19 or offered for
adoption seven days after seizure, provided that:
(1) Notice is given as set forth above and the animal remains
unclaimed;
(2) The owner or person keeping or harboring the animal has not
claimed the animal and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention, including maintenance costs not exceeding $4 per day;
or
(3) The owner or person keeping or harboring a cat which was
unlicensed at the time of seizure does not produce a license and
registration tag for the cat.
§ 73-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 73-5
68:228
ARTICLE II
Keeping of Other Animals
§ 73-6. Limit on number of dogs and cats. 66 [Added 2-10-1993 by
Ord. No. 642]
No more than five cats or dogs shall be sheltered or kept by any one family
group. If any family group possesses more than five cats or dogs on the
effective date of this section, the person in control shall arrange for their
removal within 60 days. This restriction shall not apply to properly licensed
pet shops, kennels, shelters and pounds. It is understood that the maximum
number of dogs and cats combined shall be no more than five in number.
§ 73-7. Property damage. 67 [Added 2-10-1993 by Ord. No. 642]
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog or cat shall permit or suffer
it to do any injury or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers,
grounds or property.
§ 73-8. (Reserved)68
§ 73-9. Stray cats.
No person, firm or corporation shall knowingly feed, harbor or maintain any
stray and unlicensed cat.
§ 73-9.1. Other animals. [Added 9-20-1995 by Ord. No. 698]
A. No person shall keep within the Township of Rochelle Park any cattle,
chickens, bees, goats, guinea hens, hogs, horses, ocelots, pigs
(including potbelly pigs), pigeons, sheep, swine or any other animal that
can be deemed dangerous to humans if said animal escapes from
captivity.
B. It is understood that residents who presently have chickens and bees on
their premises are allowed to keep said chickens and bees but may not
expand the number or volume of or replace said animals.
66.Editor's Note: Former § 73-6, Farm animals, was repealed 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 610.
67.Editor's Note: Former § 73-7, Fowl, was repealed 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 610.
68.Editor's Note: Former § 73-8, Bees, was repealed 3-4-1991 by Ord. No. 610.
§ 73-6 BIRDS § 73-9.1
68:229

ARTICLE III
Penalty; When Effective
§ 73-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No.
610]
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine for the first offense of between $25 and up to $500 and
shall be subject to enhanced fines in the judge's discretion for subsequent
violations up to a maximum of $500.
§ 73-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
as required by law; provided, however, that the licensing and vaccinating
provisions relating to cats shall take effect January 31, 1991.
§ 73-10 BIRDS § 73-11
68:231

ARTICLE IV
Feral Cats
[Added 10-19-2005 by Ord. No. 937-05]
§ 73-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — The person appointed annually by the
Township Committee, either directly or by interlocal services agreement, to
handle the animal control needs of the Township of Rochelle Park.
ANIMAL COORDINATOR — The person appointed annually by the Township
Committee to maintain records of feral cats, to recommend caregivers and
to do such duties specified in § 73-14 or as added by § 73-17.
CAREGIVER — A volunteer, uncompensated person who agrees to serve
to facilitate the TNR Program69 within the Township in accordance with
this article and any rules and regulations that may be established by the
Township Committee. A caregiver shall not be deemed an employee of the
Township and shall hold such volunteer position at the pleasure of the
Township Committee and may be removed from or precluded from holding
such volunteer position in the sole discretion of the Township Committee.
EAR TIPPING — The marking of a cat's ear through a surgical procedure
performed by a qualified personnel.
FERAL CAT — Any cat that is not licensed in accordance with Township
ordinances and is free-roaming as part of an identifiable colony of such cats,
which may consist of several cats or a single cat.
§ 73-13. Funding.
The Township may establish a fund or provide services to offset the costs
of trapping, neutering, and vaccinating captured feral cats that can be
returned to an appropriate, controlled, protected and registered colony site.
Caregivers for such colonies, whether one or several animals, may be aided
by the Township in providing traps for the capture of the cat, transportation
to a spay/neuter facility and offsetting costs, to the extent that funding is
available.
§ 73-14. Clearinghouse for caregivers.
Each feral cat colony will be registered by the caregivers with the
Township's Animal Coordinator, who will serve as a clearinghouse for
information on current caregivers, education for new caregivers, and
assistance for persons found in violation of this article.
69.Editor's Note: TNR Program is also known as the "Trap, Neuter and Return Program."
§ 73-12 BIRDS § 73-15
68:233
§ 73-15. Ear tipping.
Ear tipping will be used on feral cats in order to be identified as a spayed or
neutered and vaccinated member of a managed colony.
§ 73-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person or caregiver determined to be in violation of Subsections A
through D below shall be issued a written warning and be allowed a period
of time, in the discretion of the Animal Control Officer, but not longer
than 90 days, to come into compliance or provide satisfactory evidence of
working to achieve compliance. Failure to comply shall result in a violation
of this article, which may result in the issuance of a citation. Caregivers
of feral cat colonies shall implement proper management and sterilization
practices, as well as seek the assistance of the Animal Control Officer and/
or Animal Coordinator as follows:
A. Sterilize (spay/neuter) all adult cats that can be captured.
B. Vaccinate, as required by law, all cats that can be captured:
(1) Against rabies, preferably with a three-year vaccine.
(2) And any other infectious disease as mandated by law.
C. Make every attempt to remove kittens from the colony before eight
weeks of age for domestication and placement.
D. Make every attempt to remove sick or injured cats from the colony for
immediate veterinarian care or humane euthanasia.
E. Assure responsibility and arrangements for feeding the cat colony
regularly throughout the year, including weekends, holidays and
vaccinations of the feral cat caregiver. Feeding on caregiver's property
of feral cats managed by such caregiver shall not constitute a violation
of the prohibition of § 73-9 above.
F. Make every attempt to "ear tip" all cats with a single cut, preferably on
the left ear, and arrange for the implantation of an identification
microchip for each cat in the colony. If this is not practicable under the
circumstances, photographic documentation adequate to identify the
cat shall be obtained.
G. Maintain proof of sterilization, vaccination, ear tipping and
implantation of microchip and medical records for all cats. These
records must be provided to the Animal Coordinator upon request.
H. Register the feral cat colony with the Animal Coordinator for the
Township of Rochelle Park.
I. Execute all documents required by the Township which may be
established by this article or by resolution of the Township Committee.
§ 73-15 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 73-17
68:234
§ 73-17. Rules and regulations.
The Township Committee shall have the authority to adopt further rules and
regulations applicable to the TNR Program to the extent that the same are
consistent with and do not modify the provisions of this article.
§ 73-17 BIRDS § 73-17
68:235
Chapter 75
CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 80.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 102.
Housing — See Ch. 117.
Motels — See Ch. 130.
Land use and development — See Ch. 185.
§ 75-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Construction Official of the Township of
Rochelle Park or such other officer designated by the Township Committee
to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building or structure containing two or more
rented or leased dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by
two or more persons, together with all appurtenant land, buildings and
structures.
OCCUPANCY — The lawful possession of a dwelling unit, commercial or
industrial space.
OWNER — The person or persons holding a legal or equitable fee simple
interest in a commercial, industrial or residential building, or in case of
premises held in the cooperative form of ownership, the person or persons
holding legal or equitable title to the cooperative shares allocated to a
dwelling unit.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Includes one-, two- and three-family homes,
multiple-family dwellings and units therein and individual condominium and
cooperative units.
§ 75-2. Certificate of continuing occupancy required.
No person shall occupy or use any portion of a commercial, industrial or
residential building after such building or portion thereof has been vacated
or sold, or when there has been a change in use or occupancy of such
building or any portion thereof, until the owner or landlord thereof shall
have applied for and secured a certificate of continuing occupancy subject
to the requirements of § 75-3 herein. Such certificate shall be issued upon
a general inspection of the visible parts of the building and the portion
thereof that has been vacated or sold or in which there has been a change
in use and occupancy, finding that there are no imminent hazards and that
the premises in question are in compliance with applicable building, health,
§ 73-17 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 75-2
68:236
safety and fire codes, regulations, ordinances and statutes of the Township
of Rochelle Park.
§ 75-3. Certificate required for occupancy.
Prior to the rental, sale or lease of any commercial or industrial property
or the sale of a residential building or the sale of any individual unit in
a multiple-family dwelling involving a new occupancy or change of use,
the enforcement officer shall issue a certificate of continuing occupancy in
accordance with the standards set forth in § 75-2 of this chapter.
§ 75-4. Smoke detectors required in residential buildings.
No certificate of continuing occupancy may be issued to a residential
building or any portion thereof unless an approved smoke detector device
has been installed as required by applicable state statute and local
ordinance.
§ 75-5. Application for certificate of continuing occupancy.
Prior to any rental, lease or sale of any building or any portion thereof, as
set forth in § 75-3 above, the owner thereof shall apply to the enforcement
officer on an appropriate form for a certificate of continuing occupancy.
§ 75-6. Time limit for issuance or denial of certificate.
The enforcement officer shall conduct an inspection of said commercial,
industrial or residential building, or portion thereof which is to be sold,
rented or leased, within a reasonable time, not exceeding 30 days after
completion of said application, and shall issue a certificate of continuing
occupancy, provided that the standards set forth in § 75-2 of this chapter
have been satisfied and, in the case of residential building, that the
premises are in compliance with the requirement of installation of a smoke
detector alarm system.
§ 75-7. Failure to comply.
If, after inspection by the enforcement officer, a certificate of continuing
occupancy may not be issued to the commercial, industrial or residential
building or portion thereof because of the existence of a violation of any
code or failure to comply with the standards set forth in § 75-2 of this
chapter, notice shall be given by the enforcement officer to the owner
detailing the violations of applicable laws, regulations or ordinance. The
enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue any summons or
complaint for any violation of any ordinance, statute or regulation against
the owner and/or occupant of the commercial, industrial or residential
building or portion thereof wherein the violation exists. In the event any
violations are found to exist, there shall be no new occupancy or use of
the premises until the criteria has been satisfied for the issuance of the
certificate of continuing occupancy.
§ 75-2 BIRDS § 75-8
68:237
§ 75-8. Correction of deficiencies.
In the event that, upon inspection of the enforcement officer, a violation
exists which reveals that the property is being utilized in violation of local
ordinances regarding occupancy limitation or number of separate dwelling
units, the following shall be required in order to satisfy the enforcement
officer that said condition has been abated:
§ 75-9. Fees.
The following fees shall be applicable for the inspection and issuance of a
certificate of continuing occupancy:
A. If separate and distinct utility services are installed at the premises for
the "illegal units," these utility services must be removed to the
satisfaction of the enforcement officer; and
B. The present owner and contract purchaser, if any, must execute a
statement, under oath, acknowledging that they are aware that the
premises are to be used in a manner which is consistent with all local
and state laws and they are further aware that all providers of
municipal services and other municipal officials shall be obligated to
report any violation of this chapter or any other ordinances of the
Township of Rochelle Park and that they will be subject to fines and
other penalties consistent with law in the event of said future violation.
A. For one-family homes and individual condominiums, cooperative units
and apartment units: $75.
B. For two-family dwellings: $75 per unit.
C. For multiple-family dwellings:
(1) For the first two units: $75 per unit; and
(2) For each additional unit: $25.
D. For commercial or industrial property:
(1) Less than 3,000 square feet of gross floor area: $200.
(2) Between 3,000 square feet and 10,000 square feet of gross floor
area: $250.
(3) More than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area: $250, plus $25 for
each 1,000 square feet.
§ 75-8 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 75-9
68:238
Chapter 77
CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND FLEA MARKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 61.
Bingo and raffles — See Ch. 66.
Litter containers at circuses and
carnivals — See Ch. 127.
§ 77-1. Permit required; flea market defined. [Amended 6-18-1997
by Ord. No. 755]
§ 77-2. Application for permit.
A. No circus, carnival, flea market or other open-air show or
entertainment shall be produced, carried on or conducted in the
township unless a permit therefor has been approved by the Township
Committee and the permit fee paid as hereinafter provided in this
chapter. Any nonprofit, charitable, eleemosynary or benevolent
organization which is located or operates within the confines of the
township and has as its primary purpose the raising of money for the
promotion of health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community may be granted a permit for the operation of a circus,
carnival, flea market and/or other open-air shows and entertainment in
the Township of Rochelle Park on public lands based upon the
requirements of this chapter.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FLEA MARKET — The sale of items of tangible personal property
wherein on one location there are multiple vendors who have paid a fee
for the privilege of occupying the space allotted to each such vendor
for the purpose of displaying and selling items of tangible personal
property. The intent of this chapter relating to flea markets is to limit
the number of occasions and the location of said sales, as is necessary
for the preservation, safety, health and welfare of the residents of the
Township of Rochelle Park.
A. The application for the permit shall be filed with the Township Clerk
and shall state:
(1) Name and residence or principal office of the applicant.
(2) Purpose and place for which the applicant seeks a license.
(3) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime
or violation of the Disorderly Persons Law of New Jersey (N.J.S.A.
2A:169-1 et seq.70) or of any violation of any ordinance of the
township involving breach of the peace or immorality. If the answer
§ 75-9 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND FLEA MARKETS § 77-2
77:239
is in the affirmative, the applicant shall state the date and nature of
each conviction.
(4) The duration for which a permit is sought.
B. The fee for the permit shall be payable with the filing of the application.
C. The following shall apply to flea markets only: No person, firm or
corporation may conduct or participate in displaying or selling at a flea
market, other than a bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational or
cultural organization organized not-for-profit and being able to
establish that it is such type of nonprofit organization, subject, however,
to the following requirements: [Added 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 755]
(1) Each organization authorized to conduct or participate in
displaying or selling at a flea market, in accordance with this
section, will file an application with the Township Clerk at least 60
days prior to the date of the commencement of such flea market
sale.
(2) Such application shall set forth the following:
(a) Name of organization conducting sale.
(b) Name and address of owner of the property upon which said
flea market sale is to be conducted.
(c) Written consent of owner if applicant is other than owner.
(d) Street address or Tax Map reference of location at which the
flea market sale is to be conducted.
(e) Number of days.
(f) Date, if any, of prior sales within three years prior to date of
application.
(g) Whether or not applicant has been issued any other vendor's
license by any local, state or federal agency.
(h) Whether or not sale will be held indoors or outdoors.
(i) Date or dates of sale.
(j) Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to
be so.
(3) No more than two permits to any one such organization shall be
authorized in any one calendar year.
70.Editor's Note: Most of the provisions of the Disorderly Persons Law have been repealed
and superseded by the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice, N.J.S.A. 2C:1-1 et seq.
§ 77-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 77-2
77:240
§ 77-3. Investigation of application; approval or disapproval.
§ 77-4. Issuance of permit; contents; fee.
(4) Such flea market sales shall be limited to two consecutive calendar
days and shall be conducted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m. Permittees shall be allowed a maximum of two rain
days.
(5) The permit for the conducting of such sale must be prominently
displayed upon the premises upon which the sale is conducted
throughout the entire period of the sale.
A. The Township Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of Police.
B. The Chief of Police, Fire Inspector and Ambulance Corps shall make or
cause to be made an investigation of the facts stated in the application
and an inspection of the premises in or on which the circus, carnival,
flea market or other open-air show or entertainment is to be located.
The Chief shall attach to the application his report thereon in writing,
which shall also state his recommendation for approval or disapproval
with the reasons therefor. [Amended 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 755]
C. Upon receipt of said application and police report, the Township
Committee shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the
permit to the applicant.
D. No permit shall be approved by the Mayor and Township Committee or
issued by the Township Clerk if it appears that:
(1) The applicant is not of good moral character.
(2) The premises in or on which the circus, carnival or open-air show or
entertainment is to be located will constitute a hazard or nuisance
to the safety of the public.
(3) The applicant is not qualified to conduct or operate a circus,
carnival or other open-air show or entertainment.
A. Upon approval of the application as set forth in § 77-3 hereinabove
mentioned, the Township Clerk shall issue the permit under the seal of
the township and sign same.
B. The permit shall state:
(1) The name and post office address of the permittee.
(2) The number of the permit.
(3) The purpose for which the permit is issued.
(4) That the permit is issued for twenty-four-hour periods at the daily
fee specified below and subject to revocation after any twenty-fourhour
period for the reasons set forth in § 77-6.
§ 77-2 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND FLEA MARKETS § 77-4
77:241
§ 77-5. Exhibition of permits.
The failure of a permittee to produce his permit and exhibit same to any
police officer or authorized township official upon request shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
§ 77-6. Revocation or suspension of permit.
§ 77-7. Renewal of permit. [Amended 6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 755]
Any permit issued under this chapter may be renewed upon the same terms
and conditions and upon payment of the same fee as is provided herein with
respect to the original permit.
C. The permit fee for the circuses, carnivals and open-air shows and
entertainment per day shall be a maximum of $1,000. The permit fee for
flea markets shall be $50. Said fees may be waived at the discretion of
the Township Committee. It is understood that should said event
include the sale or distribution of food or substances, additional fees
may be charged pursuant to Chapter 100, § 100-2C, Food handling
permits. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519; 6-18-1997 by Ord.
No. 755]
A. Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Mayor and
Township Committee, after due notice and hearing, for any of the
following grounds:
(1) False statement in the application for the permit.
(2) Disorderly or immoral conduct in or on the place or premises
covered by the permit.
(3) The premises covered by the permit constitutes a hazard to the
health, safety or morals of the public.
(4) Violation of the provisions of any applicable state law or ordinance
of the township.
(5) Any cause that would be grounds for a denial of the permit in the
first instance.
B. In case of emergency and pending the aforesaid hearing, the Chief of
Police or the Health Officer shall have the power and authority to
suspend the permit and close the operation of the show covered by the
permit.
C. The Zoning Enforcement Official shall have the authority to inspect and,
if necessary, recommend to the Township Committee revocation or
suspension of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter. [Added
6-18-1997 by Ord. No. 755]
§ 77-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 77-8
77:242
§ 77-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
Chapter 80
CONSTRUCTION CODES; CODE ENFORCEMENT
DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contractors — See Ch. 83.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 104.
Land use and development regulations — See
Ch. 185.
§ 80-1. Enforcing agency established. [Amended 5-16-2007 by Ord.
No. 963-0771]
A. There is hereby established in the Township of Rochelle Park a State
Uniform Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Code
Enforcement Department." This Department shall consist of the
following:
(1) Director of the Code Enforcement Department/Construction Code
Official/Property Maintenance Officer.
(2) Building Subcode Official/Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(3) Plumbing Subcode Official.
(4) Electrical Subcode Official.
(5) Fire Protection Subcode Official.
(6) Control person.
(7) Such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of
New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et
seq., and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that in lieu of any particular subcode
official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be
71.Editor's Note: Pursuant to this ordinance, Ch. 80, formerly entitled "Construction Codes,
Uniform," was retitled.
§ 77-8 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND FLEA MARKETS § 80-1
77:243
held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to the aforementioned laws.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the Code
Enforcement Department at one office location, except for emergencies
and unforseen or unavoidable circumstances, during such hours as may
be determined and established by the Township Committee. These
hours shall include at least one evening per week.
D. All personnel shall be appointed or assigned to the Code Enforcement
Department by the Township Committee pursuant to law.
E. The Director of the Code Enforcement Department/Construction Code
Official/Property Maintenance Officer shall be a full-time employee of
the Township of Rochelle Park who shall have the following duties and
responsibilities. The following list is intended to be illustrative, not
exhaustive, and, therefore, this individual employee shall perform all
other work and services as required by this position as welt as by state
law:
(1) Represent the Department, on behalf of the Township Committee,
to the public.
(2) Identify goals and establish annual business plan to serve as a
constant improvement.
(3) Manage all staff assigned to the Building, Zoning and Property
Maintenance Departments.
(a) Maintain job description and work force.
(4) Assist in supervision of the Township Engineer.
(a) Review monthly voucher.
(5) Coordinate subcode officials' responsibilities and assignments, to
be efficiently offered as a professional service, justifying fees
collected.
(a) Facilitate bimonthly review meeting.
(b) Maintain mentor and continuing education opportunities.
(6) Coordinate local permit review, inspection and maintenance.
(7) Supervise, administrate and assist support staff, including control
person. This shall include preparation of annual evaluations of all
staff members.
(8) Organize business systems, put in place monitoring controls,
organize filing and provide procedures to ensure maintenance of
approvals.
§ 80-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 80-1
77:244
(9) Review permit and inspection processes to offer final approvals
and/or actions.
(a) Review and call for prior approvals.
(b) Call for subcode review.
(c) Review all applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment and
submit a written report and evaluation to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment on each application reviewed. [Amended
6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No.
1038-11]
(10) Attend all meetings of the Rochelle Park Planning Board.
[Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord.
No. 1038-11]
(11) Respond to and assist in connection with any and all emergencies
which may from time to time arise and which involve any areas
under the jurisdiction of the Building, Zoning and Property
Maintenance Departments.
F. The positions of Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official,
Electrical Subcode Official and Fire Protection Subcode Official shall be
part-time positions and the position of control person shall be a full-time
position. The Township Committee shall attempt, when possible, to
appoint one person to hold more than one subcode official, provided
that same is permissible pursuant to state law.
G. The salaries and other terms, conditions, obligations and entitlements
of employment shall be determined pursuant to the Annual Salary
Ordinance adopted by the Township Committee of the Township of
Rochelle Park, and the employee holding such position shall fully
comply with and be bound by Chapter 27 of the Code of the Township of
Rochelle Park entitled "Personnel."
H. All employees of the Department shall, at all times, maintain a
maximum level of professionalism and courtesy in all dealings with
members of the public and in a timely manner. The employee shall
recognize, at all times, that they are public servants who have been
appointed to their position to serve the Township of Rochelle Park, its
residents, taxpayers, property owners and developers.
I. The duties of the Property Maintenance Officer shall be as set forth in
Chapter 150 of the Code of the Township of Rochelle Park and the
duties of the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be as set forth in
Chapter 185 of the Code of the Township of Rochelle Park.
J. Additional duties.
(1) In addition to the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction
Code and other state codes described above, the Code Enforcement
§ 80-1 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND FLEA MARKETS § 80-1
77:245
§ 80-2. Appeals.
The Township of Rochelle Park shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the
Bergen County Construction Board of Appeals as the administrative agency
responsible for handling appeals pursuant to the Uniform Construction
Code of the State of New Jersey.
§ 80-3. Fee schedule. [Amended 5-20-2009 by Ord. No. 1001-09]
Department shall be charged with the responsibility of supervision
and enforcement of the following:
(a) Housing inspections pursuant to Chapter 117 of the Code of
the Township of Rochelle Park;
(b) Construction and building;
(c) Fire prevention pursuant to Chapter 102 of the Code of the
Township of Rochelle Park;
(d) Enforcement of the Noise Ordinance.72
(2) The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
Code Enforcement Department.
A. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees,
plus all applicable special fees, listed herein and shall be issued as
required by the Uniform Construction Code Regulations,
5:23-2.15(e)3i(3). A separate fee computed by volume or estimated cost
will be charged at the same rate as designated.
B. Building subcode fees shall be:
(1) New construction and additions: $0.040 per cubic foot. [Amended
3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 1029-11]
(a) Minimum fee, principal building, garages: $150.
(b) Minimum fee, accessory building over 100 square feet: $125.
(2) State training surcharge fee: $0.0022 per cubic foot.
(a) State training fee based upon estimated cost: $0.00009 per
cost.
(3) Renovations, alterations and repairs: $26 per $1,000 of estimated
cost. [Amended 3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 1029-11]
(a) Minimum fee (all subcodes): $60.
(b) Reroof: $25 per $1,000.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Noise.
§ 80-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 80-3
77:246
(c) Re-side: $25 per $1,000.
(d) Retaining walls over three feet (residential): $25 per $1,000.
(e) Retaining walls over three feet (commercial): $25 per $1,000.
(4) Combinations of renovations and additions are to be determined by
combining the fees for the appropriate parts.
(5) Partial permits for footings and foundation: no additional fee.
[Amended 3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 1029-11]
(6) Semipermanent trailers used for construction offices and storage:
$315 commercial. [Amended 3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 1029-11]
(7) Certificate of occupancy:
(a) Residential: $100 each. [Amended 3-16-2011 by Ord. No.
1029-11]
(b) Commercial: $262.50 each.
(8) Certificate of approval: $0. [Amended 3-16-2011 by Ord. No.
1029-11]
(9) Temporary certificate of occupancy: [Amended 3-16-2011 by
Ord. No. 1029-11]
(a) Residential: $150.
(b) Commercial: $250.
(10) Certificate of continued occupancy:
(a) Residential: $105 per unit.
(b) Commercial: $250.
(11) Annual permits as per N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.14: one to 25, $667/worker.
[Amended 3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 1029-11]
(12) Demolition: [Amended 3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 1029-11]
(a) Use Groups R-3 and R-4: $175 each.
(b) All other use groups or over 10,000 square feet: $525 each.
(c) Accessory structures: $150 each.
(13) Swimming pools, including fences (aboveground): $125 each.
[Amended 3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 1029-11]
(14) Swimming pools, including fences (in-ground): $175 each.
[Amended 3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 1029-11]
(15) Swimming pools (public): $525 each.
§ 80-3 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND FLEA MARKETS § 80-3
77:247
(16) Relocation of structures: $500 each. [Amended 3-16-2011 by
Ord. No. 1029-11]
(17) Modular houses: $500 each. [Amended 3-16-2011 by Ord. No.
1029-11]
(18) Signs:
(a) Up to six square feet: $100.
(b) Six or more square feet: $200.
(19) Masonry fireplaces: $150 each. [Amended 3-16-2011 by Ord.
No. 1029-11]
(20) Storage tanks, including replacement: $75 each. [Amended
3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 1029-11]
(20.1) Variations: $150. [Added 3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 1029-11]
(21) Zoning permits: $52.50.
(a) Driveway expansion, recapping: $75.
(b) Sidewalk:
[1] One to three slabs: $50.
[2] More than three slabs: $75.
(c) Curbing, per fifty-foot section: $50.
(22) Minimum fee (includes L.P.G., flammable liquids, combustible
liquids and gases): $105 each.
C. Mechanical and fire subcode fees shall be:
(1) Continuing inspections:
(a) High-pressure boilers (annual): $262.50 each.
(b) Refrigeration systems (annual): $262.50 each.
(c) Cross connections and backflow preventers, commercial
(quarterly): $52.50 each.
(d) Pressure vessels (annual): $105 each.
(2) All heating appliances and HVAC equipment, including solid-fuelburning
appliances and duct work, new or replacement: $105 each.
(3) Fire dampers: $11 per damper.
(4) Kitchen exhausts systems:
(a) Residential: $52.50 each.
§ 80-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 80-3
77:248
(b) Commercial: $300 each.
(5) Incinerators and crematories: $5,250 each.
(6) Swimming pool heaters: $105 each.
(7) Fire pumps: $1,050 each.
(8) Central fire control center: $2,100 each.
(9) Automatic fire detection and alarm systems:
(a) Commercial:
[1] One to 25 heads: $157.50.
[2] Twenty-six to 100 heads: $367.50.
[3] More than 100 heads: $6 per additional head.
(b) Residential: $105.
(10) Chimneys, vents and shafts:
(a) Residential: $105 each.
(b) Commercial: $210 each.
(11) Fire suppression systems, including water sprinkler; dry chemical;
foam; carbon dioxide; or other chemical agents:
(a) Each installation one to 25 heads or nozzles: $152.50.
(b) Each installation 26 to 75 heads or nozzles: $310.
(c) Each installation 76 to 200 heads or nozzles: $525.
(d) Each additional 105 heads or nozzles or portion thereof: $105
per 100.
(12) Standpipes:
(a) Two-and-one-half-inch pipes per riser: $310 each.
(b) Four-inch pipes per riser: $525 each.
(c) Six-inch pipes per riser: $787.50 each.
(d) Eight-inch pipes per riser: $1,050 each.
(e) Larger than eight-inch pipes per riser: $1,260 each.
(13) Manual fire alarms: $262.50.
(a) Plus each pull station: $11.
(14) Minimum fee: $52.50.
§ 80-3 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND FLEA MARKETS § 80-3
77:249
D. Plumbing subcode fee schedule shall be:
(1) Hot water heater (new and replacement):
(a) Residential: $75 each.
(b) Commercial: $125 each.
(2) Grease traps and oil separators, backflow devices:
(a) Residential: $52.50 each.
(b) Commercial: $105 each.
(3) Sewer connection (sanitary or storm):
(a) Residential (first 200 feet): $105.
[1] Each additional 100 feet or portion thereof: $52.50.
(b) Commercial (first 200 feet): $210.
[1] Each additional 100 feet or portion thereof: $105.
(4) Gas piping:
(a) Residential (first 100 feet): $52.50.
(b) Commercial (first 100 feet): $210.
(c) Each additional 100 feet: $105.
(5) Dry sewers (sanitary or storm):
(a) Residential (first 100 feet): $105.
(b) Commercial (first 100 feet): $210.
(c) Each additional 100 feet: $105.
(6) Swimming pools (commercial): $525.
(7) Water service:
(a) Residential (first 100 feet): $105.
(b) Commercial (first 100 feet): $210.
(c) Each additional 100 feet: $105.
(8) Heating appliances:
(a) Residential: $100 per unit.
(b) Commercial: $250 per unit.
(9) Plumbing fixtures: $52.50 each.
§ 80-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 80-3
77:250
§ 80-4. Buildings or construction not subject to fees; biannual
report; surcharge fees.
(10) Minimum fee: $52.50.
E. Electrical subcode fee schedule shall be:
(1) Switching, lighting, receptacle outlets:
(a) One to 25 outlets: $105.
(b) Each additional 25 outlets or fraction thereof: $52.50.
(2) Pool, spa, tub electrical certificate of compliance: $105.
(3) Service panels, equipment, service entrance subpanels, temporary
services and feeders:
(a) Zero to 100 amps: $105 each.
(b) One hundred one to 300 amps: $152.50 each.
(c) Three hundred one to 1,000 amps: $315 each.
(d) Over 1,000 amps: $525 each.
(4) Electrical devices, generators, transformers:
(a) One kw to 10 kw: $52.50 each.
(b) Eleven kw to 45 kw: $105 each.
(c) Forty-six kw to 112.5 kw: $157.50 each.
(d) Over 112.5 kw: $210 each.
(5) Motor schedule, includes air conditioners, generators, electric
furnaces and welders:
(a) Single unit or group not to exceed one HP to 10 HP, KW or KVA:
$52.50 each.
(b) Over 10 HP to 50 HP, KVA, or KW: $105 each.
(c) Over 50 HP, to 100 HP, KVA or KW: $210 each.
(d) Over 100 HP, KW, KVA: $262.50 each.
(6) Minimum fee is $52.50.
A. Public buildings (county and Township). No fee shall be charged for any
type of construction permitted for any building or structure owned by
the County of Bergen or the Township of Rochelle Park or any of their
subordinate agencies.
§ 80-3 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND FLEA MARKETS § 80-4
77:251
§ 80-5. (Reserved)
§ 80-6. Statutory regulations.
All appointments, qualifications for appointment, internal procedures,
hearings and notice relative thereto, appeals and filing therefor shall be
and are hereby governed by Chapter 217, Laws of New Jersey 1975,73 and
Title 5 Chapter 23, of the New Jersey Administrative Code, as amended and
supplemented, three copies of each being on file in the Code Enforcement
Department and Office of the Township Clerk.
§ 80-7. Filing of copy.
Upon publication and passage as prescribed by law, this chapter shall be
filed and recorded with the Bureau of Housing Inspection, New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, and retained on file as a public record
in the Office of the Township Clerk, Construction Official and Code
Enforcement Department.
B. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Township Committee, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to
the enforcement of the Stale Uniform Construction Act.
C. Surcharge fees.
(1) The fee provided herein for surcharge shall be $0.0016 per cubic
foot. The surcharge training fee for alterations shall be $0.0008 per
$1,000 of estimated cost.
(2) The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal
year to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July
31, the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal
year. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective, said report shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
D. No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing public or private structure or any of
the facilities contained therein.
73.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 80-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 80-7
77:252
Chapter 83
CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 80.
§ 83-1. Registration requirements.
§ 83-2. Application for registration; work on Sundays; hours.
[Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519; 11-18-1996 by Ord. No.
740-96]
A. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
constructing, erecting, altering, repairing, restoring, re-siding, moving
or demolishing the whole or any part of structures or the
appurtenances thereto, or erecting or altering signs, within the
Township of Rochelle Park, shall be required, before undertaking the
construction, erection, alteration, addition, repair, restoration,
reroofing, re-siding, moving or demolition of any structure or sign for
which a permit is required by this chapter, to register the name of such
person or firm or corporation with the Department of Building
Inspections. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
B. The owner or occupant of a structure applying for a permit required by
this chapter shall not be required to register, provided that he intends
to do and supervise his own work; however, if a construction permit is
required by the Building Department, Building Inspector or any
subcode official, said owner or occupant shall be required to limit the
time of work as set forth in § 83-2. [Amended 8-20-2003 by Ord. No.
889-03]
A. Applications for the registration of contractors shall be submitted to the
Construction Official upon appropriate forms supplied by him and shall
include, in addition to any information he may deem necessary, a
statement giving the name or corporate or firm name of the contractor
and, in the case of a firm, corporation or partnership, the name and
address of the principal officer or member of said firm, corporation or
partnership. The application shall also contain the number of years the
person, firm or corporation has been in business or in existence at the
current location or any prior locations, including the address of such
prior locations, if any. The applicant shall state in which class he desires
to be registered, choosing one or more of the classes designated in
§ 83-4.
B. Days and times when activities are prohibited; exceptions. [Amended
8-20-2003 by Ord. No. 889-03]
§ 80-7 CONTRACTORS § 83-2
83:253
§ 83-3. Registration fee; annual renewal. [Amended 5-5-1986 by
Ord. No. 519]
§ 83-4. Classes of registration.
For the purposes of this chapter, there shall be the following classes of
registration:
(1) No contractor, as defined in this chapter, nor any qualifying
homeowner or property owner pursuant to § 83-1B shall be allowed
to perform activities set forth herein within the Township of
Rochelle on Sunday or on the following holidays, unless an
exemption is sought and obtained for such work from the
Construction Code Department.
Holidays
New Year’s Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day (July 4th)
Labor Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
(2) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be considered as
prohibiting emergency repairs necessary for the preservation of
health and safety on Sundays or on the aforementioned holidays.
(3) During the days of Monday through Saturday, no activity shall
commence before 7:00 a.m. and shall cease by 6:00 p.m.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall be registered under this chapter or
shall be reregistered after revocation of registration under § 83-6
unless and until there is paid to the Construction Official therefor a fee
of $15.
B. After registration and for so long as the registration is not revoked
under § 83-5, the registration shall be renewed annually at a fee of $15.
A. General contractor: a contractor who is proficient in the construction of
a structure from start to finish and the alteration, addition to or repair
of any structure. The contractor shall be equipped to handle such work
either by and through his own organization or appropriate
subcontractors and, in the latter event, must be completely responsible
for his subcontractors' work.
B. Contractor: a contractor who is proficient in the construction of a
structure from start to finish and the alteration, addition to or repair of
any structure. The contractor shall be equipped to handle such work by
and through his own work or his own organization or employees.
§ 83-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 83-4
83:254
§ 83-5. Revocation of registrations. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
§ 83-6. Reregistration after revocations. [Amended 5-5-1986 by
Ord. No. 519]
Any person, firm or corporation whose registration has been revoked under
the provisions of this chapter may reregister and have his or its name
reentered upon the registration list upon filing with the Department of
Building Inspections a certificate signed by the Construction Official to the
effect that all violations with reference to which conviction was secured
have been corrected or are nonexistent and upon the payment of the fee
prescribed by § 83-3.
Chapter 84
CONTRACTS
C. Roofing and siding contractor: a contractor who is proficient in the
applying of roofing and siding materials to existing or new structures.
D. Demolition contractor: a contractor who is proficient in the demolishing
of any structure in whole or in part.
E. Moving contractor: a contractor who is proficient in the moving of any
structure.
F. Sign or billboard contractor: a contractor who is proficient in the
erection, alteration or maintenance of signs or billboards.
G. Miscellaneous contractor: a contractor who is proficient in work of a
special character as determined by the Construction Official.
[Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
A. If any person, firm or corporation registered under the provisions of
this chapter shall fail, in the execution of any work for which a permit is
required, to comply with the provisions relevant to the construction,
erection, alteration, repair, restoration, re-siding, reroofing, moving or
demolition of any structure or sign or part thereof, the Construction
Official shall cause a notice of violation to be served upon such person
or the principal member or officer of any such firm or corporation.
B. Upon conviction for such violation, the registration of such person, firm
or corporation shall be revoked by the Construction Official, who shall
strike the name of such person, firm or corporation from the
registration list and shall not reenter or reinstate such registration
during such time as the said violation exists or remains. Upon
revocation, the Construction Official shall forthwith cause notice of
revocation to be published in a newspaper circulating in the Township.
§ 83-4 CONTRACTORS § 83-6
83:255

ARTICLE I
Political Campaign Contributions by Professional Service Providers
[Adopted 3-21-2007 by Ord. No. 961-07]
§ 84-1. Campaign contributions prohibited.
No professional business entity or individual, which enters into negotiations
for or agrees to any contract or agreement with the municipality or any
department or agency thereof or of its independent authorities for the
rendition of professional, banking or insurance coverage services or any
other consulting services, shall solicit or make any contribution of money,
or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to any Bergen
County or other county political party committee, or to any political action
committee (PAC) that engages in the support of municipal candidates and/
or municipal parties.
§ 84-2. Certification of compliance; duration.
A. Prior to awarding an agreement or contract to a professional business
entity or individual for providing professional services or making any
payment pursuant to the same, the Township Administrator or his
designee shall require that the professional certify that the professional
business entity or individual has not knowingly made any contribution
which violates the provisions of § 84-1 of this article.
B. The professional shall have a continuing duty to report immediately to
the Township Administrator or his designee any contributions made in
violation of this article that occur during any time that an agreement for
professional services is in effect.
§ 84-1 CONTRACTORS § 84-2
83:257

ARTICLE II
Political Campaign Contributions by Redevelopers
[Adopted 12-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1152-19]
§ 84-3. Entering into or amending agreements with certain
contributors.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the Mayor
and Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park, its
departments, instrumentalities, or independent authorities, and the
purchasing agents or agencies of the foregoing shall not enter into or
amend, extend, or modify an agreement or contract with any
redeveloper for the planning, replanning, construction or undertaking
of any redevelopment project, including the acquisition or leasing of
any public property in conjunction with the redevelopment of any area
within the Township of Rochelle Park pursuant to the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law, if that redeveloper has solicited or
made any contribution during the applicable time period as specified
below to: a candidate, candidate committee, or joint candidates
committee of any candidate for elective, municipal office in the
Township of Rochelle Park; a holder of public office having ultimate
responsibility for the award of a redevelopment agreement; or any
political action committee (hereinafter PAC) that regularly engages in
the support of Township of Rochelle Park municipal or Bergen County
elections and/or Township of Rochelle Park or Bergen County political
parties. If, however, any of the foregoing has received a contribution
during the applicable time period from a presumptive redeveloper who
is an owner of property at the time the property was determined as an
area in need of redevelopment, the local official shall be required to
return said contribution. For purposes of this article, the "applicable
time period" shall be defined as the time period between the date that
the property which is the subject of the redevelopment project has been
included in a memorializing resolution adopted by the governing body
directing the Planning Board to conduct a preliminary investigation to
determine if the site is in need of redevelopment pursuant to and in
accordance with the New Jersey Local Redevelopment and Housing
Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., and the date of entering into the
redevelopment agreement, or the 12 months prior to entering into the
agreement, whichever is shorter.
B. All redevelopment agreements or amendments thereto entered into by
the Mayor and Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park
shall contain a provision prohibiting redevelopers as defined in
Subsection C from soliciting or making any contribution to a candidate,
candidate committee, or joint candidates committee of any candidate
for elective municipal office in the Township of Rochelle Park; a holder
of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a
redevelopment agreement; or any PAC.
C. As defined in this article, a "redeveloper" means:
§ 84-3 CONTRACTORS § 84-3
83:259
§ 84-4. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No solicitation or contribution made by a redeveloper or consultant as
defined in §§ 84-3C and 84-6, respectively, shall be deemed a violation of
this article if that contribution or agreement was made by the redeveloper
or consultant prior to the effective date of this article which shall be
December 18, 2019.
§ 84-5. Notice given by municipality; sworn statement of
redeveloper.
(1) Any person, firm, corporation or public body that shall enter into or
propose to enter into a contract with a municipality or other
redevelopment entity for the redevelopment or rehabilitation of an
area in need of redevelopment, or an area in need of rehabilitation,
or any part thereof, under the provisions of this act, or for any
construction or other work forming part of a redevelopment or
rehabilitation project;
(2) Any person who owns 10% or more of the equity or ownership or
income interests in a person or entity as defined in Subsection C(1)
above and their spouses and child/children living at home.
D. For the purposes of this article, the holder of public office having
ultimate responsibility for the award of a redevelopment agreement is:
(1) The Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park and
each of its members (without regard to such member's vote on any
aspect of a redevelopment agreement) if the redevelopment
agreement requires approval or appropriation from the Committee
or from a public officer appointed by Council; or
(2) A designated redevelopment entity, if the redevelopment
agreement requires the approval of the redevelopment entity.
A. It shall be the municipality's continuing responsibility to give notice to
this article when the municipality gives notice of redevelopment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-6 and when the municipality adopts a
resolution directing the Planning Board to prepare a redevelopment
plan and at the time that the municipality adopts the ordinance to
implement the redevelopment plan.
B. Prior to arranging and entering into the redevelopment agreement or
any other financial agreement with any redeveloper, the Township of
Rochelle Park or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or
independent authorities, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn
statement from the redeveloper that the redeveloper has not made any
contribution in violation of § 84-3A above. Furthermore, the
redeveloper shall have a continuing duty to report any violations of this
article that may occur while arranging and entering into the
redevelopment agreement, and until all specified terms of the
§ 84-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 84-5
83:260
§ 84-6. Return of prohibited contributions.
A redeveloper or consultant may cure a violation of § 84-3 of this article,
and shall not be deemed to be in violation thereof if, within 30 days after
the cited violation, the redeveloper notifies the Municipal Council in writing
and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from the municipal
candidate or municipal or county political party or PAC referenced in this
article.
§ 84-7. Violations and penalties.
agreement have been completed. The certification required under this
section shall be made prior to entry into the agreement with the
municipality and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may
be required by any other provision of law.
A. It shall be a breach of the terms of the Township of Rochelle Park
redevelopment agreement if it is demonstrated by a preponderance of
the evidence that such redeveloper has:
(1) Made or solicited a contribution in violation of this article;
(2) Purposely, knowingly or recklessly concealed or misrepresented a
contribution given or received;
(3) Made or solicited contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Made or solicited any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be contributed to a campaign committee of
any candidate or holder of the public office of Township of Rochelle
Park;
(5) Engaged or employed a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution, which, if made or solicited by the
redeveloper itself, would subject that entity to the restrictions of
this article;
(6) Funded contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members, and employees;
(7) Engaged in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this article; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means,
done any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of
this article.
B. Disqualification; fine.
§ 84-5 CONTRACTORS § 84-7
83:261
(1) Any redeveloper who violates Subsection A(2) through (8) shall be
disqualified from eligibility for future redeveloper designations in
Rochelle Park for a period of five calendar years from the later of
the date of the violation or the date the violation is recorded.
(2) Additionally, the redeveloper shall also be subject to a fine of
$1,000.
§ 84-7 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 84-7
83:262
Chapter 86
CRANE REGULATIONS
§ 86-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Crane Operators License Advisory Board, the Township
Administrator or such other person or official as designated by the Township
Committee, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-3.
CERTIFICATION — Certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by the
Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program meeting
the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME
B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the National Commission for
Certifying Agencies.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Labor.
CRANE — As used in this chapter, the term "crane" shall be defined in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:26-1 through 45:26-17 (Licensure of Crane
Operators Act), hereafter referred to as the Crane Operator Licensure Act
and the 1926 OSHA Crane and Derricks in Construction also known as
OSHA Subpart CC.
CRANE OPERATOR — An individual engaged in the operation of a crane.
CRANE RELATED EXPERIENCE — Operating, inspecting, training and
maintenance experience acceptable to the board.
PRACTICAL EXAMINATION — An examination demonstrating the
applicant's ability to safely operate a particular category or type of crane.
Practical examinations shall be conducted for the following crane
categories: the lattice boom crawler cranes (LBC), lattice boom truck
cranes (LBT), telescopic boom cranes (TLL, swing cab and TSS, fixed cab),
tower cranes and overhead cranes.
§ 86-2. General requirements.
A. Five days before any crane operator, contractor or other person or
company initiates the use of a crane within the municipality, a permit
shall be obtained. In emergent situations, the building inspector may
waive this requirement in his or her own discretion if the operator
meets the balance of the requirements of this chapter.
B. The permit will be maintained with the municipality as well as with the
crane operator at all times; a copy of the permit shall be produced on
the work site when requested.
C. The following documents must be provided to the municipality in order
to be granted a permit:
§ 84-7 CONTRACTORS § 86-2
83:263
§ 86-3. Crane operator licensing.
(1) Copy of crane operator certificate from one of the following
organizations:
(a) National Commission for the Certification of Crane Operators
(NCCCO);
(b) Operating Engineers Certification Program (OECP); or
(c) Crane Institute of America Certification.
(2) New Jersey crane license.
(3) Current medical examiner's card.
(4) A copy of the most recent and current proof of inspection for the
crane being operated (crane owner).
(5) Insurance required as follows:
(a) See attached schedule for insurance and indemnification
requirements.74
(6) Proof that the crane operator submits to a random drug testing
program.
(7) Proof of completion of signal person qualification or certification
course.
D. Upon receipt of a properly completed application and compliance with
the requirements of this section, the building department shall issue or
deny the requested permit within five business days. If the application
is denied the reasons for the denial are furnished to the applicant in
writing.
A. Licensure of crane operators, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-7. No person
shall engage in the operation of a crane, offer himself or herself for
employment as a crane operator or otherwise act, attempt to act,
present or represent himself as a crane operator unless licensed as
such under the provisions of this act.
B. A crane operator's license shall be valid only in conjunction with a
current certification and only in the specialty or specialties for which
the crane operator is certified. The specialties are lattice boom crawler
crane (LBC), lattice boom truck crane (LBT), telescopic boom cranes
(TLL, swing cab and TSS, fixed cab), tower cranes and overhead cranes.
C. To be eligible for a license as a crane operator in the municipality, an
applicant shall fulfill each of the following requirements:
74.Editor's Note: The Schedule for Insurance and Indemnification Requirements is on file in
the Township offices.
§ 86-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 86-3
83:264
§ 86-4. Fee schedule.
The permit fee for each crane shall be $100. Each permit is valid for 60
days and may be extended and/or renewed provided that compliance with
the requirements of this chapter continues to be met. Fee for an extended
or renewal permit is $50.
§ 86-5. Notification of accident or safety issue required.
The owner of the property shall immediately notify the municipality of
every accident causing personal injury or damage to property involving a
construction crane covered by this chapter and shall afford the municipal
official every facility for investigating such accident. When an accident
involves the failure, breakage, damage or destruction of any part of the
apparatus, it shall be unlawful to use such device until after an examination
by the municipality is made and approval of the equipment for continued
use is granted. it shall be the duty of the municipality to make a prompt
examination into the cause of the accident and to enter a full and complete
report thereof in the records of the municipality. Such records shall be open
for public inspection during regular business hours.
§ 86-6. Safety equipment required.
(1) Be at least 18 years of age.
(2) Receive certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by
the board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program
meeting the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers ASME B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the
National Commission for Certifying Agencies.
(3) Have at least 1,000 hours of crane-related experience.
(4) Maintain a current medical examiner's certification card.
D. The crane operator should reside in the municipality. If not, they should
reside in the same county as the municipality is located. The crane
operator shall reside in New Jersey.
A. All crane equipment shall be kept in safe working condition at all times
by the owner and licensee.
B. If any safety or operational aid used or required to be used in
connection with the operation of a crane is not working properly, the
person operating such crane shall immediately shut down the crane
until such time that the required safety or operational aid is repaired or
replaced and the crane is restored to proper working order.
C. Any and all safety requirements promulgated by the Board or
municipality must be adhered to at all times.
§ 86-3 CONTRACTORS § 86-6
83:265
§ 86-7. Administration; enforcement.
§ 86-8. Unsafe cranes.
D. Every crane shall be thoroughly inspected by a competent designated
employee or authorized agent of the owner or lessee of such mobile
crane, tower crane or derrick at intervals not exceeding one month.
Such inspection shall include, but not be limited to, all blocks, shackles,
sheaves, wire rope, connectors, and various devices on the master
boom, controls and braking mechanisms.
E. A written, dated, and signed record of each such inspection shall be
completed by the competent designated employee or authorized agent
who made the inspection. The most recent record of such inspection
shall be posted inside the cab of such crane and shall be filed with the
municipality. Attached to such record of inspection shall be a written
designation naming the competent employee or authorized agent. Such
attached designation shall be signed by the owner or lessee of said
crane.
F. Every crane shall be inspected before being erected or operated for the
first time on any job.
G. Adjustments and repairs to cranes shall be made only by competent
designated persons.
A. The Township Committee may promulgate rules and regulations for the
administration of the provisions of this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Building
Department.
A. Any crane which is or hereafter becomes unsafe or otherwise
dangerous to human life or public safety, or which demonstrates
inadequate maintenance shall be deemed to be in an unsafe condition
by the Municipal Engineer. All unsafe cranes shall be taken down or
removed or made safe, as the Municipal Engineer deems necessary and
as provided for in this section.
B. The Municipal Engineer shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe
crane. The report shall state the nature of the unsafe condition.
C. If an unsafe condition is found, the Municipal Engineer or municipal
agent shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the crane a
written notice that describes the condition being unsafe and specifies
the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe
condition. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare
immediately to the Municipal Engineer or municipal agent exceptions
or rejection of the terms of the written notice.
D. Such written notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy is
delivered to the owner personally, or sent by certified or registered mail
§ 86-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 86-8
83:266
§ 86-9. Violations; penalties.
Chapter 88
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Birds — See Ch. 68.
Cats and other animals — See Ch. 73.
Noise — See Ch. 135.
addressed to the owner at the last known address with the return
receipt requested. If a certified or registered letter is returned showing
that the written order has not been delivered, a copy shall be posted
in a conspicuous place in or on the structure affected by such notice.
Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent
or upon the person responsible for the crane shall constitute service of
notice upon the owner.
E. The equipment determined to be unsafe by the Municipal Engineer or
municipal agent may be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that
repairs, alterations or additions are made during restoration of such
equipment, such repairs, alterations or additions shall comply with all
applicable codes.
F. Any person who refuses or neglects to comply with the requirements of
notice to abate an unsafe condition shall be subject to a fine in
accordance with § 86-9.
A. Any person who operates a crane without meeting the requirements of
this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $1,000 and no more than $10,000 for
each violation. Each day of illegal operation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
B. Any person or company who employs an unlicensed person as a crane
operator or who permits or directs an unlicensed person to operate a
crane shall be subject to a fine of not less than $2,000 nor more than
$20,000 for each violation. Each day of illegal operation shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
§ 86-8 CONTRACTORS § 86-9
83:267

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Registration
[Adopted 1-26-1942 by Ord. No. 131]
§ 88-1. Annual licensing and registration.
The following regulations are hereby established pursuant to Chapter 151
of the Laws of 1941 of the State of New Jersey:75
A. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall,
in the month of January 1942 and annually thereafter, apply for and
procure from the Registrar to the Board of Health a license and official
metal registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored
and shall place upon such dog a collar or harness with the registration
tag securely fastened thereto. [Amended 3-18-1998 by Ord. No.
768-98]
B. The persons applying for the license and registration tag shall pay the
fee of $8.80 for each dog license and the sum of $1 for the registration
of each dog and an additional sum of $0.20 to be used for the pilot clinic
as required by law (P.L. 1983, c. 18176) and, for each annual renewal,
shall pay the same fee for the license and registration tag as for the
original license and tag. However, if the person applying for said dog
license cannot furnish proof that the dog has had its reproductive
capacity permanently altered through sterilization, then and in that
event there shall be an additional surcharge licensing fee as mandated
by the State of New Jersey (P.L. 1983, c.17277) in the amount of $3 per
dog. Said license, registration tag and renewal shall expire on the last
day of January of each year. [Amended 11-17-1966 by Ord. No. 263;
11-16-1981 by Ord. No. 453; 10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 477; 5-5-1986
by Ord. No. 519; 11-20-1989 by Ord. No. 576; 8-18-2010 by Ord.
No. 1020-10]
C. License forms and uniform official metal registration tags designed by
the State Department of Health shall be issued and shall be numbered
serially and shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the
Township of Rochelle Park.
D. The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog
which attains the licensing age, as in said Act provided, shall make
application for license and registration tag for such dog within 10 days
after such acquisition or age attainment. Said application shall contain
the information as in said Act required.
E. The Municipal Clerk to the Board of Health shall forward to the State
Department of Health each month, on forms furnished by the State
75.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19.15.1 et seq.
76.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3c.
77.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3b.
§ 88-1 CONTRACTORS § 88-1
83:269
Department, the information contained in said application. [Amended
3-18-1998 by Ord. No. 768-98; 8-18-2010 by Ord. No. 1020-10]
F. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the application.
G. License fees collected or received under the provisions of this article,
except registration tag fees, shall be received and disposed of in the
manner provided in said Act.
H. The Chief of Police of the Township of Rochelle Park shall promptly
after February 1, 1942, and annually thereafter cause a canvass to be
made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the
township and shall cause a report of the result thereof to be filed with
the Municipal Clerk to the Board of Health in the manner and form
required by said Act. [Amended 3-18-1998 by Ord. No. 768-98;
8-18-2010 by Ord. No. 1020-10]
I. The Chief of Police of the Township of Rochelle Park shall cause the
provisions of said Act to be enforced as therein provided.
J. Should any person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog which is required
to be licensed pursuant to township ordinance fail to obtain a license by
January 31, there shall be included in the cost of said license fee a late
charge of $5. Should a license not be obtained before February 15 of a
given year, then a summons will be issued which will require the
applicant to pay not only the cost of the license but a fine in the amount
of $45 plus court costs for each violation. Said summons may be paid
through the Violations Bureau of the Municipal Court. [Added
10-20-1993 by Ord. No. 662; amended 10-16-1996 by Ord. No.
736; 3-18-1998 by Ord. No. 768-98; 12-17-2003 by Ord. No.
903-03]
K. Should a dog be classified as potentially dangerous pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-17 et seq., the owner thereof shall be required to pay the sum of
$700 per year for the continuing licensing of the potentially dangerous
dog. [Added 12-18-1996 by Ord. No. 742-96]
§ 88-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 88-1
83:270
ARTICLE II
Control of Dogs
[Adopted 4-5-1971 as Ord. No. 325]
§ 88-2. Nuisances; curbing of dogs.78
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons owning or having the care,
custody or control of any dog to permit such dog to soil or defile or to
commit any nuisance upon any sidewalk of any public street or thoroughfare
or in or upon any public building or any approach to such building from
the street or in or upon any public park, public playground or school
playground, or in or upon the property of persons other than the owner,
person or persons owning or having the care, custody or control of such
dog; provided, however, that for the purpose of this section of this article,
the above-mentioned restrictions shall not apply to that portion of the street
lying between the curblines which shall be used to curb said dog.
§ 88-3. Leash required on streets or in public places.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the Township of
Rochelle Park unless such dog is accompanied by a person who is capable
of controlling the dog and who has the dog securely confined and controlled
by a leash.
§ 88-4. Dogs barking at night.
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually barks or
cries between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 88-5. Dogs barking while unattended.
No person shall leave a dog unattended which habitually barks or cries, and
no person shall keep, harbor or maintain a dog which habitually barks or
cries while unattended.
§ 88-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-20-1981 by Ord. No.
446; 11-15-1982 by Ord. No. 463; 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the regulations of this
article shall be liable for a first offense to a penalty of not less than $5 nor
more than $25. For a second offense, the fine shall be not less than $25 nor
more than $100. For a third offense, a court appearance shall be required
before the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township of Rochelle Park,
and a fine shall be imposed not to exceed $200.
78.Editor's Note: See also Article III of this chapter.
§ 88-2 CONTRACTORS § 88-7
83:271
§ 88-7. Additional penalty. [Added 11-15-1982 by Ord. No. 463]
A mandatory court appearance shall also be required and a fine shall be
imposed not to exceed $200 by the Municipal Judge for a dog running at
large who attacks someone.
§ 88-7.1. Vicious dogs; determination. [Added 4-17-1996 by Ord.
No. 719]
A. The Township of Rochelle Park hereby adopts by reference P.L. 1994, c.
187, N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 through 4:19-37. Should a dog be considered
vicious or potentially dangerous, the Municipal Court shall determine if,
in fact, the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous.
B. N.J.S.A. 4:19-36 is enacted relating to any specific breed of dog and its
viciousness and potential danger.
§ 88-7 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 88-7.1
83:272
ARTICLE III
Disposal of Dog Litter
[Adopted 11-5-1979 as Ord. No. 428]
§ 88-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG LITTER — All fecal matter or excrement issuing from dogs.
OWNER — The person to whom the dog belongs and any other person
having possession or control of the animal either with or without the
consent of the person to whom such animal belongs.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any land, sidewalk, building, driveway, garden or
roadway, either residential or commercial, which is owned by any
individual, partnership, public utility, corporation, company or other
business or commercial entity.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any land, building, sidewalk, driveway, parking lot,
street, roadway or roadbed, park, playground or other recreation area
which is either owned or leased by the Township of Rochelle Park, or any
other such property owned or leased by the State of New Jersey, the County
of Bergen, the Rochelle Park Board of Education or any agency thereof,
which property is located within the geographic boundaries of the Township
of Rochelle Park.
STREET — That portion of a public roadway which is between the curbs.
Specifically excluded from this definition is any interpretation whereby the
sidewalk, grass strip or other public easement adjoining a roadway shall be
included as part of the term "street."
§ 88-9. Applicability.
This Article shall apply to all persons who own, possess or control a dog
while such dog is physically in this Township of Rochelle Park, whether or
not such dog is generally maintained or housed in the Township of Rochelle
Park.
§ 88-10. Prohibited acts.
A. No dog owner shall permit, cause or encourage any dog to deposit dog
litter on any public property other than streets.
B. No dog owner shall permit, cause or encourage any dog to deposit dog
litter on any private property without the express consent of the owner
of such private property.
C. No person shall remove dog litter from any place and thereafter cause it
to be deposited on any public property or private property without the
property owner's express consent.
§ 88-8 CONTRACTORS § 88-10
83:273
§ 88-11. Duties of dog owners.
It shall be the duty and obligation of every dog owner to collect any dog
litter left by the owner's dog by retrieving the same immediately following
its deposit by the dog and thereafter disposing of such dog litter by:
§ 88-12. Publication of article.
D. No person shall place, deposit, throw or insert dog litter into any storm
drain or storm sewer system in the Township of Rochelle Park.
E. No dog owner shall fail to collect and dispose of dog litter in accordance
with § 88-11.
A. Placement in the sanitary sewer system;
B. Placement in an appropriate disposal system manufactured for the
purpose of dog litter disposal;
C. Placement of the dog litter in a sealed and fastened plastic bag and
disposal of the same in a public refuse container provided by the
Township of Rochelle Park; or
D. Placement of the dog litter in a sealed and fastened plastic bag and
disposal of the same in the owner's own refuse container.
A. This article shall be published for the general knowledge of the public
in the following manner:
(1) In addition to publication as required by law for ordinances of the
township, the full text of this article shall be published in Our Town,
a newspaper of general circulation within the township, at least
once during the month of November 1979 and once during the
month of December 1979.
(2) Following the second reading of this article in accordance with law,
the Township Clerk shall post the full text hereof at or near the
office of the Township Clerk in the Township of Rochelle Park,
where such posting shall remain in plain view until January 31,
1980.
(3) Each applicant for a dog license in the Township of Rochelle Park
shall be given a separate sheet of paper with the application or with
the dog license which shall state as follows:
DOG OWNERS — TAKE NOTICE! The Township of Rochelle Park
has passed a Dog Litter Ordinance which requires you to clean
up after your dog. The ordinance goes into effect January 1, 1980,
and it is your obligation to strictly adhere to the requirements of
this new law. Copies are available from the Township Clerk free of
charge upon request.
§ 88-10 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 88-12
83:274
§ 88-13. Violations and penalties.
§ 88-14. Enforcement.
This Article shall be enforced upon the filing of a sworn complaint duly
executed in accordance with law by any person or by any police officer
in whose presence any offense hereunder is committed, and such police
officer may issue process by summons rather than sworn complaint or by
any other law enforcement official in the township in accordance with the
law, rules and regulations governing each official, but not necessarily by
sworn complaint.
B. This section of this article is intended to provide public information as a
community service and is not intended to impose upon the township any
standards for publication over and above those required by state law. It
shall not be a defense to any charges of violation of this article that the
township failed to publish notice thereof under one or more of the
subsections of this section.
A. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100 for a first offense; not less than $50 nor
more than $500 for any second offense; not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000 for any third or subsequent offense. [Amended 5-5-1986
by Ord. No. 519]
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article for a third or
subsequent offense may also have his dog license revoked for a period
of not less than five years.
C. Payment of this offense may be made through the Violations Bureau of
the Municipal Court. [Added 10-20-1993 by Ord. No. 662]
§ 88-12 CONTRACTORS § 88-14
83:275

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)79
§ 88-15. (Reserved)
§ 88-16. (Reserved)
§ 88-17. (Reserved)
§ 88-18. (Reserved)
§ 88-19. (Reserved)
§ 88-20. (Reserved)
79.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Pit Bulls, adopted 6-6-1988 by Ord. No. 553, as amended,
was repealed 3-18-1998 by Ord. No. 768-98 as said regulation has been preempted by
state statute.
§ 88-15 CONTRACTORS § 88-20
83:277
Chapter 97
EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 161.
§ 97-1. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to tear up any of
the road surfaces of or make any excavation in any of the public streets,
avenues, highways or public places in the Township of Rochelle Park for
the purpose of constructing surface or subsurface improvements or for the
purpose of laying, examining, replacing or repairing of gas mains, water
mains, sewers, sewer connections, telephone conduits, electrical conduits
or for any other purpose unless and until there shall be granted a permit
in accordance with the terms of this chapter by the Township Committee.
However, any company filing a bond in accordance with the provisions of
§ 97-12 shall not be required to secure said permit in advance of the work
but shall do so within 24 hours thereafter.
§ 97-2. Application for permit; fee. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519; 11-20-2014 by Ord. No. 1079-14]
All applications for permits referred to in this chapter shall be made to
the Township Committee in writing and shall specify the full name of the
person, firm, partnership, association or corporation to whom the permit is
to be granted, the location at which the work is to be done, the character of
the work and the length of time considered necessary to complete the work.
A. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee of $300 for each
opening, together with the deposits and maintenance fees described in
this section.
B. At the time of said application, applicants shall also pay a
nonrefundable maintenance fee, as follows:
(1) A maintenance fee of $300 for 22 linear feet and $10 for each
additional linear foot.
(2) If the applicant is a public utility company as defined by statute
(N.J.S.A.48:2-13) the nonrefundable maintenance fee, as described
herein, shall not be charged. The public utility company shall,
however, be charged a flat fee in the amount which would be
necessary to reimburse the municipality for its customary
inspection fees, administrative fees, legal fees and engineering fees
associated with the project. This amount shall be determined by the
Township Administrator but shall not exceed the sum of $7,500.
The exemption granted herein shall remain in effect from the date
§ 88-20 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 97-2
83:278
§ 97-3. Security deposit required; use or refund.
No permit shall be granted unless the sums hereinafter set forth in § 97-4
shall be paid to the Township Clerk. Those sums shall be held by the
Township Clerk until six months after the completion of each improvement
as a security deposit to guarantee the completion of the improvement and
the maintenance thereof for six months thereafter, pursuant to the terms of
the application, in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with
the specifications and standards of the Township of Rochelle Park, to the
satisfaction of the Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park.
Six months after such completion, provided the work has been properly
completed and maintained, the township shall return said deposit to the
applicant less the cost to the township for inspecting said work. Upon
failure to complete and maintain the improvement to the satisfaction of
the township, the township may complete and maintain said improvement,
using the moneys so deposited or so much thereof as is necessary for such
purpose, returning the balance of the deposit, if any, to the applicant after
six months from the date of completion.
§ 97-4. Amount of deposit; performance bonds.
of the adoption of this ordinance until June 30, 2018, at which
time it shall end and the following subsection shall be readopted:
[Amended 7-19-2017 by Ord. No. 1113-17]
If the applicant is a public utility company as defined by statute
(N.J.S.A.48:2-13), the maintenance fee shall be $300 for 22 linear
feet and $3 for each additional linear foot.
C. Qualifications for exemption. [Added 7-19-2017 by Ord. No.
1113-17]
(1) In order to qualify for the public utility company exemption as
described in the preceding subsections, the public utility company
shall be required to file a request for said exemption which will be
reviewed and considered by the Township Committee. The request
shall describe, with specificity, the nature of the project
contemplated and shall include at least the following information:
(a) Description of the project.
(b) Estimated time for completion.
(c) Estimated cost for the project.
(2) In addition to the foregoing, if the contemplated project involves
replacement of the gas main and providing new service and meters
to residential properties, the public utility company shall agree to
restore the homeowner's property to its preproject condition and
an agreement to pave the roadway, curb to curb, in the event that
the road was paved within five years preceding the commencement
of the project.
§ 97-2 CONTRACTORS § 97-4
83:279
§ 97-5. Safeguarding of excavations and materials.
All excavations, earth, stone, lumber, pipe or other material shall be safely
and securely barricaded and further guarded at night by at least two lights,
one at each end of the excavation or material, and in any other manner as
the Superintendent of Public Works may deem necessary for the reasonable
protection of the public from injury.
§ 97-6. Manner of making excavation.
In making excavations in paved streets, the person or persons doing said
work shall carefully remove the paving material and keep it free and
separate from the earth removed from the excavation, and upon refilling the
trench, shall allow such paving material so removed from the excavation to
remain so that the same may again be used in replacing the pavement of the
excavation. Not more than 1/2 of the trench shall be excavated at one time
where the trench will run from one side of the pavement to the other, and
the part so excavated shall immediately be backfilled under the supervision
of or to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 97-7. Backfilling.
The backfilling of the trench shall proceed in the following manner: Earth,
sand, gravel or broken stone removed from the trench shall be replaced
in layers not exceeding 12 inches in depth and shall be properly rammed
with rammers not less than 18 pounds in weight. The work of refilling
shall continue in this manner until the material is brought up to within 24
inches of the finished pavement, at which time if the material excavated has
contained rock or boulders not exceeding 12 inches in diameter, a layer of
such rocks or boulders shall be laid in the opening to serve as a telford base
under the pavement to be later placed by the forces of the Superintendent
of Public Works. The backfilling shall be continued until the top thereof
A. The permit deposit shall be in the following amounts for each opening
or excavation covered by such permit: [Amended 8-18-2010 by Ord.
No. 1020-10]
(1) For unimproved streets or places: from $40 to $100.
(2) For streets or places with macadam surfaces: from $75 to $300 for
22 linear feet and $10 for each additional foot.
(3) For street or places with concrete surfaces: from $100 to $400 for
22 linear feet and $10 for each additional foot.
B. The aforementioned deposits shall not be required where performance
bonds to assure the proper completion and maintenance of the
excavations aforesaid have been filed with the Township Clerk in
accordance with township ordinances. Each 50 square feet of road
surface or place broken hereunder shall be deemed a separate opening
or excavation.
§ 97-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 97-7
83:280
after being thoroughly tamped shall be one inch higher than the pavement.
No animal or vegetable matter or refuse shall be used or permitted in the
backfill, and all refuse or surplus material from the trench shall be removed
from the work immediately after the trench has been backfilled. After the
fill has thoroughly settled, the road surface shall be restored to its original
condition.
§ 97-8. Permit for placement of materials in street; fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place any stones,
earth, ashes, lumber, pipe or other materials of any description whatsoever
upon any road or street so as to interfere with the flow of water along the
gutters or so as to interfere with the traffic on said road or street without
having first obtained a permit from the Township Clerk, the fee for which
shall be $5, to be paid to the Township Clerk. The application for such
permit shall state the approximate quantity of material to be stored and
the time of such storage, and same shall be guarded as set forth in § 97-5.
Any unlawful exercise of this privilege shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. Any company filing a bond in accordance with the provisions of
§ 97-12 shall be permitted to store pipe and other necessary materials for
the purpose of its business, in such a manner and to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent of Public Works of the Township of Rochelle Park as to
cause the minimum interference with the normal use of the road or street,
upon filing written notice with the Superintendent of Public Works as soon
as possible and not later than 24 hours after storing such material, setting
forth the amount of the material placed on the streets and the location
thereof.
§ 97-9. Width of opening.
No opening in the paved section of any road shall be less than three feet
wide, and such openings shall be made so that the width at the bottom shall
be less than the width at the surface of the pavement, unless in the opinion
of the Superintendent of Public Works a specific operation requires a wider
trench.
§ 97-10. Tunneling prohibited.
Tunneling under any road or street will not be permitted under any
circumstances and shall be unlawful exercise of the privilege under any
such permit and a violation thereof.
§ 97-11. Duties of Superintendent of Public Works.
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works of the Township
of Rochelle Park, or such other officer as the Township Committee may
designate, to ascertain whether permits have been issued covering each
operation and to supervise all excavations and backfilling as provided
herein.
§ 97-7 CONTRACTORS § 97-12
83:281
§ 97-12. When deposit not required.
The provisions of §§ 97-3 and 97-4 shall not apply to any public utility
company as defined by statute (N.J.S.A. 48:2-13) or any company now
having the right in the discharge of its duties to the public to make openings
and to store materials in the public streets, avenues or public places in
said township, provided that such company shall file with the Clerk of the
township a bond, which bond may be executed by the company solely in
the sum of $2,000 conditioned to save the township harmless from any
and all costs, loss, charge or damage which it may sustain or may incur
or be subjected to by reason of any such opening or storing of materials,
and further to restore and maintain for 18 months in the manner set forth
in § 97-3, in proper order and condition and to the satisfaction of said
township, any public street, avenue or public place wherein openings shall
be made by it, which bond shall be approved as to form by the Township
Attorney.
§ 97-13. Violations and penalties. 80 [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the terms or
conditions hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, forfeit and pay a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $500 or be imprisoned in the county jail for
not more than 90 days, or be subject to both a fine and imprisonment. Each
and every nonconformance with this chapter or each day that any provision
of this chapter shall have been violated shall be construed as a separate and
distinct violation thereof.
Chapter 100
FEES AND LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food establishments — See Chs. 107 and 194.
Massage businesses — See Ch. 128.
Tobacco vending machines — See Ch. 171,
Art. I.
80.Editor's Note: See also Ch. I, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 97-12 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 97-13
83:282
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 100-1. License required for retail food establishment.81
It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a
retail food establishment as defined in and governed by the Retail Food
Establishment Code of New Jersey without first having procured an annual
license from the local Board of Health so to do and without complying with
any or all of the provisions concerning operation and maintenance of the
same as contained in the aforementioned Retail Food Establishment Code
of New Jersey.
§ 100-2. Annual fees for licenses. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519; 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 582; 10-16-1996 by Ord. No. 737;
7-16-2003 by Ord. No. 888-03; 8-18-2010 by Ord. No. 1020-10;
11-10-2010 by Ord. No. 1026-10]
The annual fees for licensing of retail food establishments and other
businesses subject to regulation by the Board of Health are hereby fixed as
follows:
A. Restaurants, luncheonettes, etc.
Class Seating Capacity Annual Fee
Class I 1 to 50 $210
Class II 51 to 100 $270
Class III 101 to 200 $360
Class IV Over 200 $420
B. Miscellaneous businesses.
Business Annual Fee
Single food handling, retail $150
Single food handling, nonprocessing $110
Taverns, no food service $50
Delicatessens $250
Confectionery stores $125
Soda fountains, snack bars, stands, no seats $125
Milk license, per truck $100
Milk handler's permit, per store $50
Mobile food vendors $75
81.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 464 enacting this chapter was adopted by the Township Committee
as an amendment and supplement to the Sanitary Code of the Township of Rochelle Park,
which was adopted by the Board of Health on April 27, 1931. The Sanitary Code is
outdated in many respects and has not been included in this volume. However, it is on file
in the office of the Board of Health.
§ 100-1 CONTRACTORS § 100-2
83:283
§ 100-3. Issuance of initial license, expiration of license and
renewal of licenses; enforcement. [Amended 7-16-2003 by Ord. No.
888-03]
Business Annual Fee
Food processing, commercial or wholesale $500
Supermarkets $800
Cafeterias $150
Cards, gift and drug stores with packaged
candy
$100
Barbershops and beauty parlors or salons $125
Laundromats and cleaners
Laundries, fee for inspection of plan $100
Licensing fee for laundry and/or cleaners $200
Fruits and vegetables $150
Pet stores $250
All vending machines
First vending machine $100
Each additional machine $50
Catering kitchens $200
Bakeries $200
Ice machines $50
Refuse-rendering vehicle $100
Masseur, per operator $200
Nursery school or boarding-house $300
Maternity house $300
Nursing and/or convalescent home $350
Butchers $200
Tanning salons $200
Tattooing parlors or studios $750
Body-piercing parlors or studios $750
Combination tattooing parlor and bodypiercing
parlor
$1,000
C. Food-handling permits, temporary:
(1) Up to and including three days for carnivals, fairs, etc.: $75.
(2) More than three days and up to and including a maximum of 10
days for carnivals, fairs, etc.: $300.
§ 100-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 100-3
83:284
§ 100-4. Fees for Board of Health licenses and certificates.
[Amended 12-27-1989 by Ord. No. 582; 2-16-2005 by Ord. No.
920-05; 8-18-2010 by Ord. No. 1020-10]
The Board of Health fees shall be as follows:
§ 100-4.1. Public bathing places. [Added 12-27-1989 by Ord. No.
582; amended 8-18-2010 by Ord. No. 1020-10]
The following fees shall be established for public bathing places:
§ 100-5. Revocation or suspension of license; hearing.
A. Any business which is set forth herein and which must obtain a license
from the Board of Health and pay an annual fee shall obtain its initial
license within 10 days of the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy
from the Building Department. No business shall be permitted to
operate until such license is obtained from the Board of Health.
B. The annual fee shall be due and payable, in full, for the initial year of
operation regardless of the date on which the license is issued. The
annual fee shall not be prorated. Should the licensee or prospective
licensee fail to obtain the designated license enumerated, there shall be
a late fee for said license representing 25% per month of the annual fee.
Each month or any part thereof which expires before payment of said
fee shall be considered a separate period for the 25% late fee.
C. The provisions of this section may be enforced by the Board of Health or
the Office of the Township Administrator or the Office of the Township
Clerk. In the event that a summons is issued for violation of this section,
the enforcing authority shall immediately advise the Building
Department of the lack of compliance and the issuance of a summons.
The Building Department shall then take any and all action appropriate
pursuant to local or state law.
A. Marriage license fee: $28.
B. Copy of a marriage license: $10.
C. Death certificates, each: $10.
D. Birth certificates, each: $10.
E. Civil union license: $28.
F. Burial permit: $5.
A. Swimming pool and/or whirlpool (year-round operation): $500.
B. Swimming pool (seasonal): $250.
C. Outdoor bathing place (seasonal): $250.
§ 100-3 CONTRACTORS § 100-5
83:285
§ 100-6. Interpretation.
No provision of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 100-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not to exceed
$500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not to exceed 90
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter may
be suspended or revoked by the Board of Health of this municipality for
the violation by the licensee of any provision of this chapter or the
Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey or whenever it shall
appear that the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of the
person, firm or corporation to whom such license was issued is
conducted in a disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any law
of the United States, the State of New Jersey or any ordinance of this
municipality, or that the person or persons conducting the retail food
establishment is of an unfit character to conduct the same, or that the
purpose for which the license has been issued is being abused to the
detriment of the public, or that the license is being used for a purpose
foreign to that for which the license was issued.
B. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this chapter shall not
be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have
been had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior
to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief
statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or
suspending such license. Notice may be given either by personal
delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by depositing the same in
the United States Postal Service in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at the business address
appearing upon such license. At the hearing before the Board of Health,
the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may
thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by
the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the Board of
Health concludes that the charges have been sustained and
substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the
licensee.
C. If such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof nor
any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
another license to carry on the same business within the Township
unless the application for such license shall be approved by the Board
of Health.
§ 100-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 100-7
83:286
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter and each day the same is violated shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 100-7 CONTRACTORS § 100-7
83:287

ARTICLE II
Additional Licenses
[Added 1-20-1993 by Ord. No. 643]
§ 100-8. Licenses and fees for calendar year.
In addition to the above-stated licenses and fees required for the sale or
distribution of food, it shall be necessary for persons or parties, including
corporations, operating within the Township of Rochelle Park to obtain
licenses to carry out the following businesses or activities.
§ 100-9. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, company, partnership or
corporation to engage in, to carry on, pursue or conduct within the
territorial limits of the Township of Rochelle Park, any business, trade,
employment or occupation hereinafter specified without first obtaining a
license from the Township Clerk of the Township of Rochelle Park, and no
place, premises or vehicle shall be used or operated for any of the said
purposes hereinafter specified unless the license is first had and procured
in the manner prescribed herein.
§ 100-10. Application for license; issuance; disposition of fees;
reports.
All applications for a license shall be made in writing and filed with the
Township Clerk. Applications shall be in the form as prescribed by the
Township Clerk and state the nature of the license desired and such facts as
the Township Clerk shall require. The Township Clerk shall keep a record
of all licenses issued. The Township Clerk shall remit all moneys received
for the license fees, as hereinafter provided, to the Township Treasurer on
or before the first day of each month and shall make a written report to the
Township Committee as to the number and types of said licenses.
§ 100-11. Display of license.
All licenses herein issued shall be displayed either in or on the premises
affected or the vehicle used and operated. Said license shall be produced
and exhibited at any time upon the request of a police officer or any other
person.
§ 100-12. License fees.
The following enumerated businesses or occupations are required to be
licensed. It is understood that this particular article deals solely with the
enumerated sections herein and shall not be considered contradictory or in
conflict to any other ordinance requiring licenses or fees.
A. Auctioneers: $75.
§ 100-8 CONTRACTORS § 100-12
83:289

ARTICLE III
Emergency Medical Services
[Added 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1017-10]
§ 100-13. Schedule of fees for emergency medical services.
There are hereby established the following fees for emergency medical
services:
A. Residents, fee per response and transport: an amount equal to the
reimbursable cost from health insurance, automobile insurance,
Medicare, Medicaid, or other insurance program not to exceed $575,
less the cost of any deductible and co-pay.
B. Nonresidents, fee per response and transport: $575.
C. Mileage fee: In addition to the foregoing fees, there shall be a mileage
fee charged from the point of pickup to the hospital or other point of
discharge. This fee shall be in an amount of up to $10 per mile with the
exact amount to be determined by the Township’s emergency medical
service (EMS).
§ 100-13 CONTRACTORS § 100-13
83:291
Chapter 101
FILMING AND VIDEOTAPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
— Police DepartmentSee Ch. 28.
— NoiseSee Ch. 135.
— Peace and good orderSee Ch. 143.
— Streets and sidewalksSee Ch. 161.
§ 101-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film or
videotape or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational
purposes intended for viewing on television, in theaters or for institutional
uses. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to include the
filming of news stories within the Township of Rochelle Park. This chapter
shall provide regulations for filming on private property and/or public lands.
§ 101-2. Permits.
A. No person shall film or permit filming within the township without first
obtaining a permit therefor, which permit shall set forth the location of
such filming and the date or dates when filming shall take place.
B. Permits shall be obtained in the office of the Township Clerk during
normal business hours. Applications for such permits shall be in the
form approved by the Township Clerk and shall be accompanied by a
permit fee in the amount established by the township.
C. One permit shall be required for each location.
D. One permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor filming on one day
and indoor filming on one day, provided that such date on which filming
is to take place shall be specified in the permit, and further provided
that the maximum number of days on which filming may be authorized
in any calendar year for premises located in a residential zone shall not
exceed two without a waiver.
E. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not, in fact, take place on the dates specified, the Township
Clerk may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit for
filming on other dates, subject to full compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this
permit.
§ 100-13 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 101-2
83:292
§ 101-3. Application for permit.
Applications shall be obtained from and submitted to the Township Clerk in
person or by mail and must contain at least the following information:
§ 101-4. Rules and regulations.
F. No permit shall be issued for filming within the township on or in any
private property unless written consent of the property owner and/or
tenant accompanies the application.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. The location of the property where filming, etc., is to take place.
C. Whether the applicant is the owner or tenant in possession of the
property.
D. The name and address of the owner of the property if the applicant is
not the owner.
E. The consent of the owner if other than the applicant.
F. The name, address and telephone number of the person or entity the
applicant wishes to allow to film, etc.
G. The date filming is to take place and the hours of filming.
H. The dates within the previous 12 months that any filming, as described
in §101-1 above, was conducted at this location.
I. Approval from the Police Chief, with any conditions he may set forth if
the filming is to take place on public lands.
J. Any other approval the Township Clerk deems necessary, with any
conditions which may be set forth.
K. A signed statement that the applicant affirms, under penalty of perjury,
that all statements contained in the application are true.
A. No permit shall be issued for filming at a particular location in a
residential zone within the township which would permit filming at said
location on more than two days during any one calendar year unless a
waiver is granted by the township.
B. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands within the
township unless the applicant for such permit:
(1) Provides proof of insurance coverage for bodily injury for any
person in the amount of $500,000 and for any aggregate
occurrence in the amount of $1,000,000;
§ 101-2 CONTRACTORS § 101-4
83:293
(2) Agrees, in writing, to indemnify and save harmless the township
from any and all liability or damages resulting from the use of such
public lands.
C. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Township
Police Chief with respect thereto.
D. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and shall limit, to the extent
possible, any interference with normal public activity on such public
lands.
E. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location upon the completion of filming or the expiration of
the permit, whichever comes first.
F. Filming shall be permitted only Monday through Friday, between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., or sundown, whichever is earlier, in
residential zones.
G. The Township Clerk may refuse to issue a permit whenever he
determines, on the basis of objective facts and a review of the
application and a report thereon by the Township Police Chief and by
other township agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that
filming at the location and/or time set forth in the application would
violate any law or ordinance or would unreasonably interfere with the
public's use of public lands, unreasonably interfere with the use and
enjoyment of adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the free flow
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's
health, safety or welfare.
H. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Township Clerk denying or
revoking a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to Subsection I
may appeal to the Township Administrator. A written notice of appeal
setting forth the reasons for the appeal shall be filed with the Township
Administrator. An appeal from the decision of the Township Clerk shall
be filed within 10 days of the Township Clerk's decision. The Township
Administrator shall set the matter down for a hearing within 30 days of
the day on which the notice of appeal was filed. The decision of the
Township Administrator shall be in the form of a written decision.
I. The Township Administrator may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements or limitations of this chapter and may authorize filming
other than during the hours herein described or may extend the
§ 101-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 101-4
83:294
§ 101-5. Fees. [Amended 12-16-2015 by Ord. No. 1093-15]
Fees shall be as follows:
Chapter 102
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 80.
§ 102-1. Legislative determinations.
duration of a permit beyond two days, or may permit filming at a
particular location on more than two days during any one calendar
year or may waive any other limitation or requirement of this chapter
whenever he determines that strict compliance with such limitations
will pose an unreasonable burden upon the applicant and that such a
permit may be issued without endangering the public's health, safety
and welfare.
J. The applicant shall notify the Fire Chief 24 hours before filming takes
place and shall permit the Fire Chief or his designee to inspect the site
and the equipment to be used. The applicant shall comply with all
firesafety instructions issued by the Fire Chief or his designee.
K. The holder of a permit issued for filming on public lands shall hire, at
said person's sole cost and expense, a township police officer who will
be present at all times at the site during the filming.
L. Automobiles, trucks and all other vehicles owned, leased or used by the
holder of a permit for either residential or public land filming shall not
be parked on more than one side of the street.
A. A filming permit: $200 per day with a minimum fee of $1,000.
B. A filming permit for filming on public land: $750 per day.
C. A filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for educational
purposes (including public land) $100 per day for each day of filming
(no minimum fee).
A. The Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.) was enacted
for the purpose of establishing a system for the enforcement of
minimum fire safety standards throughout the State of New Jersey.
B. The Uniform Fire Safety Act ("the Act") authorized municipalities to
provide for local enforcement and to establish Local Enforcement
Agencies (LEAs) to accomplish that purpose.
§ 101-4 CONTRACTORS § 102-1
83:295
§ 102-2. Agency designation.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Code Enforcement.
§ 102-3. Duties.
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act,82
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures,
premises and places within the established boundaries of Rochelle Park,
other than owner occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 102-4. Life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 102-2 of this chapter shall carry
out the periodic inspection of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 102-5. Organization.
The Bureau of Fire Code Enforcement established pursuant to § 102-2 shall
be a part of the Rochelle Park Fire Department and be under the direct
supervision and control of the Bureau Chief who shall report to Township
Administrator.
§ 102-6. Appointments; terms of office; removal; identification.
C. The Township Committee hereby determines it is in the best interest of
the Township to have the Uniform Fire Safety Act enforced locally.
A. Appointment of the Bureau Chief. The Bureau Chief shall be appointed
by the Township Committee of Township of Rochelle Park. The Bureau
Chief shall be certified by the State of New Jersey as a Fire Official.
B. Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and other employees as may
be necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the
Township Committee of Rochelle Park, from a recommendation
provided in writing by the Fire Official to the Bureau Chief and
Township Committee. A Supervisor shall also be certified by the State of
New Jersey.
C. Terms of office. The terms of office for the Bureau Chief and inspectors
shall be for a period of three years, effective January 1 to December 31
annually. Any vacancy of the Bureau Chief shall be filled for the
unexpired term. Terms of office for supervisors and inspectors shall be
for a period of one year, effective January 1 to December 31 annually.
D. Removal from office. The inspectors and other employees of the
enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by the Bureau Chief for
82.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
§ 102-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 102-6
83:296
§ 102-7. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Bergen County.
§ 102-8. Permits.
The application fee for a permit shall be as follows; the permit types shall
be known as defined in the Uniform Fire Code.
Type Fee
Type 1 $70
Type 2 $175
Type 3 $350
Type 4 $497
§ 102-9. Additional required inspections and fees.
inefficiency or misconduct. The inspector or employee to be removed
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority
or by a designated hearing officer. The Bureau Chief may be removed,
with or without cause, by the Township Committee.
E. Identification. All inspectors will be provided with proper identification,
which he or she will be required to wear on all assigned inspections
within the Township of Rochelle Park. Property identification shall
consist of a department-issued badge and Township-issued photo ID.
A. Inspection and fees. In addition to the inspections and fees required
pursuant to the Act and the regulations of the Department of
Community Affairs, the following additional annual inspections and fees
shall be required. To provide a fire inspection service for all places
described herein located within the Township of Rochelle Park, not
classified as life hazard use the following inspection fees are required
(all calculations of gross area shall be rounded to the nearest square
foot).
Type Fee
RP-1. Any person, firm, corporation, building owner,
business owner, occupant, tenant, vendor or any
other business use up to 1,499 square feet in gross
area.
$70
RP-2. Any person, firm, corporation, building owner,
business owner, occupant, tenant, vendor or any
other business use up to 3,499 square feet in gross
area.
$100
§ 102-6 CONTRACTORS § 102-9
83:297
Type Fee
RP-3. Any person, firm, corporation, building owner,
business owner, occupant, tenant, vendor or any
other business use up to 6,999 square feet in gross
area.
$120
RP-4. Any person, firm, corporation, building owner,
business owner, occupant, tenant, vendor or any
other business use up to 9,999 square feet in gross
area.
$140
RP-5. Any person, firm, corporation, building owner,
business owner, occupant, tenant, vendor or any
other business use up to 11,999 square feet in gross
area.
$160
RP-6. Any person, firm, corporation, building owner,
business owner, occupant, tenant, vendor or any
other business use up to 14,999 square feet in gross
area.
$180
RP-7. Any person, firm, corporation, building owner,
business owner, occupant, tenant, vendor or any
other business use up to 17,999 square feet in gross
area.
$200
RP-8. Any person, firm, corporation, building owner,
business owner, occupant, tenant, vendor or any
other business use 18,000 square feet and above in
gross area.
$300
B. Occupied residential homes, apartment buildings and condo complex
structures. [Amended 3-28-2018 by Ord. No. 1124-18]
Type Fee
RP-9. Up to 2 units $70 per year
RP-10. 3 to 5 units $100 per year
RP-11. 6 to 10 units $120 per year
RP-12. 11 to 20 units $175 per year
RP-13. Any nonowner occupied home
and garden apartment comprised of 21
to 39 units
$200 per year
RP-14. 40 or more units $300 per year
C. Certificate of smoke detector, carbon monoxide alarm and fire
extinguisher compliance certification. Before any residential structure,
unit, apartment, condo or townhouse is sold, leased or otherwise made
subject to a change of occupancy for residential purpose, the owner
shall obtain certificate of compliance from the Bureau of Fire Code
Enforcement. An application shall be completed and the property fee
paid prior to the scheduling of an inspection. Failure to obtain a smoke
§ 102-9 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 102-9
83:298
§ 102-10. Enforcement of fire lanes.
Section F-311.0 of the BOCA Basic/National Fire Prevention Code, 1984,
shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Code Enforcement and the Police
Department of the Township of Rochelle Park and the complaints for the
violation may be filed by any inspector of the Fire Prevention Bureau or the
Police Department or the owner or occupant of the premises by which the
fire lane in question is located or any other person.
detector, carbon monoxide alarm and fire extinguisher compliance
certification will be punishable by a penalty of not less than $200 and
not more than $1,000. Additionally, occupants found to be residing in a
residential dwelling without a certificate of compliance may be forced
to vacate such dwelling until such time a certificate is issued.
(1) Garden apartments.
Applications received prior to five
calendar days before change of
occupancy
$50
Applications received with four days
or less notice
$125
(2) All other residential occupancies.
Applications received prior to five
calendar days before change of
occupancy
$75
Applications received with four days
or less notice
$125
D. All municipal, Board of Education, religious buildings, structures and
premises shall be exempt from inspection fees. This does not exempt
the above-named from filing any required inspection forms or exempt
any of the above-named from fire safety inspections and the obligation
to comply with by law all fire code violations by this Bureau.
E. Cyclical inspection fees (once every five years, or as required by fire
code or housing code). Inspections performed on a cyclical basis shall
follow the fee schedule provided below.
Type Fee
RP-9. Up to 2 units $140
RP-10. 3 to 5 units $200
RP-11. 6 to 10 units $240
RP-12. 11 to 20 units $350
RP-13. 21 to 39 units $400
RP-14. 40 or more units $600
§ 102-9 CONTRACTORS § 102-11
83:299
§ 102-11. Violations and penalties.83
Penalties of Section F-322-0 Fire Lanes, of the BOCA Basic National Fire
Prevention Code, 1984, shall not be less than a fine of $110 plus court
cots for a first offense and $110 for each and every subsequent violation.
Any person, firm or corporation failing to respond to a locally required
registration form shall, for each offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine
not less than $200 and not more than $1,000 or be imprisoned for a term
not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the judge before whom
such conviction shall be obtained.
§ 102-12. Fire watches.
A. Systems out of service. Where a required fire protection system is out of
service, the Fire Department and the Fire Code Official shall be notified
immediately, and if there the Fire Code Office and Chief of the Fire
Department determine that an imminent hazard exists, the building
shall be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all
occupants left unprotected by the shutdown until the fire protection
system has been returned to service. In addition, agreement to provide
a fire watch may be entered into between a representative of the
property owner and the fire chief or fire code official in those
circumstances where such fire watch is desired.
B. Fire services. Members of the Fire Department may be available for
service as fire watch personnel only at such time as will not interfere
with the efficient performance of emergency duty for the Township,
with the approval of the Fire Chief and Fire Official. The application for
such services shall be made known to the Fire Chief and the Chief
Financial Officer, either in writing or verbally. The application for fire
watch by the reasonable building representative, as required by the
Fire Official, shall set forth pertinent information concerning the
location of the fire watch, the number of service personnel, and
estimate the duration of such services. The application for such services
probability that such outside employment will interfere with a members
performance or compromise a member's position with the Township
through a conflict of interest or if there is any reasonable probability
that the particular service requested would reflect unfavorably upon
the firefighter or the Fire Department.
C. Payment.
(1) Upon receipt of an application for such services and approval of
same by the Fire Chief, Chief Financial Officer and Fire Official, the
building representative shall execute an agreement to perform fire
watch coverage in the form provided by the Fire Official, which
shall provide, inter alia, for the building representative to pay to
the Treasurer of the Township a certain amount in cash, check or
money order as is set forth herein or as may be fixed from time to
83.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 102-11 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 102-12
83:300
§ 102-13. Fire reports.
Fire report fees, per copy are as follows:
Type
Fee
(per copy)
Copy(s) of fire investigation reports $25
Photos provided on CD $25
Copy(s) of NFIRS reports (National Fire
Incident Report)
$10
All other document(s) (per copy) $1.50
§ 102-14. Lock box system.
time by resolution of the Township Committee as compensation for
such services.
(2) The rate of compensation to the Township shall be determined
based upon the fixed amount of pay, with an additional 20%
surcharges of the total amount billed to cover administration,
insurance, equipment and other related costs: ($35 + 20% = $42
per hour payment for such services per firefighter). The total
amount of the cost to perform fire watch duty shall be paid to the
Township within 15 days after such duty has been performed.
D. Collection of fees.
(1) The Bureau Chief or his designee shall be responsible for the
collection of the aforesaid fees and shall maintain an accurate
accounting thereof and shall turn these funds over to the Township
Treasurer as prescribed by state requirements.
(2) The Township Treasurer then shall present a monthly accounting
report to the Township Committee.
A. In all structures served by an internal automatic fire detection or
suppression system, where access to the structure or within the
structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings, or
where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or for firefighting
purposes, the Bureau Chief may require a key box to be installed in an
accessible location to the fire department. The key box shall be a type
approved by the Bureau Chief, so that all key access to this type within
the township of Rochelle Park may be accomplished with one system.
The key box shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by
the Fire Department.
B. Installation. Installation of the key box shall be in accordance with
specifications maintained and approved by the Bureau Chief as
required. The Bureau Chief shall have the authority to implement a
uniform system throughout the Township, so that access to the
§ 102-12 CONTRACTORS § 102-14
83:301
Chapter 104
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land Use and Development
Regulations — See Ch. 185.
Stormwater Management — See Ch. 160.
§ 104-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations
designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle
Park of Bergen County, New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 104-2. Findings of fact.
§ 104-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
designated key boxes may be accomplished by the utilization of one
uniform key system.
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Rochelle Park are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and government services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health.
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
§ 102-14 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 104-3
83:302
§ 104-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 104-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are between one
and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from detailed hydraulic
analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average depths are
between one and three feet.
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges,
located in areas of special flood hazard.
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood-blight areas.
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard.
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
land uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters.
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging or other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 104-3 CONTRACTORS § 104-5
83:303
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or as a request of a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a 1% or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within the
Township subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of
pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the
water; and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity
of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an
area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
§ 104-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 104-5
83:304
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state and local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without accumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
A.
§ 104-5 CONTRACTORS § 104-5
83:305
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR Section 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain regulations adopted
by the community and included any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district.
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior.
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
A. Built on a single chassis;
§ 104-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 104-5
83:306
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act, P.L.
No. 97-348,84 includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvements was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings,
the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways,
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not however, include either:
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
84.Editor's Note: See 16 U.S.C. § 3501 et seq.
§ 104-5 CONTRACTORS § 104-5
83:307
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)5, (c)4, (c)10,
(e)2, (e)4, or (e)5 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 104-6. Lands to which chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Rochelle Park, in the County of Bergen, State
of New Jersey.
§ 104-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 104-8. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions, shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for
each violation and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Rochelle
Park from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Rochelle Park,
Community No. 340070 are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Bergen
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated August 28, 2019.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and panels 34003C0187H and
34003C0189H, whose effective date is August 28, 2019.
B. The above-referenced documents are hereby adopted and declared to
be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on
file at 151 West Passaic Street, Rochelle Park, New Jersey.
§ 104-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 104-9
83:308
§ 104-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 104-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 104-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Township of Rochelle Park, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 104-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured home, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 104-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Official and
may include but not be limited to plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing
the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials and drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including
basement, of all structures.
B. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria contained in § 104-17B.
§ 104-9 CONTRACTORS § 104-12
83:309
§ 104-13. Designation of the local administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 104-14. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include but not be limited to:
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 104-18A are met.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 104-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source in order to administer § 104-17A, Specific standards, residential
construction and § 104-17B, Specific standards, nonresidential
construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea
level; and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 104-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
§ 104-12 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 104-14
83:310
§ 104-15. Variance procedure.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control and the Land
Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 104-17A, Specific standards, residential construction, § 104-17B,
Specific standards, nonresidential construction, and § 104-17C,
Specific standards, manufactured homes.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 104-15.
A. Appeal board.
(1) The Township Committee as established by the Township of
Rochelle Park shall hear and decide requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Township Committee shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Township Committee, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of the
State of New Jersey, as provided in state law.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Township Committee shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
§ 104-14 CONTRACTORS § 104-15
83:311
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water
systems, streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Township Committee may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that
items in § 104-15A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As
§ 104-15 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 104-15
83:312
§ 104-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud or
victimization of the public as identified in § 104-15A(4) or
conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvement shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
§ 104-15 CONTRACTORS § 104-16
83:313
addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements, the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new developments which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less.
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
§ 104-16 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 104-16
83:314
§ 104-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 104-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 104-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities (including
all electrical, heating, ventilating, air conditioning and other
service equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the
more restrictive base flood elevation plus one foot or as required by
ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1;
(2) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's DFIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet, if no
depth number is specified), and, require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities as well as all electrical,
heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service equipment:
(1) Elevated to or above the more restrictive base flood elevation plus
one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1; and
(2) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's DFIRM to
elevate above the depth number specified in feet plus one foot,
above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet, if no depth
§ 104-16 CONTRACTORS § 104-17
83:315
§ 104-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 104-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous
area due to the velocity of the floodwaters which carry debris, potential
projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
number is specified), and, require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures; or
(3) Be floodproofed so that below the more restrictive base flood
elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1
the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water;
(4) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(5) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 104-14C(2).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 104-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be construed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage;
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the more restrictive base flood
elevation plus one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14,
Table 2-1; and
(e) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement.
§ 104-17 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 104-18
83:316
§ 104-19. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
Chapter 107
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tobacco vending machines — See Ch. 171,
Art. I.
Fees and licenses for food
establishments — See Ch. 100.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 194.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development, unless a technical evaluation
demonstrated that encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvement shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of §§ 104-16 and 104-17.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 104-18 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 104-19
107:317

ARTICLE I
Food Vending Machines
[Adopted 9-6-1955 by Ord. No. 208]
§ 107-1. Title.
This article shall be known as and referred to as the "Vending Machine
Ordinance."
§ 107-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, partnership, firm or corporation
to install coin-operated vending machines or to engage in the business
of selling or dispensing food, milk, beverages or refreshments from a
mechanical vending device located in stores, restaurants, roadstands,
refreshment stands, factories, schools, offices, theaters, clubs, lodges or
buildings of public assembly unless the sale or dispensing of said food,
milk or beverages from a mechanical device shall be licensed as hereinafter
provided.
§ 107-3. Locations restricted.
It shall be unlawful to erect, operate or maintain within the Township of
Rochelle Park any mechanical vending device for the sale of milk, food or
beverages in any location other than those set forth in § 107-2 hereof.
§ 107-4. Application for license; issuance.
Licenses to erect, operate, maintain or install coin-operated vending
machines or to engage in the business of selling or dispensing food, milk,
beverages or refreshments from a mechanical vending device in places
referred to in § 107-2 above may be granted by the Board of Health of the
Township of Rochelle Park upon application in writing. Application forms for
such licenses shall set forth the name and address of the applicant, name
and address of the operator, the owner of the property where such machine
shall be located, a list of the products to be vended and the type or types of
vending machines to be used.
§ 107-5. Identification of machines.
All machines shall be identified by the licensee with the name and address
of the licensee and the number of the license issued to said licensee.
§ 107-6. Annual license fee. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
The license fee to engage in the business of dispensing or selling food or
milk from a mechanical vending device shall be $50 per annum, payable
on the first day of October of each year, for each machine vending any
of the following: bulk soft drinks, bulk food products, milk, soup, coffee,
tea, hot cocoa or chocolate, fruit juices, cake, pastry, pie, popcorn, candy,
sandwiches, sherbet, flavored ice, ice cream or other similar foodstuffs.85
§ 107-1 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 107-7
107:319
§ 107-7. Machines not covered.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to apply to coinoperated
vending machines selling or dispensing gum, cigarettes or other
tobacco products.
§ 107-8. Sanitary maintenance of machines.
Vending machines dispensing food products, milk or beverages shall be
maintained in a sanitary manner at all times. Where bulk food products,
milk or bulk beverages are vended, the applicant shall have adequate
cleaning and sanitizing facilities.
§ 107-9. Required temperatures of certain foods.
All perishable foods or drink requiring high or low temperatures dispensed
through coin-operated vending machines shall be kept at or below 50º F. or
above 150º F., as the case may be.
§ 107-10. Design and construction of machines.
Vending machines shall be so constructed and designed that the contents
are protected from dust, contamination or foreign substances.
§ 107-11. Machines containing contaminated foods.
If, upon inspection by the Board of Health, it shall find or has probable cause
to believe that any food, beverage or refreshment sold or dispensed from a
mechanical vending device is not free from dust, contamination or foreign
substances, the inspector shall affix to said vending machine or device a
tag or other appropriate marking, giving notice that such vending machine
or device is suspected of being in violation of this article and carrying a
warning to all persons not to remove or dispose of said articles in said
vending machine or device by sale or otherwise until permission for removal
or disposal is given by the Board of Health.
§ 107-12. Purpose of fees.
This article is for the purpose of regulation and shall in no way affect any
other fees as now provided for in any other ordinance in the Township of
Rochelle Park but shall be in addition thereto.86
85.Editor's Note: See § 107-12 indicating that the fee imposed in this article is in addition to
other fees. Note that fees for food vending machines are also contained in § 100-2B of Ch.
100, Fees and Licenses.
86.Editor's Note: Additional fees for food vending machines are included in § 100-2B of Ch.
100, Fees and Licenses.
§ 107-7 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 107-13
107:320
§ 107-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
Any person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $500 or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense as to each machine
and shall be punishable as such.
§ 107-13 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 107-13
107:321

ARTICLE II
Food Service and Sanitation Course
[Adopted 7-7-1969 as Ord. No. 301]
§ 107-14. Requirements for obtaining food establishment license.
Commencing January 1, 1970, and thereafter, annually, no retail food
establishment licenses shall be issued unless the following regulations are
complied with:
A. The owner and/or manager of a retail food establishment and/or his
designated representative applying for a retail food establishment
license must register for and successfully complete a general course of
instruction in sanitation, personal hygiene, food poisoning, dishwashing
procedures, germs, insects and rodents and other related health
matters. This course, known as the "food service and sanitation course,"
consists of a minimum of one three-hour session under the direction of
the Rochelle Park Board of Health. The designated representative
referred to above must be certified to be a supervisor of employees of
the food establishment. [Amended 10-20-1993 by Ord. No. 666]
B. If unable to attend this township's food service and sanitation course,
the person or persons referred to in Subsection A may attend other
municipalities' comparable food service and sanitation courses.
Permission for such attendance shall be granted upon written request
to the Rochelle Park Board of Health. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord.
No. 519]
C. A period of time for compliance with this article may be allowed by the
Rochelle Park Board of Health for newly established owners who apply
for a retail food license after January 1 of each year.
§ 107-14 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 107-14
107:323

ARTICLE III
Licensing of Retail Food Establishments
[Adopted 7-7-1969 as Ord. No. 302]
§ 107-15. License from Board of Health required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a
retail food establishment as defined in and governed by the Retail Food
Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965), established by ordinance of
the local Board of Health dated October 19, 1967,87 without first having
procured a license from the local Board of Health so to do or without
complying with any or all of the provisions concerning operation and
maintenance of the same as contained in the aforementioned Retail Food
Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965).
§ 107-16. Suspension or revocation of license.
Any license issued may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Health
of this municipality for the violation by the licensee of any provision of the
Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965) or whenever it shall
appear that the business, trade, calling, profession or occupation of the
person, firm or corporation to whom such license was issued is conducted
in a disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any law of the United
States, the State of New Jersey or any ordinance of this municipality, or that
the person or persons conducting the retail food establishment is of an unfit
character to conduct the same, or that the purpose for which the license
has been issued is being abused to the detriment of the public, or that the
license is being used for a purpose foreign to that for which the license was
issued.
§ 107-17. Hearing for suspension or revocation of license.
A license issued under the terms and provisions of this article shall not be
revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have been
had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior to the
date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement
of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling or suspending
such license. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to
the person to be notified or by depositing the same in the United States
Postal Service in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such
person to be notified at the business address appearing upon said license.
At the hearing before the Board of Health, the person aggrieved shall
have an opportunity to answer and may thereafter be heard, and upon due
consideration and deliberation by the Board of Health, the complaint may
be dismissed, or if the governing body concludes that the charges have been
sustained and substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license
held by the licensee.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 194, Food Establishments, Retail.
§ 107-15 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 107-18
107:325
§ 107-18. Reapplication for license.
If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
another license to carry on the same business within the township unless
the application for such license shall be approved by the Board of Health.
§ 107-19. Interpretation.
No provision of this article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 107-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $500 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of
not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each
violation of any of the provisions of this article and each day the same is
violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 107-18 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 107-20
107:326
Chapter 110
GARAGE SALES
§ 110-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALES — Includes every general sale that:
TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY — Property previously purchased,
owned, utilized or otherwise in the lawful possession of a resident occupant
of the residence at which the garage sale occurs. It does not include goods,
merchandise or property purchased for resale or obtained on consignment,
or any exemptions set forth under the following sections.
§ 110-2. Property permitted to be sold.
No person shall sell or offer for sale from or on premises in any residential
district any tangible property other than pursuant to a permit lawfully
procured under this chapter.
§ 110-3. Permit required.
No person shall conduct or participate in the conduct of a garage sale
unless a permit for such sale shall have lawfully issued pursuant hereto.
§ 110-4. Permit application.
Application for a garage sale permit shall be made on forms prescribed by
the Building Department and shall be filed with the Township Clerk not less
than three days prior to the date of the proposed garage sale. No fee shall
be charged for the issuance of the permit.
§ 110-5. Information required.
The application shall include the following information:
Is conducted from or on premises in any residential district as defined
and delineated in Chapter 185.
A.
B. Is open to the public.
C. Is conducted for the purpose of selling tangible personal property.
Is a sale commonly referred to as a "garage," "attic," "basement,"
"porch," "lawn," "barn," "yard," "flea market," "rummage," or similar
sale.
D.
A. The full name and address of the applicant.
§ 107-20 GARAGE SALES § 110-5
110:327
§ 110-6. Permit conditions.
No permit shall be issued:
§ 110-7. Display of permit.
The person to whom the permit is issued shall cause the permit to be posted
at a place on the premises so as to be visible from the street and to be
maintained at such place throughout the entire period of the sale.
§ 110-8. Advertising signs.
Garage sale signs shall comply with the provisions set forth in
§ 185-132C(12).
§ 110-9. Hours of sale.
No person shall conduct or participate in the conduct of a garage sale other
than between the hour of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
B. The name and address of the premises on which the proposed garage
sale is to be conducted.
C. The full name and address of the owner or lessee of the premises.
D. The date or dates upon which the sale is to be held.
E. The date or dates upon which all previous garage sales on the premises
were held within the preceding twelve-month period.
F. An affirmative certification that the applicant has read and understands
the provisions of this chapter and that all statements made and
information given by the applicant are true.
G. The signature of the applicant.
H. The signature of the owner of the premises.
A. For a garage sale that will be of more than two consecutive days'
duration; or
B. For a garage sale on premises on which a garage sale has been held
twice during a twelve-month period of the proposed garage sale;
provided, however, that if a garage sale is not held on the dates for
which the permit is issued or is terminated during the first day of the
sale because of inclement weather conditions and an affidavit to this
effect is submitted by the permit holder, the Building Department may
issue another permit to the applicant for a garage sale to be conducted
at the same location within 30 days from the date when the first sale
was to be held.
§ 110-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 110-10
110:328
§ 110-10. Parking.
All parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable
laws and ordinances. Further, the Police Department may enforce
temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards and/or congestion
created by any garage sale.
§ 110-11. Orderly conduct.
The person to whom such permit is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale is conducted shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the
premises during all hours of such sale. Such persons shall not permit any
loud or boisterous conduct on said premises. All such persons shall obey the
reasonable orders of any member of the Police or Fire Department of the
Township of Rochelle Park in order to maintain the public health, safety and
welfare. The premises shall at all times be subject to such reasonable rules
as may be made from time to time by the Township Committee and shall
be subject to inspection at all times by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the
Police Department and the Fire Department or any agents or any other duly
authorized representatives of the Township.
§ 110-12. Persons and sales exempt.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply or to affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 110-13. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer, Police Department or
the Fire Department of the Township.
§ 110-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person or group of persons who shall violate any tern or provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to imprisonment in
the county jail or in any place provided by the Township of Rochelle Park
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Persons selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement, and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Sales conducted by mercantile or other business establishment from or
at a place of business wherein such sales would be permitted by
Chapter 185, Land Use and Development Regulations, by virtue of a
variance or by virtue of its status as a nonconforming use.
§ 110-10 GARAGE SALES § 110-14
110:329
for the detention of prisoners for a term not to exceed 90 days or to a fine
not to exceed $500, or both. Any person so convicted may, in the discretion
of the Judge by whom he was convicted, in default of the payment of any
fine, be imprisoned in the county jail or place of detention provided by the
Township of Rochelle Park for any term not exceeding 90 days. Each day
that a violation of a term or provision of this chapter shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 112
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 70.
Littering — See Ch. 127.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 150.
§ 110-14 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 110-14
110:330
ARTICLE I
Licensing of Collectors
[Adopted 1-17-1925 by Ord. No. 22]
§ 112-1. Expense of collection. [Amended 12-3-1990 by Ord. No.
606]
Collection, removal and disposal of ashes, garbage and other refuse from
residential dwellings, municipal buildings and public schools within the
limits of the Township of Rochelle Park shall be done at the general expense
of the township. The owners/occupants of all other buildings and structures
used for commercial and industrial purposes and all other nonresidential
purposes within the Township of Rochelle Park shall arrange or contract for
private sanitation services at their own cost and expense.
§ 112-2. Collection practices; vehicles.
The said collection, removal and disposal of ashes, garbage and other refuse
shall be performed in accordance with the specifications that the Township
Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park may from time to time adopt,
but said collection, removal and disposal of ashes, garbage and other refuse
shall in every case be performed in a sanitary and inoffensive manner and
in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health of the
Township of Rochelle Park and the Department of Health of the State of
New Jersey. Garbage must in every case be removed in wagons, carts or
automobiles that have watertight compartments for said garbage, and both
garbage and ash wagons, carts or automobiles shall always be covered by
heavy canvas coverings except when ashes and garbage are being placed in
such wagons, carts or automobiles.
§ 112-3. Frequency of collections. [Amended 12-3-1990 by Ord. No.
606; 8-15-2007 by Ord. No. 972-07]
Municipal collection of ashes, garbage and other refuse within the limits of
the Township of Rochelle Park shall be provided twice each week during
the months of May, June, July, August and September. Collection shall be
provided once per week during the months of January, February, March,
April, October, November and December. The schedule for collection shall
be promulgated by the Township Committee.
§ 112-4. Award of collection contracts. [Amended 8-15-2007 by Ord.
No. 972-07]
A. The Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park shall award
the contracts for the collection, removal and disposal of said ashes,
garbage and other refuse to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders
for said work, who shall give satisfactory bonds or security for the
faithful performance of said work. Such contract shall be entered into in
accordance with the requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law.88
§ 112-1 GARAGE SALES § 112-4
110:331
B. The Township of Rochelle Park may enter into a contract without
competitive bidding provided that same is in accordance with the Local
Public Contracts Law which may include an interlocal agreement with
another municipality.
88.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 112-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 112-4
110:332
ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 11-18-1974 by Ord. No. 363; amended in its entirety
12-3-1990 by Ord. No. 606]
§ 112-5. Hours of collection.
No collection of garbage, ashes, refuse, leaves or other waste matter shall
be performed or take place and no vehicles used in the collection of said
material shall be operated on the streets of the Township of Rochelle Park
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 112-6. Storage of waste; collection.
A. All garbage and ashes shall be drained free of water and stored in
watertight covered cans or like containers made of either galvanized
steel or such other materials which will not rust easily, equipped with
proper facilities for handling and which can be readily cleaned.
B. Except for containers designed for pickup and disposal by private
scavengers, no can or container shall exceed more than 50 pounds
when full.
C. Except for containers or bundles designed for pickup and disposal by
private scavengers, no bundle or container of rubbish, trash, hedge and
tree trimmings and similar materials shall weigh more than 50 pounds.
Such rubbish, trash and other debris shall be stored in a container, free
from handling hazards of such quality as to prevent collapsing and
littering of the streets and sidewalks or shall be securely tied in bundles
not exceeding four feet in length.
D. No person shall litter, sweep, shake, throw, cast or lay or direct, suffer
or permit any duly authorized agent under his or her control to litter,
sweep, shake, throw, cast or lay or direct any ashes, garbage, paper,
rust, rubbish or other refuse onto any public or private street, sidewalk,
lot, place, airshaft, driveway, yard, court, catch basin or drain.
E. No household, commercial or industrial rubbish or garbage shall be
placed in litter baskets provided by the township for the use of passing
pedestrians.
F. The municipal collection of garbage, ashes and other refuse shall be
made at the curb between the sidewalk area and the curb in front of
each residential building.
G. With respect to premises receiving municipal collection, no property
owner or occupant shall place more than four containers or bundles or
more than two pieces of furniture at the curb for any one collection.
Amounts in excess of the aforesaid limitation shall require the services
of a private hauling or disposal company for removal. [Amended
12-18-2013 by Ord. No. 1064-13]
§ 112-5 GARAGE SALES § 112-6
110:333
§ 112-7. Exclusions.
§ 112-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-21-2016 by Ord. No.
1104-16]
Any violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as follows:
H. Containers or bundles shall not be placed at the curb for collection
prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding collection nor shall any
containers or bundles be left at the curb beyond 8:00 p.m. of the day of
collection.
I. Collection of ashes, garbage and other refuse by private scavengers
shall be made at the rear of the premises whenever possible and, if not
possible, shall be made at the curb in front of the premises only in
accordance with the provisions hereof.
J. Ashes, garbage and other refuse shall not be placed in the street or
roadway, nor shall any ashes, garbage or refuse or collection container
be placed upon the sidewalk so as to obstruct or interfere with
pedestrian passage while such waste is awaiting collection.
K. Municipal collection of bulk items, such as household furniture,
appliances, mattresses and similar items, shall be limited to items not in
excess of 300 pounds.
L. No ashes, garbage or other refuse shall be transported through any
public street or highway within the Township of Rochelle Park except in
vehicles so covered, constructed and maintained so as to prevent
leakage, attraction of flies and the scattering of contents or dust, and
the body of the truck shall be constructed and covered so as to prevent
such leakage or loss of materials during transit.
M. No person shall place or deposit within the Township of Rochelle Park
any ashes, garbage or other refuse generated from outside the
Township of Rochelle Park.
A. The removal and disposal of debris and other building materials
resulting from construction of new buildings, major alterations of
existing buildings or debris resulting from fire, windstorm or flood shall
be the responsibility of the homeowner, contractor or individual
performing the work.
B. The removal and disposal of any hazardous waste, as that term is
defined in N.J.S.A. 13:1K-15 or any successor statute, if amended, shall
be the responsibility of the generator of such hazardous waste.
A. For the first offense in any calendar year, by a fine of $25.
B. For the second offense in any calendar year, by a fine of $50.
C. For the third offense in any calendar year, by a fine of between $100 and
$250. A court appearance shall be mandatory for a third offense.
§ 112-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 112-8
110:334
D. For the fourth offense, by a fine up to $1,000, and/or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. A court
appearance shall be mandatory for a fourth offense.
E. If the owner of any property who is charged with violating this article
chooses to enter a plea of guilty for a first or second offense, he shall be
entitled to pay the fine without the necessity of a court appearance.
F. Separate violation. Except as otherwise provided, every day that the
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate violation.
G. This section may be enforced by the Department of Public Works,
Health Department, Police Department, Building Department or
Property Maintenance Department.
§ 112-8 GARAGE SALES § 112-8
110:335

ARTICLE III
Collection of Paper
[Adopted 5-6-1974 by Ord. No. 356]
§ 112-9. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, gather or take newspapers,
magazines or other materials made of paper from a street, curb, sidewalk or
any private or publicly owned property without a license. Said license shall
designate the day or days on which the applicant may collect newspapers,
magazines or other materials made of paper from a street.
§ 112-10. Annual license fee.
A license shall be obtained from the Township Clerk for an annual fee of
$15.
§ 112-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-15-1986 by Ord. No.
519; 9-21-2016 by Ord. No. 1104-16]
Any violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as follows:
A. For the first offense in any calendar year, by a fine of $25.
B. For the second offense in any calendar year, by a fine of $50.
C. For the third offense in any calendar year, by a fine of between $100 and
$250. A court appearance shall be mandatory for a third offense.
D. For the fourth offense, by a fine up to $1,000, and/or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. A court
appearance shall be mandatory for a fourth offense.
E. If the owner of any property who is charged with violating this article
chooses to enter a plea of guilty for a first or second offense, he shall be
entitled to pay the fine without the necessity of a court appearance.
F. Separate violation. Except as otherwise provided, every day that the
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate violation.
G. This section may be enforced by the Department of Public Works,
Health Department, Police Department, Building Department or
Property Maintenance Department.
§ 112-9 GARAGE SALES § 112-11
110:337

ARTICLE IV
Mandatory Recycling
[Adopted 12-21-1987 by Ord. No. 543; amended in its entirety
6-6-1988 by Ord. No. 552]
§ 112-12. (Reserved)
§ 112-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article of this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
ALUMINUM CANS — All disposable containers fabricated primarily of
aluminum and commonly used for beverages, usually having a capacity of
between seven and 16 ounces.
ALUMINUM SCRAP — All products made of aluminum, excluding aluminum
cans, such as doorframes, window frames, screen frames, lawn chairs and
similar types of aluminum products.
CORRUGATED — Structural material shaped in parallel furrows and ridges
for rigidity and utilized to construct packaging and shipping containers.
DEBRIS — Stones, dirt, demolition material, broken concrete and other like
material.
FERROUS SCRAP — All metal scrap containing steel or cast iron.[Added
5-18-1994 by Ord. No. 678]
FOOD WASTE — Putrescible animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable waste
incident to and resulting from the use, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
GARBAGE — All garbage and rubbish normally placed at the curb by the
residents and commercial occupants of the Township of Rochelle Park for
regular solid waste collection.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash or limestone,
the product being transparent or translucent and being for packaging or
bottling of various matter; specifically, clear green and brown glass
containers only. Excluded are all other colored glass items and glass
commonly known as "window glass."
GRASS CLIPPINGS — Those materials formed from grass that are suitable
for composting and/or mulching purposes.[Added 10-15-1991 by Ord.
No. 622]
HI-GRADE PAPER — White typing paper, ledger paper, copier paper,
carbonless computer printout paper, manila tab cards and file
folders.[Added 6-19-1989 by Ord. No. 568]
HOUSEHOLD-GENERATED BATTERIES [Added 12-21-1994 by Ord. No.
685; amended 4-19-1995 by Ord. No. 688] —
§ 112-12 GARAGE SALES § 112-13
110:339
LEAVES — Those materials formed from trees and bushes that are suitable
for composting and/or mulching purposes.
MAGAZINES — Magazines or periodicals printed on glossy stock or paper
of heavier quality than that commonly recognized as "newsprint."
METAL — All products made of metal, exclusive of aluminum, including
washers, dryers, refrigerators, stoves, hot-water heaters, tire rims, springs,
bicycles and other similar metal products.
MIXED PAPER — Noncontaminated paper products of all grades and types,
such as used newspapers, magazines, corrugated, books, food cartons,
cardboard boxes, wrapping paper, bags and discarded letters and
envelopes.
NEWSPAPER — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other
matters of public interest. Expressly excluded, however, are all other
periodicals, as well as other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
PLASTICS — All plastic containers with the designations one through seven
are hereby included, unless the Township Committee from time to time
places a limitation. It shall be the obligation of the Township Committee,
if a limitation on the plastic containers is put into effect, to notify the
residents.[Added 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 622]
SOLID WASTE — All solid waste, garbage, leaves, refuse, trash, etc., usually
disposed of under the municipal garbage contract and normally placed for
front yard pickup by residents of the Township of Rochelle Park for usual
collection at regular intervals by the contractor.
TIN CANS or FERROUS CONTAINERS — Cans made of steel or tin. The
most common are tin-plated steel cans which contain food.[Added
5-18-1994 by Ord. No. 678]
TRASH — Ashes, plastic material, ceramics, blue and flat glass,
nonputrescible solid waste, building materials, contaminated paper,
unwanted furniture, cabinets and other similar materials.
WHITE GOODS — Used appliances, such as refrigerators, washers, dryers
and stoves, also referred to as "metal" above.[Added 5-18-1994 by Ord.
No. 678]
§ 112-13.1. Mandatory recyclable materials. [Added 5-18-1994 by
Ord. No. 678; amended 7-15-2009 by Ord. No. 1007-09]
Mandatory recyclable materials are as follows;
Residential Sector Commercial Sector
Newspaper Corrugated cardboard
Glass beverage containers High-grade office paper
Aluminum cans Glass beverage containers
§ 112-13 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 112-13.1
110:340
Residential Sector Commercial Sector
Ferrous scrap Ferrous scrap
Leaves White goods
White goods Aluminum cans
Tin cans Mixed paper
Grass Construction and demolition debris
(concrete, brick, tree parts,
nonferrous/ferrous metal, asphalt,
corrugated cardboard; where
practical)
Construction and demolition debris
(concrete, brick, tree parts,
nonferrous/ferrous metal, asphalt,
corrugated cardboard; where
practical)
Type 1 and 2 plastic containers
Corrugated cardboard
Mixed paper
Type 1 and 2 plastic containers
§ 112-13.2. License required for construction and demolition.
[Added 5-18-1994 by Ord. No. 678]
All construction and demolition performed by a person other than the owner
of the premises in residential dwellings and/or construction and demolition
performed in any commercial establishment shall require the obtaining of a
license from the Recycling Coordinator.
§ 112-14. Establishment of program. [Amended 10-15-1991 by Ord.
No. 622]
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
paper products, glass, aluminum, metal, garbage, trash and debris within
the Township of Rochelle Park. Concurrent with the passage of this
amendment, the township is contracting with a private scavenger for the
implementation of its recycling program.
§ 112-15. Separation and placement; collection.
A. Separation and placement. The occupant and/or owner of any building
within the Township of Rochelle Park who shall place for disposal,
removal or collection the following named items shall do so in strict
conformity with the following regulations:
(1) Wastepaper products shall be bundled separately and secured in
bundles not to exceed 25 pounds and shall not be contained in
plastic bags. Paper products may be placed in brown paper bags.
§ 112-13.1 GARAGE SALES § 112-15
110:341
(2) (Reserved)89
(3) (Reserved)90
(4) Corrugated paper products shall be tied into bundles as described
above.
(5) Garbage: according to the existing Garbage Ordinance.91
(6) Trash and debris shall be placed in metal or heavy-duty plastic
containers, boxes or plastic bags, secured by a lid or securely tied,
with a total weight not to exceed 50 pounds.
(7) Brush. Branches shall be tied in bundles not to exceed four feet in
length and of sufficient size and weight (not to exceed 50 pounds)
to be handled by one man.
(8) Large nonmetal items, such as furniture, rugs, mattresses,
television sets, tires and household-generated batteries, shall be
placed at curbside on the day designated for collection of such
items. [Amended 4-19-1995 by Ord. No. 688]
(9) Large metal items, such as washers, dryers, refrigerators,
bedsprings and bicycles, shall be placed at curbside on the day
designated for collection of such items.
(10) Leaves shall be placed in compostable paper bags.
(11) Hi-grade paper shall be separated by all commercial businesses
handling such paper and shall be disposed of at a vendor
authorized to acquire the same. [Added 6-19-1989 by Ord. No.
568]
(12) All commingled products, which consist of glass (all colors),
aluminum cans and scrap plastics number one through seven and
tin cans, shall be contained in a reusable occupant or ownersupplied
container. It is understood that this shall include any
future items mandated by the state as recyclable. [Added
10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 622]
(13) Grass clippings shall be placed in compostable paper bags and
must not be commingled with leaves. [Added 10-15-1991 by Ord.
No. 622]
B. General collection. The collection, removal and disposal of wastepaper
products, glass, aluminum, garbage, trash, debris and large objects
shall be scheduled and regulated by the enactment of resolutions from
time to time by the Township Committee with the advice of the
89.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), regarding separation of green and brown glass,
was repealed 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 622. See now Subsection A(12).
90.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), regarding separation of aluminum cans and scrap,
was repealed 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 622. See now Subsection A(12).
91.Editor's Note: See Article II of this chapter.
§ 112-15 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 112-15
110:342
Recycling Commissioner, which shall establish the time, method of
routes of service and the color-coding of receptacles. Special times for
large-item pickup shall be established.
C. Leaf collection. Leaves shall be kept separate and apart from other
solid waste at any time of the year and, unless stored or recycled for
composting or mulching by the generator, shall not be disposed of
except in a licensed leaf composting facility, vegetative waste
composting or recycling center. It shall be mandatory for all persons
who accumulate leaves, unless stored or recycled for composting or
mulching by the generator, to separate the same from municipal solid
waste and to place said leaves at curbside for collection in accordance
with this article, at a scheduled interval particular to that specific
geographical area of the Township of Rochelle Park as prescribed in
regulations promulgated by the Township Committee of the Township of
Rochelle Park. [Amended 5-7-1990 by Ord. No. 594]
D. Reporting and registration. [Added 6-19-1989 by Ord. No. 568;
amended 12-3-1990 by Ord. No. 606]
(1) With respect to all premises not receiving municipal collection
services, it shall be the responsibility of the owners, lessees and/or
occupants of such premises to contract for the private collection of
recyclables in accordance with the terms hereof. Any such person
contracting for such private collection of recyclables shall furnish
to the Recycling Coordinator the name, address and telephone
number of the private scavenger with whom such person has a
contract to collect recyclables, the address at which such
recyclables are collected and a description of such recyclables.
Such information shall be furnished to the Recycling Coordinator
annually during the month of January. In the event that there is a
change in private scavengers within the calendar year, the person
contracting with such private scavengers shall notify the Recycling
Coordinator within 30 days following such change.
(2) Any scavenger performing private collection of recyclable
materials within the Township of Rochelle Park shall register
annually with the Recycling Coordinator. At the time of
registration, the scavenger shall furnish the Recycling Coordinator
with the following information:
(a) The name of the scavenger.
(b) The place of business.
(c) The telephone number.
(d) The name and address of any person holding a 10% or greater
interest in the scavenger's business or who is an officer of such
scavenger's business.
§ 112-15 GARAGE SALES § 112-15
110:343
§ 112-16. Receptacle requirements; time for placement.
(3) Each such scavenger shall complete and furnish to the Recycling
Coordinator a monthly statement of recyclable materials collected
within the Township of Rochelle Park, which shall contain:
(a) A list of properties within the Township of Rochelle Park from
which recyclable materials are collected.
(b) An estimate of the quantity of such recyclable materials
collected from within the Township of Rochelle Park.
(c) The name and location where such recyclable materials are
deposited after collection.
(d) Such other information as may reasonably be required by the
Recycling Coordinator.
(4) No person shall collect any recyclable material within the Township
of Rochelle Park unless such person has registered with the
Recycling Coordinator in accordance with the provisions hereof.
A. General. All receptacles required herein shall be supplied by the
occupant and/or owner of the premises, and all recyclable material
receptacles shall be placed between the curb and sidewalk where they
shall be readily accessible to the collector. The occupant and/or owner
shall keep all receptacles clean and in condition for safe handling.
Containers or bundles shall not be placed at the curb for collection
prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding collection, nor shall any
containers or bundles be left at the curb beyond 8:00 p.m. of the day of
collection. [Amended 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 622]
B. Leaves. All persons shall comply with the following regulations:
(1) The use of any and all plastic container bags in conjunction with
actual leaf collection by the Township of Rochelle Park is
prohibited.
(2) All leaves must be separated from municipal solid waste generated
within the Township of Rochelle Park and, as a consequence, are
prohibited from inclusion in the regular curbside collection of
municipal solid waste.
(3) Alternate means of disposal for leaves.
(a) Strict adherence to all requirements contained herein or
regulations to be promulgated notwithstanding, any person
may choose to compost and/or mulch his particular leaves on
site for his personal horticultural benefit, provided that such
activities are of no adverse consequence to health and safety
codes currently governing or to be promulgated to govern such
activity and that such alternate means of disposal are
accomplished at no cost to the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 112-15 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 112-16
110:344
§ 112-17. Collection by unauthorized persons.
From the time of placement at the curb by anyone of the categories
described herein for collection by the Township of Rochelle Park in
accordance with the terms hereof, items shall be and become the property
of the Township of Rochelle Park or its authorized agent. It shall be a
violation of this article for any person unauthorized by the Township of
Rochelle Park to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up
any such items. Any and each such collection in violation hereof from one or
more residences shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, punishable
as hereinafter provided.
§ 112-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-15-1991 by Ord.
No. 622; 9-21-2016 by Ord. No. 1104-16]
Any violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as follows:
(b) At the option and expense of persons required to separate
leaves from municipal solid waste, said leaves may be brought
to the leaf composting facility under contract with the
Township of Rochelle Park.
C. Placement at curb. All leaves, garbage, rubbish or refuse shall be
placed for collection between the curb and sidewalk, where they shall
be readily accessible to the collector. The occupant and/or owner shall
keep all receptacles clean and in condition for safe handling.
Containers or bundles shall not be placed at the curb for collection
prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding collection, nor shall any
containers or bundles be left at the curb beyond 8:00 p.m. of the day of
collection. [Amended 10-15-1991 by Ord. No. 622]
A. For the first offense in any calendar year, by a fine of $25.
B. For the second offense in any calendar year, by a fine of $50.
C. For the third offense in any calendar year, by a fine of between $100 and
$250. A court appearance shall be mandatory for a third offense.
D. For the fourth offense, by a fine up to $1,000, and/or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. A court
appearance shall be mandatory for a fourth offense.
E. If the owner of any property who is charged with violating this article
chooses to enter a plea of guilty for a first or second offense, he shall be
entitled to pay the fine without the necessity of a court appearance.
F. Separate violation. Except as otherwise provided, every day that the
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate violation.
G. This section may be enforced by the Department of Public Works,
Health Department, Police Department, Building Department or
Property Maintenance Department.
§ 112-16 GARAGE SALES § 112-19
110:345
§ 112-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-21-2016 by Ord. No.
1104-16]
Any violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as follows:
§ 112-20. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed as to such inconsistency only.
§ 112-21. Severability.
If any section or provision of this article shall be held invalid in any court,
the same shall not affect the other sections or provisions of this article,
except so far as the section or provision so declared invalid shall be
declared invalid, and shall be inseparable from the remainder or any portion
thereof. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent
herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 112-22. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon publication as provided by law.
A. For the first offense in any calendar year, by a fine of $25.
B. For the second offense in any calendar year, by a fine of $50.
C. For the third offense in any calendar year, by a fine of between $100 and
$250. A court appearance shall be mandatory for a third offense.
D. For the fourth offense, by a fine up to $1,000, and/or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. A court
appearance shall be mandatory for a fourth offense.
E. If the owner of any property who is charged with violating this article
chooses to enter a plea of guilty for a first or second offense, he shall be
entitled to pay the fine without the necessity of a court appearance.
F. Separate violation. Except as otherwise provided, every day that the
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate violation.
G. This section may be enforced by the Department of Public Works,
Health Department, Police Department, Building Department or
Property Maintenance Department.
§ 112-19 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 112-22
110:346
Chapter 114
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 143.
§ 114-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall purposely or knowingly vandalize, deface, damage, write,
print, inscribe or place, with ink, paint, chalk or other substances, what
is commonly known a "graffiti." Graffiti shall include any form of painting,
writing or inscription, regardless of the content of said painting, writing
or inscription or the nature of the materials used in the commission of the
act. No person shall place graffiti on real or personal property of another,
whether said personal or real property is publicly or privately owned,
unless the owner of said property shall have, prior to the writing, printing,
inscribing or placing of graffiti, specifically consented to the same.
§ 114-2. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person having
custody and care of any minor child under the age of 18 years to assist, aid,
abet, allow, permit or encourage said minor to violate the provisions of this
chapter, as defined herein, either by words, by overt act, by failing to act,
by negligence or by lack of supervision and control over said minor child.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-15, any parent, guardian or other person having
legal custody of said minor child who fails or neglects to exercise reasonable
supervision and control of such infant child shall be liable in a civil action
for any destruction or damage caused by such infant child offender under
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 114-3. Violations and penalties.
A. Any minor child under the age of 18 years apprehended for the violation
of this chapter shall be brought before the Bergen County Juvenile and
Domestic Relations Court. As to the offense charge, the Bergen County
Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court shall then have exclusive
jurisdiction of the trial of such infant or infants, and such infant or
infants shall be surrendered to Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court,
and the case, including all papers and process thereto, shall be
transferred to said Court as provided in N.J.S.A. 2C:4-11. Furthermore,
the parent, legal guardian or other person having care and custody of
said minor shall be summoned or arrested and brought before the Judge
of the Municipal Court of the Township of Rochelle Park and be subject
to the penalties provided herein.
§ 112-22 GARAGE SALES § 114-3
110:347
§ 114-4. Responsibility of owners and/or occupiers of premises.
[Added 4-20-1994 by Ord. No. 675]
Should the premises of any of the landlords or tenants in Rochelle Park
be subject to any of the prohibited acts described herein above in § 114-1,
then and in that event it shall be the obligation of the owner or occupier
to remove the defaced painting, writing or inscription within 14 days or as
designated by the Building Inspector. Said owner or occupier of premises
shall have the duty to assist and aid the Police Department in ascertaining
who committed the prohibited acts. Should the owner or occupier of said
premises fail to remove said painting, writing or inscription within the
time period described above, then that person shall be subject to the
penalties described in § 114-3B. In addition thereto, the municipality shall
have the right to enter upon said premises and remove, erase or paint
over said prohibited writing or inscription. The cost of said work shall be
charged against the owner or occupier either through reimbursement to
the municipality at the time fines are paid to the Municipal Court, or the
municipality shall have the right to file separate action in order to collect
the cost of said work.
B. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or
a fine not exceeding $500, or both, in the discretion of the Municipal
Court Judge.
C. An exception to this chapter shall be any minor child under the age of
18 years who shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties imposed
on him by the Judge of Bergen County Juvenile and Domestic Relations
Court.
D. As a condition of sentencing, the Municipal Court shall have the
authority to order the offender to be responsible for cleaning, repairing,
painting or otherwise restoring the damaged property to the condition
it was in prior to being damaged. In the event that the offender is
unable, for any reason, to comply with the above, the Municipal Court
shall have the authority to order that said offender make the necessary
monetary restitution to restore the property to its original undamaged
condition.
E. This chapter shall be considered as supplemental to the municipality's
enforcement powers pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:33-9 (desecration of
venerated objects), N.J.S.A. 2C:33-10 (graffiti on property to put
persons in fear of violence) and N.J.S.A. 2C:33-11 (defacement or
damage of property by placement of symbol, object or graffiti).
§ 114-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 114-4
110:348
Chapter 117
HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 150.
§ 114-4 GARAGE SALES § 114-4
110:349

ARTICLE I
Housing Standards
[Adopted 11-6-1967 by Ord. No. 274]
§ 117-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
The Township of Rochelle Park, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:49-5.1, does hereby establish and adopt, as applicable to the Township
of Rochelle Park, that certain code known as the "New Jersey State
Department of Conservation and State Housing Code," heretofore approved
by the New Jersey Economic Development and the New Jersey State
Department of Health.
§ 117-2. Copies on file.
A copy of said code is annexed to this article and three copies thereof have
been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk of the Township of
Rochelle Park upon the introduction of this article and will remain on file in
said office for use and examination by the public until final action is taken
on this article.
§ 117-3. Conformity to standards required.
No person shall occupy or rent to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit which does not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey
State Housing Code.
§ 117-4. Enforcement; State Housing Officer. [Amended 5-16-2007
by Ord. No. 965-07; 9-19-2007 by Ord. No. 973-07]
There is hereby created the position of State Housing Inspector who is
hereby designated as the officer charged with the enforcement of this
article and the Code hereby established as well as the provisions of the
State Housing Code and the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law.92
§ 117-5. Notice of violation; effect.
Whenever the enforcement officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
article or of the code hereby adopted or of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person
or persons responsible therefor as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall
be in writing, include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued
and be served upon the owner or occupant of the premises, or the agent
of either of them, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served if a copy thereof is served upon such person personally or sent
by certified or registered mail to his last known address or posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice. Such
92.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.
§ 117-1 GARAGE SALES § 117-5
110:351
notice shall also state that unless, within 10 days from service of the notice,
a written request is made for a hearing before the enforcement officer, said
notice shall, at the expiration of such ten-day period, be deemed an order
to cease and desist from and to abate the described violation, and such
notice shall prescribe a reasonable time within which such person shall
be required to cease and desist from and abate such violation. The notice
may also contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this article and the code hereby adopted.
§ 117-6. Hearings.
If a hearing as aforesaid is requested, it shall be commenced not later than
10 days after request therefor is made, provided that for good cause the
enforcement officer may postpone such hearing for a reasonable time. If,
after hearing, the enforcement officer finds that no violation exists, he shall
withdraw the notice. If he finds that a violation does exist, he shall enter
and issue an order requiring the abatement of same within a prescribed
reasonable time. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings
and decision of the enforcement officer, shall be summarized, reduced
to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the
enforcement officer.
§ 117-7. Emergencies.
Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary
to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article,
such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order
is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the
enforcement officer shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After
such hearing, the enforcement officer shall continue such order in effect, or
modify or withdraw it.
§ 117-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or any
order promulgated hereunder or of the code established hereby shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of any of the
provisions of this article and each day that such violation shall continue
shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 117-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 117-8
110:352
ARTICLE II
Housing Authority Participation
[Adopted 4-20-1970 by Ord. No. 310]
§ 117-9. Purpose of participation.
The Township of Rochelle Park shall participate in the Housing Authority of
Bergen County for the sole purpose of receiving rent subsidies for senior
citizens on a lease basis only.
§ 117-10. Interpretation.
This article shall not be interpreted so as to give the Housing Authority of
Bergen County any rights as to construction, rehabilitation, condemnation
or otherwise within the boundary of the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 117-11. Filing of copies.
The Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file a certified copy of this
article with the Commissioner of the State Department of Conservation and
Economic Development and with the Secretary of the Housing Authority of
Bergen County.
§ 117-9 GARAGE SALES § 117-11
110:353
Chapter 120
HUNTING AND FIREARMS
§ 120-1. Discharge of firearms prohibited; exceptions.
No person shall discharge any firearms, air gun, air pistol, slingshot or other
weapon within the limits of the Township of Rochelle Park, unless specially
authorized by the Chief of Police or officer in charge.
§ 120-2. Hunting prohibited.
No person shall engage in hunting within the limits of the Township of
Rochelle Park.
§ 120-3. Evidence of hunting.
For the purpose of § 120-2, the carrying of a loaded rifle or shotgun within
the limits of the Township of Rochelle Park shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of hunting therein.
§ 120-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or be
imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or both, for each
offense.
Chapter 121
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 102.
§ 117-11 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 120-4
120:354
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 74793]
§ 121-1. Statutory authority; statutory provisions adopted by
reference.
This article is adopted pursuant to and in accordance with the authority
vested in a municipality by virtue of Chapter 184 of the Laws of New Jersey
1978 (N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.), signed into law by the Governor of this
state on January 8, 1979. The terms and provisions of said Chapter 184 are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein just as though fully
recited in this article. In the event that any provision of this article varies
or is not in accordance with the terms and provisions of the aforementioned
Chapter 184, then it is intended that the terms and provisions of said
chapter shall prevail.
§ 121-2. Conditions for payment.
No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in this
state shall pay any claims in excess of $2,500 on any real property located
within the Township of Rochelle Park, unless and until all taxes and
assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due and payable
appearing on an official certificate of search shall have been paid either by
the owner of such real property or by the insurance company pursuant to
and in accordance with the terms and provisions of said Chapter 184 or
until the township submits to the insurance company a copy of a resolution
adopted pursuant to and in accordance with the terms and provisions of said
chapter.
§ 121-3. Copy to be filed.
Upon adoption of this article, a certified copy thereof shall be filed with the
State Commissioner of Insurance.
§ 121-4. When effective.
This article shall become operative as soon as the aforementioned Chapter
184, by its terms, becomes operative.
93.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 285, but was redesignated in
order to adhere to the alphabetical sequence of the Code Table of Contents.
§ 121-1 INSURANCE § 121-4
121:355
Chapter 123
LANDSCAPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 70. Shade trees — See Ch. 157.
§ 123-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LANDSCAPERS — Any person, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company or any other entity which is engaged in the business of
landscaping, lawn maintenance, irrigation or gardening, for a fee or for
profit. This shall not include casual employment by minors or casual
employment by family members.[Amended 2-19-2003 by Ord. No.
874-03]
§ 123-2. Proof of state registration required. [Added 8-16-2006 by
Ord. No. 952-0694]
Landscapers, as defined herein, who perform work or services within the
Township of Rochelle Park shall, annually, provide the office of the Township
of Clerk with proof of registration with the State of New Jersey pursuant
to the "Contractors' Registration Act."95 In the event that any landscaper
or landscaping company is not required to register pursuant to the
aforementioned state law, the company or landscaper shall provide written
notice to the Township Clerk of the fact that the landscaper is working
within the Township of Rochelle Park but is not subject to the Contractors'
Registration Act.
§ 123-3. (Reserved)96
§ 123-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 123-5. Removal of landscaping debris and lawn clippings.
All landscapers shall provide for the removal of lawn clippings and other
landscaping debris and shall not leave or deposit said debris at the curbside
94.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 123-2, License required; application.
95.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 56:8-136 et seq.
96.Editor's Note: Former § 123-3, License fee; identification sticker, was repealed 8-16-2006
by Ord. No. 952-06.
§ 121-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 123-5
123:356
or any other site in the Township of Rochelle Park. Any landscaper who
causes said lawn clippings or landscaping debris to remain on the site or
curbside or anywhere in the Township of Rochelle Park shall forfeit his
license to conduct his landscaping business anywhere in the Township of
Rochelle Park and shall also be subject to the penalties provided in this
chapter.
§ 123-6. Work on Sundays and holidays; hours. [Added 2-19-2003 by
Ord. No. 874-03]
Chapter 125
(RESERVED)
Chapter 127
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 112. Property maintenance — See Ch. 150.
§ 127-1. Littering prohibited.
No person shall put, drop, throw, discard, sweep or otherwise place any
litter, rubbish, refuse or other similar material in or upon any sidewalk,
gutter, street, public place within the Township of Rochelle Park or upon
private property within the Township of Rochelle Park other than in a
receptacle designed to collect such material.
§ 127-2. Dumping prohibited. [Amended 8-17-2005 by Ord. No.
932-05]
No person shall dispose, discard, or dump any garbage, rubbish, refuse,
ashes, discarded vehicle or vehicle parts, discarded rubber tires, discarded
appliances, discarded furniture or other household or commercial or
A. No landscaper, as defined in this chapter, shall be allowed to perform
activities set forth herein within the Township of Rochelle Park on
Sunday or on the following holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day (July 4), Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas
Day, unless an exemption is sought and obtained for such work from the
Township Committee. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
considered as prohibiting an emergency situation necessary for the
preservation of health and safety on Sundays.
B. During the days of Monday through Saturday, no activities shall
commence before 7:00 a.m. and shall end at sundown.
§ 123-5 (RESERVED) § 127-2
125:357
industrial solid waste upon any public street, right-of-way, public place,
upon any private property or any river, canal, public water drain, sewer
or receiving basin within the Township of Rochelle Park, except at such
locations or facilities specifically approved and designated by law for the
storage or disposal of solid waste.
§ 127-3. Use of receptacles required.
§ 127-4. Containerization of sweepings required.
A. "Litter receptacle" shall mean a container suitable for the depositing of
litter.
B. The owners, tenants and proprietors of the following public places
within the Township of Rochelle Park shall provide and service litter
receptacles such that adequate containerization is available.
(1) Pedestrian sidewalks located within areas zoned for business use in
such a manner that at a minimum there shall be no single linear
quarter mile without a receptacle.
(2) Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings and railroad and bus stations.
(3) Parks.
(4) Drive-in restaurants.
(5) All street vendor locations.
(6) Self-service refreshment areas.
(7) Construction sites.
(8) Gasoline service stations.
(9) Shopping centers.
(10) Parking lots.
(11) Special events to which the public is invited, including sports
events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
C. The owners, tenants and proprietors of such places shall periodically
arrange for the disposal of the litter placed in the aforesaid litter
receptacles as often as is necessary to avoid the overflow of litter from
said litter receptacle.
D. No person shall use said litter receptacles for the regular disposal of
their household, commercial or industrial garbage or rubbish.
A. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin
or other public place any accumulation of litter from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway.
§ 127-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 127-4
127:358
§ 127-5. Receptacles to be covered.
§ 127-6. Loads on vehicles to be covered.
§ 127-7. Maintenance of construction sites.
§ 127-8. Maintenance of exterior of premises.
Every owner, tenant or other person in possession of any building, structure
or premises within the Township of Rochelle Park shall maintain the exterior
B. Every person owning or occupying property abutting or bordering any
public streets within the Township of Rochelle Park shall at all times
keep the portion of such public street between the curbline or, if no
curbline, the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line
in front of such property, including the sidewalk area, free of any
rubbish, refuse, debris or other litter.
C. All litter sweepings shall be collected and properly containerized for
disposal.
A. Garbage containers and waste disposal bins shall be fitted with a
securely fitting cover.
B. No owner, tenant or other person in possession of any property within
the Township of Rochelle Park shall suffer or permit an uncovered or
overflowing garbage can or waste disposal bin upon such property.
A. No person shall drive, or cause or permit to be driven, any vehicle so
loaded with any substance, matter or thing that the contents or any part
thereof shall fall or be deposited, spilled or scattered in or upon any
public street.
B. No person shall so load a vehicle, or cause or permit a vehicle to be so
loaded, with any substance, matter or thing that the contents or any
part thereof shall fall or be deposited, spilled or scattered in or upon
any public street.
A. No owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction or demolition
site shall permit the accumulation of litter, rubbish, refuse or debris
before, during or immediately following completion of any construction
or demolition project other than in a suitable waste disposal container.
B. Every owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction or
demolition site shall furnish solid waste containers adequate to
accommodate all rubbish, trash or debris accumulated upon the
construction or demolition site.
C. Every owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction or
demolition site within the Township of Rochelle Park shall maintain and
empty the solid waste containers in such a manner and with such
frequency as to prevent spillage of rubbish, trash, refuse and debris.
§ 127-4 LITTERING § 127-8
127:359
of said premises, including the sidewalk and curb abutting such premises,
free of any rubbish, refuse, debris or other litter.
§ 127-9. Handbills.
§ 127-10. Enforcement.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall, together with the Police Department,
enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall be authorized to serve
warnings, summonses and complaints with respect to a violation of this
chapter; provided, however, that in no event shall more than two warnings
be served prior to the issuance of a summons and complaint.
§ 127-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord. No.
609]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the following penalties:
A. No person shall place, cause to be placed or suffer or permit to be
placed any circular, handbill or advertisement on any windshield or
other portion of an automobile located upon a public street or public
place.
B. No person shall place, cause to be placed or suffer or permit to be
placed any circular, handbill or advertisement upon any door, railing,
entranceway, stoop or other location upon any premises within the
Township of Rochelle Park unless placed, secured or fastened in such a
manner as to prevent such circular, handbill or advertisement from
being blown or carried by the wind.
C. Nothing contained herein shall be construed so as to prohibit the
delivery of mail by the United States Postal Service or the delivery or
distribution of letters, packages, circulars, handbills, advertisements,
newspapers, magazines or other publications, provided that such items
are either placed in a receptacle specifically designed for such purpose
or placed at the foot of the door of the premises to which such items are
intended to be delivered in such a manner so as not to violate
Subsection B hereof.
A. First offenses.
(1) Littering. For the first offense within a twelve-month period, a fine
of not less than $10 nor more than $25.
(2) Dumping. For the first offense within a twelve-month period, a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $200.
B. Second offenses.
(1) Littering. For the second offense within a twelve-month period, a
fine of not less than $25 nor more than $50.
§ 127-8 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 127-11
127:360
§ 127-12. Abatement of conditions; lien.
In the event that the owner, tenant or other person in possession of private
property or lands within the Township of Rochelle Park shall refuse or
neglect to abate or remedy a violation of this chapter, the township may
cause the condition to be abated and remedied. Upon the removal by the
township of any litter, rubbish, refuse or debris which has accumulated
in violation of § 127-4, 127-5, 127-7 or 127-8 of this chapter, where the
owner, tenant or person in possession shall have refused or neglected to
remove such items within five days of receiving a notice of violation, the
public officer in charge of such removal shall certify the cost thereof to
the Township Committee, which shall examine the certificate and, if found
correct, shall cause the costs as shown thereon to be charged against said
lands, to be added to and become and form a part thereof of the taxes to
be assessed and levied upon said lands. Such lien shall bear interest at the
same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same offices
and in the same manner as taxes.
Chapter 127A
MARRIAGE AND CIVIL UNION CEREMONIES
§ 127A-1. Performance of ceremonies.
The Mayor, or the Deputy Mayor when authorized by the Mayor, is hereby
authorized to perform marriage and civil union ceremonies between such
persons as may lawfully enter into the matrimonial relation or civil union.
The ceremony performed by the Mayor or Deputy Mayor may take place
within or outside of the municipal boundaries of the Township of Rochelle
(2) Dumping. For the second offense within a twelve-month period, a
fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500.
C. Third offenses.
(1) Littering. For the third offense within a twelve-month period, a fine
of not less than $50 nor more than $100.
(2) Dumping. For the third offense within a twelve- month period, a
fine of not less than $500 nor more than $750.
D. Fourth offenses.
(1) Littering. For the fourth offense within a twelve-month period, a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both.
(2) Dumping. For the fourth offense within a twelve-month period, a
fine of $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or
both.
§ 127-11 MARRIAGE AND CIVIL UNION CEREMONIES § 127A-1
127A:361
Park within the discretion of the Mayor or Deputy Mayor, as the case may
be.
§ 127A-2. Fee.
The Mayor or the Deputy Mayor may collect a fee for the performance of
the marriage or civil union ceremony if the Mayor or the Deputy Mayor
chooses to collect such a fee. If collected, the fee for the performance of
the ceremony shall be $100. The fee shall be due and payable upon the
performance of the ceremony and shall be payable to the municipality. Upon
receipt of payment of the aforesaid fee, the Mayor or Deputy Mayor shall
arrange for the deposit of the fee into the general fund of the Township.
§ 127A-3. Disbursement of fees as additional fixed salary.
The Mayor or Deputy Mayor shall be entitled to an additional salary
payment in an amount equal to the fee charged for each ceremony. These
salary payments shall be paid to the Mayor or Deputy Mayor based upon the
number of ceremonies performed and shall be paid pursuant to the annual
Salary Ordinance.
§ 127A-4. Contributions to charity.
In lieu of the fee described in § 127A-2, above, the Mayor or Deputy Mayor
may suggest to a party that a voluntary contribution directly to a charitable
organization may be made. The Mayor or Deputy Mayor may not, however,
specify a specific charity.
Chapter 128
MASSAGE AND SOMATIC THERAPIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land Use and Development
Regulations — See Ch. 185.
§ 128-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms herein are defined
as follows:
MASSAGE AND SOMATIC THERAPIES — Any systems of activity of
structured touch which include, but are not limited to, holding, applying
pressure, stroking, kneading, positioning and mobilizing soft tissue of the
body by manual technique and use of visual, kinesthetic, auditory and
palpating skills to access the body for purposes of applying therapeutic
massage, bodywork or somatic principles. Such application may include,
but is not limited to, the use of therapies such as heliotherapy or
hydrotherapy, the use of moist hot and cold external applications, external
§ 127A-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 128-1
128:362
application of herbal or topical preparations not classified as prescription
drugs, analysis of posture, movement and neural myofacial education and
education in self-care and stress management. This definition shall not
include the providing of chiropractic and medical services by a licensed
professional.
MASSAGE AND SOMATIC THERAPIST — A person who practices or
administers massage and/or somatic therapy. Massage and/or somatic
therapists shall not diagnose or treat classified diseases, nor practice spinal
or other joint manipulation.
§ 128-2. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that the business of operating a massage and/or
somatic therapies business, as defined in this chapter, is a business affecting
the public health, safety and general welfare.
§ 128-3. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the massage and/or somatic
therapies business without a permit, in violation of any requirements set
forth in this chapter or any regulation issued pursuant hereto.
§ 128-4. Location.
The type of business described herein shall be located solely within the
Business Overlay Zone and shall be a conditional use in said zone.
§ 128-5. License required.
No person shall be engaged or employed (every business entity and each
person employed by such entity shall be required to obtain a license) in the
Township of Rochelle Park as a massage or somatic therapist for which any
form of compensation is charged or accepted without first having obtained
a license from the Township Clerk to do so. The license, when issued, is
personal and shall not be construed to grant a certificate of occupancy or
approval for the use of any premises or location.
§ 128-6. Requirements for license.
A license shall not be issued to a person unless he/she meets the following
conditions:
A. The applicant is at least 18 years of age.
B. The applicant submits a certification from a duly licensed physician of
the State of New Jersey, stating that the applicant is free from
contagious and communicable disease, dated within 30 days of the date
of application.
C. The applicant submits three recent photographs that shall be
approximately two inches by two inches, showing the head and
§ 128-1 MASSAGE AND SOMATIC THERAPIES § 128-6
128:363
§ 128-7. Qualifications for license.
No one shall be authorized to hold oneself out to offer a massage as a
massage practitioner within the meaning of this chapter, or employ or
engage as an independent contractor any massage practitioner rendering
massage, bodywork and somatic therapy services within the Township of
Rochelle Park, unless certified by the National Certification Board for
Therapeutic Massages and Bodyworks or the American Massage and
Therapy Association. A person shall not be identified by titles "massage,
bodywork and somatic therapist," "registered massage, bodywork and
somatic therapist," "licensed massage, bodywork and somatic therapist,"
or the abbreviations "MBT," "RMBT," "LMBT" or "LOBT" unless licensed to
practice massage, bodywork and somatic therapies under the provisions of
this chapter and provides satisfactory proof or evidence of the following:
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. Each
applicant shall be fingerprinted by the Chief of Police or his designee
and shall undergo a background check by the police. Said photographs
and fingerprints shall constitute a part of the application. The license
shall be valid for a period of one year, and it may be renewed for
additional one-year periods upon the filing of a new application fee of
$500. All provisions of this chapter shall apply to renewals in the same
manner as they apply to applications for and granting of the initial
license.
D. The applicant completes an application and a form to be provided by
the Township of Rochelle Park, which application, among other things,
requires a detailed description of the applicant, fingerprinting by the
Township of Rochelle Park Police Department and prior residence and
employment history for at least 10 years. The application shall be
subject to a background and activity check by the Chief of Police.
E. In addition, such application shall include a sworn statement as to
whether or not the applicant has, within the last five years, been
convicted, pleaded nolo contendere or suffered a forfeiture on any
criminal offense or on a charge of violating any provisions included in
N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1 et seq., and/or N.J.S.A. 2C:14-2, as amended, which
laws relate to indecency, obscenity and sexual offenses, or similar
charges of violating this chapter or similar ordinances in any other
jurisdiction. The application shall state thereon that "It is unlawful for
any person to make a false statement on this application, and discovery
of a false statement shall constitute grounds for denial of an application
or revocation of a permit."
F. Each massage practitioner shall have malpractice insurance in an
amount not less than $250,000. A copy of such certificate of insurance
shall be presented to the Township Clerk and/or administrative officer
with the filed application.
A. Successful completion of a minimum of 500 hours in class study in the
field of massage, bodywork and somatic therapies; and
§ 128-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 128-7
128:364
§ 128-8. Fees.
The following nonrefundable fees shall be paid to the Township of Rochelle
Park:
§ 128-9. Building structure and layout.
§ 128-10. Sanitation and hygiene.
B. Successful completion of the within examination offered by the National
Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodyworks or a
substantially equivalent examination approved by the Board to
determine the applicant's competence to practice massage, bodywork
and somatic therapies.
A. Five hundred dollars upon the filing of an annual application for the
operation of a business engaged in providing the services set forth in
§ 128-1 hereof.
B. One hundred dollars upon the filing of an annual application for persons
engaged in providing services as set forth in § 128-1 hereof.
C. A fee for providing State of New Jersey fingerprint checks at the rate
permitted by State of New Jersey law at the time said request is made.
A fingerprint check shall not be required when obtaining a renewal of
an existing license.
A. No massage and/or somatic therapies business shall begin operations
until the building occupied shall have been approved by the Township
Construction Code Department, who shall establish procedures for
investigation and report pursuant to regulations of the chapter.
B. An applicant for a permit to operate a massage and/or somatic
therapies business shall submit to the Township Construction Code
Department plans and specifications of the quarters proposed to be
occupied. Such plans shall show details of entrances, partitions,
windows, openings, ventilation, plumbing fixtures, water supply and
waste and vent connections.
C. Each massage and/or somatic therapies business shall be equipped with
a toilet and lavatory facilities for personnel. Each operating area shall
be equipped with a hand lavatory.
D. All other pertinent building and land use regulations of the Township of
Rochelle Park shall be complied with.
A. All equipment, shower stalls, toilets, lavatories and any other such
accouterments of the establishment shall be regularly treated with
disinfectants and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition
at all times.
§ 128-7 MASSAGE AND SOMATIC THERAPIES § 128-10
128:365
§ 128-11. Sleeping quarters.
No part of any quarters of any massage and/or somatic therapies business
shall be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping quarters, nor
shall any person sleep in such massage and/or somatic therapies business
except or limited to periods incidental to and directly related to a massage
or bath. This provision shall not preclude the location of a massage and/or
somatic therapies business in a separate quarters of a building housing a
hotel or other separate businesses or clubs.
§ 128-12. Equipment standards.
§ 128-13. Term of license.
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire in the calendar year
in which the said license was issued. Generally speaking, a license shall be
issued for one calendar year, but in the event that the issuance of same is
made for part of a calendar year, the full license fees required hereinabove
will apply without any proration.
B. Health, plumbing, electric and other inspectors shall be given access to
any part of a massage and/or somatic therapies business for the
purpose of inspection at all reasonable times.
C. No person shall practice any services of a massage and/or somatic
therapies business without a certificate of good health issued by a duly
licensed physician, commensurate with the nature of the services
rendered. Such certificate shall be renewed every six months.
D. No massage and/or somatic therapies business shall knowingly serve
any patron infected with any fungus or other skin infections, nor shall
service be performed on any patron exhibiting skin inflammation or
eruptions, provided that a duly licensed physician may certify that a
person may be safely served, prescribing the conditions thereof.
E. All personnel shall wash their hands in hot running water, using a
proper soap or disinfectant, before giving any service or treatment to
each separate patron.
F. All towels and tissues and all sheets or other coverings shall be used
singularly for each patron and discarded for laundry or disposal
immediately after use.
G. Nondisposable tools of the trade shall be disinfected after use upon one
patron.
A. All tables, tubs, shower stalls and floors, except reception and
administrative area, shall be made of nonporous materials which may
readily be disinfected.
B. Closed containers shall be provided for wet towels and waste materials.
§ 128-10 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 128-14
128:366
§ 128-14. Display of license.
All licenses issued hereunder shall be exhibited in a prominent place inside
the business establishment.
§ 128-15. Revocation of license.
§ 128-16. Revocation procedure.
§ 128-17. Appeal.
The applicant or license holder may appeal any denial or revocation of
a license within 30 days of receiving written notice of such denial or
revocation by submitting to the Township Clerk a written request for a
hearing by the Township Committee, which request shall be made on a
form provided by the Township Clerk. The Township Committee shall hold
a hearing within 45 days within the date of request for a hearing. The
Township Committee shall direct the Township Clerk to issue a decision to
the applicant or license holder within 10 days of its decision or within 45
days of the hearing, whichever is sooner. The time periods set forth in this
chapter may be extended and/or waived on a mutually agreeable basis by
the Township Committee and the applicant and/or license holder.
§ 128-18. Violation and penalties.
A. The conviction of any applicant or licensee of any criminal offense,
quasi-criminal offense or sanitary code violation related to the
licensee's business, or any sex-related offense, shall constitute a
forfeiture of their license and said license shall be deemed revoked.
B. Each licensee shall be deemed responsible for a clean and safe business
operation on the premises. The violation of any law at said premises
shall be grounds for the revocation of the licenses of all licensees
operating on the premises.
A. Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Township
Clerk, Construction Code Department or Chief of Police for violations of
any terms or conditions of this chapter.
B. Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing,
setting forth the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be served personally upon the licensee or
mailed by registered letter to the licensee at his last known address at
least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
C. In the event of a revocation of license, the Township Clerk, Construction
Code Official or Chief of Police shall report his/her findings and reasons
therefor to the Township Committee.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days, by a fine not exceeding $2,500 and/or by a
§ 128-14 MASSAGE AND SOMATIC THERAPIES § 128-18
128:367
§ 128-19. Nonpreemption.
This chapter is intended to be read in pari materia with any and all state
regulations appertaining to the same or similar subject matter, including,
but not by way of limitation, any and all regulations established by the
Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapy Examining Committee operating
under the New Jersey Board of Nursing (P.L. 1999, c. 19, approved February
8, 1999, Assembly Bill No. 843).
Chapter 130
MOTELS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Obscene material display — See Ch. 136. Land Use and Development
Regulations — See Ch. 185.
§ 130-1. Motel license required.
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of
the Judge of the Municipal Court. Each day the violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as set forth above.
B. A violation of any section of this chapter shall also be grounds for
revocation of any license, certificate of occupancy or permit issued by
the township for the premises.
C. Every day the provisions of this chapter are violated by any person, as
defined herein, shall be a separate and distinct violation of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or
permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property
owned or controlled by him, a motel within the limits of the Township of
Rochelle Park in the zone districts where motels are permitted, without
having first secured a license therefor from the Township Clerk. Such
license shall be for a period of one year commencing on January 1 and
terminating on December 31 of said year and shall be renewable for
additional periods of one year. Licenses shall not be transferable from
one person to another.
B. The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be filed
with the Clerk of the township and shall be accompanied by a fee of
$2,000. The application for license or renewal thereof shall be made on
printed forms furnished by the Clerk of the township and shall include
the name and address of the owner of the motel, the legal description of
the premises upon which the motel is or will be located as will readily
identify and locate the premises, the number of units and the
§ 128-18 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 130-1
130:368
§ 130-2. Records and management.
experience of the owner or manager in the motel business. [Amended
11-16-1981 by Ord. No. 453; 2-19-1985 by Ord. No. 500]
C. The Township Clerk is authorized to issue a license after the license has
been approved by the Township Committee.
A. In every motel there shall be set aside a portion of the building for an
office for the person in charge of said motel. A copy of the motel license
and of this chapter shall be posted therein and the motel register shall
at all times be kept in said office.
B. It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge,
together with the licensee, to:
(1) Keep at all times a register of all guests, which shall be open at all
times to inspection by state and federal officers and officers of the
Township of Rochelle Park, showing for all guests:
(a) Name and address for each guest for which accommodations
are afforded.
(b) Dates of entrance and departure.
(c) License number, make and type of all automobiles.
(d) States issuing such automobile licenses.
(2) Maintain the motel in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all
times.
(3) See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and
enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any
violations of this chapter or any other violations of law which may
come to his attention.
(4) Report to the Health Inspector all cases of persons or animals
affected or suspected of being affected with any communicable
disease.
(5) Maintain in convenient places, approved by the Fire Department,
hand fire extinguishers in good operating condition in the ratio of
one to each 10 sleeping units.
(6) Prohibit the use of any sleeping unit by a number of occupants
greater than that which is authorized by the Fire Prevention
Bureau.
C. No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude, nor shall any license be issued to any
corporation in which any stockholder holding 5% or more of the stock
thereof or in which any director or officer shall have been convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude. No licensee shall employ in or about
§ 130-1 MOTELS § 130-2
130:369
§ 130-3. Health and sanitation requirements; penalties.
§ 130-4. Posting of rates; advertising rates.
§ 130-5. Adult motels. [Added 5-18-1994 by Ord. No. 677]
the licensed premises any person convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude within a period of five years from the date of conviction.
A. The Health Inspector shall inspect all motels as often as shall be
necessary and in any event not less than once every four months in each
calendar year. If after such inspection it is found by the Health
Inspector that a motel is being conducted in an unclean or unsanitary
manner or in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the
township, the Health Inspector shall thereupon notify the owner or
operator of said motel of such condition and that such owner or
operator shall have five days from the date of the receipt of notice from
the Inspector to remedy such condition, and if after the said five-day
period the owner or operator fails to remedy such condition, the
Inspector shall report such facts to the Township Committee, which,
after public hearing, shall have the power to cancel or suspend the said
license. In addition, notwithstanding the above, if after the said five-day
notice period the owner or operator fails to remedy such conditions, the
Inspector may issue a complaint against the owner or operator of said
motel, alleging a violation of the terms of this chapter. Any owner or
operator of said motel who takes part or assists in any violation of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $500 for each offense or be imprisoned in the county jail
for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge
before whom such conviction shall be had. In case of failure of any
person to pay any fine imposed herein, such Judge may cause such
person to be imprisoned in the county jail for any term not to exceed 90
days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
B. Each motel unit shall have a complete bathroom, including flush toilet,
sink, bath or shower. Floors of bathrooms shall be constructed of
concrete tile or similar materials which are impervious to water. Each
bathroom shall be provided with an adequate supply of hot and cold
running water, soap, individual towels and toilet paper at all times.
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motel to charge a
price greater than the motel's accommodation price as displayed within
the sleeping units.
B. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motel to post or allow
to remain posted on any outdoor advertising sign rates for
accommodations in such motel.
A. Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
§ 130-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 130-5
130:370
Chapter 135
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unnecessary noise — See Ch. 58, § 58-10.
Dogs barking at night — See Ch. 88, § 88-4.
Disturbance of assemblages — See Ch. 143,
§ 143-4.
Noise — See Ch. 185, § 185-130D(6).
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration
and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible
from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this
adult-type of photographic reproductions;
(1)
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than
24 hours; or
(2)
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room
for a period of time that is less than 24 hours.
(3)
B. Management. In addition to requirements of § 130-2, the following shall
apply to motels:
(1) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or a similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or
more times in a period of time that is less than 10 hours creates a
rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as
that term is defined in this chapter.
(2) It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a sleeping room
in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not
have a sexually oriented permit and/or license, rents or subrents a
sleeping room to a person and, within 10 hours from the time the
room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
(3) For purposes of Subsection B of this section, the terms "rent" or
"subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any
form of consideration.
C. Penalties. The penalties prescribed in § 130-3A shall apply.
§ 130-5 NOISE § 135-1
135:371
§ 135-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electricity,
telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing
fallen frees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational waterways, or
abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound-dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTIDWELLING UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTIUSE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — An employee of a local, county or regional
health agency which is certified pursuant to the County Environmental
Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise enforcement
activities; or a municipality with a department-approved noise control
ordinance and the employee has received noise enforcement training and
is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be acting
within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to issue a
summons in order to be considered a noise control officer.
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
or land; or
A.
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
§ 135-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 135-1
135:372
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The Noise Control Officer
need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist performing the
song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a nongovernmental
entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental
entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either:
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 135-2. Applicability.
The imaginary line including its vertical extension that separates one
parcel of real property from another;
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of
a multidwelling unit building; or
B.
On a multiuse property, the interface between the two portions of the
property on which different categories of activity are being performed
(e.g., if the multiuse property is a building which is residential upstairs
and commercial downstairs, then the real property line would be the
interface between the residential area and the commercial area).
C.
A. This chapter applies to sound from the following property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities.
(2) Commercial facilities.
(3) Public service facilities.
(4) Community service facilities.
(5) Residential properties.
(6) Multiuse properties.
(7) Public and private rights-of-way.
§ 135-1 NOISE § 135-2
135:373
§ 135-3. Noise control officers.
(8) Public spaces.
(9) Multidwelling unit buildings.97
B. This chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities.
(2) Public service facilities.
(3) Community service facilities.
(4) Residential properties.
(5) Multiuse properties.
(6) Multidwelling unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by noise control
officers. A person shall be qualified to be a noise control officer if the
person meets the criteria set forth in the definition above and
completes, at a frequency specified by the Department in N.J.A.C.
7:29-2.11, a noise certification and recertification course which are
offered by the Department of Environmental Sciences of Cook College,
Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey or any other noise
certification or recertification course which is offered by an accredited
university and approved by the department.
B. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
§ 135-5B and C of this regulation and with the definition of “real
property line” as contained herein.
C. Noise control officers shall have the power to:
(1) Coordinate the noise control activities of all departments in the
Township of Rochelle Park and cooperate with all other public
bodies and agencies to the extent practicable;
(2) Review the actions of the Township of Rochelle Park and advise of
the effect, if any, of such actions on noise control;
97.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(10), regarding places of public assembly, which
subsection immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-18-2003 by Ord. No.
886-03.
§ 135-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 135-3
135:374
§ 135-4. Maximum permissible sound levels.
(3) Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
chapter;
(4) Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter for sound
levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in Tables I
and II, when measured at a receiving property located within the
designated jurisdiction of the Noise Control Officer, in accordance
with § 135-7 below; and
(5) Cooperate with noise control officers of adjacent municipalities in
enforcing one another’s municipal noise ordinances.98
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source of property listed in § 135-2A above in
such a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the
sound level limits set forth in Tables I and II when measured at or within
the real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I
and II, except as specified in Subsection B below.
B. When measuring total sound or residual sound within a multiuse
property, or within a residential unit when the property line between it
and the source property is a common wall, all exterior doors and
windows shall be closed and the measurements shall be taken in the
center of the room most affected by the noise. Measurements shall not
be taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways,
closets and bathrooms. When measuring the total sound or residual
sound, all sound sources within the dwelling must be shut off (e.g.,
television, stereo). [Amended 6-18-2003 by Ord. No. 886-03]
C. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or
within the same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a
multiuse property (e.g., sound generated within a commercial unit of a
multiuse property building and received within a residential unit of the
same building) or multidwelling unit building. In addition, indoor
measurements shall be taken if the property line between the receiving
property and the source property is a common wall, such as in a
multidwelling unit building. The allowable sound level standards for
indoors are as shown in Tables I and II.
D. Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound
shall not equal 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour shall not
equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats four or
more times in an hour shall be measured as impulsive sound and shall
meet the requirements as shown in Table I.
98.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(6), regarding temporary exceptions, which subsection
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-18-2003 by Ord. No. 886-03.
§ 135-3 NOISE § 135-4
135:375
TABLE I
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels
1. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of
any source of sound on any source property listed in § 135-2A
above in such a manner as to create a sound level that equals
or exceeds the sound levels listed below:
A. Outdoors
Receiving
Property
Category
Residential property, or
residential portion of a
multiuse property
Commercial facility,
public service facility
nonresidential portion
of a multiuse property,
or community service
facility
Time
7:00 a.m. -
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m. -
7:00 a.m. 24 hours
Maximum
A-weighted
sound level
standard (dB)
65 50 65
B. Indoors
Receiving
Property
Category
Residential property, or
residential portion of a
multiuse property
Commercial facility*, or
nonresidential portion of
a multiuse property
Time
7:00 a.m. -
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m. -
7:00 a.m. 24 hours
Maximum
A-weighted
sound level
standard
(dB)
55 40 55
*In those instances when a commercial facility shares a common wall/
ceiling/floor with another commercial facility that is producing the
sound.
§ 135-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 135-4
135:376
TABLE II
Maximum Permissible Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels In
Decibels
1. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the
operation of any source of sound on any source property
listed in § 135-2A above in such a manner as to create a
sound pressure level that equals or exceeds the sound
levels listed below in one or more octave band. [Amended
6-18-2003 by Ord. No. 886-03]
2. When octave measurements are made, the sound from the
source must be constant in level and character. If octave
band sound pressure level variations exceed plus or minus
2dB in the bands containing the principal source
frequencies, discontinue the measurement.
Receiving
Property
Category
Residential property, or
residential portion of a
multiuse property
Residential property, or
residential portion of a
multiuse property
Commercial
facility,
public
service
facility,
nonresidential
portion of
a multiuse
property,
Commercial
facility* or
nonresidential
portion of a
multiuse
property
Outdoors Indoors Outdoors Indoors
Octave
Band
Center
Frequency
(Hz)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB)
Octave
Band
Sound
Pressure
Level
(dB)
Octave
Band Sound
Pressure
Level
(dB)
Time
7:00 a.m. -
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m.
- 7:00 a.m.
7:00 a.m. -
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m.
- 7:00 a.m. 24 hours 24 hours
31.5 96 86 86 76 96 86
63 82 71 72 61 82 72
125 74 61 64 51 74 64
250 67 53 57 43 67 57
500 63 48 53 38 63 53
1,000 60 45 50 35 60 50
2,000 57 42 47 32 57 47
4,000 55 40 45 30 55 45
8,000 53 38 43 28 53 43
§ 135-4 NOISE § 135-4
135:377
§ 135-5. Restricted uses and activities.
*In those instances when a commercial facility shares a common wall/
ceiling/floor with another commercial facility that is producing the
sound.
A. Exceptions.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B below, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4.
(2) Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II, except as provided in
Subsection B below.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Tables I and II, the following
standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth
below:
(1) Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and
yard maintenance equipment shall not be operated between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet
the applicable limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping
and yard maintenance equipment;
(2) Commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be
operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a
residential property line when operated on commercial or
industrial property, on Sundays or holidays or between the hours of
sundown and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of
sundown and 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays, unless such activities can
meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II. In addition, commercial
or industrial property shall meet the limits set forth in Tables I and
II between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment. This provision shall, at all times, be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 123 of the Code of the
Township of Rochelle Park.
(3) Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
on weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities meet the
limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized equipment used in
construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a
§ 135-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 135-5
135:378
§ 135-6. Enforcement.
muffler. At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do
not apply to construction and demolition activities.
(4) Motorized snowblowers, snow throwers, and lawn equipment with
attached snow plows shall be operated at all times with a muffler.
At all times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply.
[Amended 6-18-2003 by Ord. No. 886-03]
(5) An exterior burglar alarm on a building or motor vehicle must be
activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its
operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated. At all
times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply. [Amended
6-18-2003 by Ord. No. 886-03]
(6) Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated in such a manner
that it is plainly audible at a residential property line between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(7) Personal vehicular music amplification equipment shall not be
operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of
50 feet in any direction from the operator.
(8) Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a public space or
public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m., sound from such equipment shall not be plainly
audible by any person other than the operator.
(9) Sound levels exceeding the limits set forth in Table I and Table II
shall be prohibited between residential units within the same multidwelling-
unit building. Measurements shall be taken indoors as per
§ 135-4B and C.
(10) Outdoor public functions and/or assemblies including any such
activities which take place on private property, commercial
property or any other places of public assembly shall be conducted
in such a manner so that these activities shall not violate the
standards set forth in Table I above. This prohibition shall not apply
to outdoor public functions and/or assemblies conducted by or on
behalf of the Township of Rochelle Park or any of its departments or
commissions, provided that the same are approved by Township
Committee resolution. [Amended 6-18-2003 by Ord. No.
886-03]
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for an
enforcement document to be issued to the violator by the Noise Control
§ 135-5 NOISE § 135-6
135:379
Chapter 136
OBSCENE MATERIAL DISPLAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult motels — See Ch. 130.
§ 136-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
described as follows:
OBSCENE FILM — Any motion-picture film or preview or trailer to a film,
not including newsreels portraying actual current events or pictorial news
of the day, in which a scene taken by itself depicts a specified anatomical
area or specified sexual activity or the simulation of a specified sexual
activity or verbalization concerning a specified sexual activity and emits
sensuality sufficient, in terms of duration and impact of depiction, to appeal
to prurient interests.
OBSCENE MATERIAL — Any description, narrative, account, display or
depiction of a specified anatomical area or specified sexual activity
contained in or consisting of a picture or other representation, publication,
sound recording, live performance or film, which, by means of posing,
composition, format or animated sensual details, emits sensuality with
sufficient impact to concentrate prurient interest on the area or activity.
RETAILER — Any person, corporation, partnership or entity who operates
a store, newsstand, booth, concession or similar business with unimpeded
access for persons under 18 years old, who is in the business of making
sales of periodicals or other publications at retail containing pictures,
drawings or photographs.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA and SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — The
same meanings as detailed in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3a(3) and (4).
Officer according to procedures set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.6. The
recipient of an enforcement document shall be entitled to a hearing in
municipal court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense or not more than $3,000. If the violation
is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
§ 135-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 136-2
136:380
§ 136-2. Display restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any retailer to display or permit to be displayed at
his or her business premises any obscene material at a height of less than
five feet or without a blinder, cover or printing on the front of such display
material so as to conceal the obscene material.
§ 136-3. Presumptive evidence.
The public display of the obscene material shall constitute presumptive
evidence that a retailer knowingly made or permitted such display.
§ 136-4. Violations and penalties.
For a violation hereof, any retailer shall be fined up to $1,000 or imprisoned
for up to 30 days, or both.
Chapter 141
PARKING ON POSTED LANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 177. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
§ 141-1. Parking prohibited. [Amended 10-22-1997 by Ord. No.
758-97A]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle
on lands of another, whether publicly or privately owned in the Township
of Rochelle Park, after notice has been posted as hereinafter provided by
the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee prohibiting such parking. Nothing
herein contained shall apply to any lands lying within the bounds of any
public street or highway. Parking shall be prohibited in the following
specific locations as follows:
A. Midland School parking lot. Parking is hereby restricted in the Midland
School parking lot to staff members only between the hours of 7:30 a.m.
and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. All vehicles double-parked in
said lot during said hours, in addition to the above, shall be considered
as illegally parked.
B. William Street parking area. No parking shall be permitted in the area
adjacent to the school grounds on William Street between the hours of
7:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, when school is in
session. During these hours this area shall be for the exclusive use of
parents for the purpose of discharging and picking up children. All
other vehicles parking in this area during those times shall be
considered as illegally parked. In the William Street parking area no
§ 136-2 OBSCENE MATERIAL DISPLAY § 141-1
136:381
§ 141-2. Erection of signs; defacing.
Suitable signs not less than 18 inches by 24 inches bearing the words NO
PARKING, together with any qualifications or restrictions of such parking,
if any, and conspicuously displayed, shall be posted on said land by the
owner, occupant, lessee or licensee thereof where this chapter is effective.
Defacing, tampering with or damaging such signs when posted shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 141-3. Violations and penalties.99
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine not exceeding $50 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 15
days or both, in the discretion of the Judge before whom such person shall
be convicted.
Chapter 143
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 55.
Consumption of alcoholic beverages in
public — See Ch. 58, Art. II.
Dog control — See Ch. 88.
Hunting and firearms — See Ch. 120.
Littering — See Ch. 127.
Noise — See Ch. 135.
Obscene material display — See Ch. 136.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 144.
person shall park a vehicle whenever snow is falling and the
accumulation is such that it covers the parking area. Such parking
prohibition shall remain in effect until after the snow fall has ceased
and the snow has been cleared from the parking area.
C. Midland Street parking area. During business hours, which are defined
as Monday through Friday, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., the west side of Midland Street shall be for the exclusive use of
Nalbandian Associates, its representatives, employees, customers,
clients and patrons as well as those of its tenants. All other vehicles
parked in this area during these times shall be considered illegally
parked. [Added 10-15-2003 by Ord. No. 896-03]
D. Rochelle Park Medical Center parking area. This parking area shall be
for the exclusive use of Medical Center staff and patients. All other
vehicles parked in this area shall be considered illegally parked.
[Added 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1018-10]
99.Editor’s Note: See also Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 141-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 143-1
143:382
§ 143-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISORDERLY ASSEMBLAGE — Two or more persons gathered together and
acting in a boisterous, offensive or threatening manner toward each other
or others or committing an act or acts which are a breach of the peace or
which tend to create a breach of the peace.
DISORDERLY HOUSE — A house, store or building, or any part thereof,
which is used for gambling or is frequented by gamblers, prostitutes,
vagrants or disorderly persons or in which the law is habitually violated.
HOUSE OF ILL FAME — A house or building, or any part thereof, in
which prostitution, lewdness or other immoral or unlawful sexual acts are
permitted.
VAGRANT — A person without visible means of support, who is idle and,
though able to work for his maintenance, refuses to do so and lives without
labor or on the charity of others.
§ 143-2. Disorderly houses; lewd and immoral acts.100
No person shall maintain or aid, assist or abet the maintenance of a
disorderly house or of a house of ill fame. No person shall commit any lewd
or immoral act in any house, building, public or private place. No person
shall appear in any street or public place in a state of nudity, or in an
indecent or lewd attire; or shall exhibit, sell or offer to sell or dispose of any
indecent or lewd book, picture or thing.
§ 143-3. Indecent language.
No person shall utter any loud, profane, indecent, lewd, abusive or offensive
language in a public place or any threatening, offensive, profane, indecent
or obscene language or commit any act which tends to endanger the public
peace.
§ 143-4. Disturbance of assemblages.
A. No person shall, by noisy or disorderly conduct, disturb or interfere
with the quiet or good order of any place of assembly, public or private,
including schools, churches, libraries and reading rooms, between
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. This section shall be used in conjunction with Chapter 135, Noise,
whenever possible.
100. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 136, Obscene Material Display.
§ 143-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 143-5
143:383
§ 143-5. Disorderly assemblages.
No person shall take any part in or aid, abet or assist a disorderly
assemblage.
§ 143-6. Fighting.
No person shall engage in a fight or personal encounter, or use or attempt
to use physical violence toward another.
§ 143-7. Solicitation for personal use.101
No person shall solicit from house to house or in any public street, park or
public place a gift of money, clothing or other things for his own use.
§ 143-8. Animal fights, prize fights and boxing contests.
No person shall take part in or aid or abet in a cock fight, dog fight or any
unlawful prize fight or boxing contest.
§ 143-9. Interference with fire alarm system; false alarms.102
No person shall interfere with, deface or mutilate any fire alarm box or fire
alarm system, or any part thereof or any apparatus connected therewith; or
shall knowingly give, send or cause to be given or sent a false fire alarm.
§ 143-10. Expectoration in public.
No person shall expectorate or in an other manner expel bodily fluids or
other matter in a public street or place or upon any sidewalk or on the
sidewall, floor or platform of any building or of a vehicle used for public
transportation.
§ 143-11. Permit required for public playing of musical instrument.
No person shall play any hand organ, street organ, hurdy gurdy or other
musical instrument in any street or public place after 6:00 p.m. of any day,
unless a permit therefor is obtained from the township.
§ 143-12. Loitering; penalty.
A. No person shall loiter in or upon any street or other public place within
the township.
B. For the purposes of this section, a person shall be loitering if he:
(1) Obstructs the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles and fails or
refuses to move on when ordered by a peace officer;
101. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 144, Peddling and Soliciting.
102. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 55, Alarms.
§ 143-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 143-12
143:384
§ 143-13. Disturbance of Municipal Court.
No person shall interfere with the proceedings of the Municipal Court of the
Township of Rochelle Park or use any offensive or abusive language to any
Judge or Acting Judge holding such Court.
§ 143-14. Disturbing or endangering public peace.
No person shall, in any house, building or grounds belonging thereto or
in or upon any street or public place or public conveyance, disturb or
endanger the public peace or health by any offensive or disorderly act or
language.
§ 143-15. Operation of elevators.
No person, other than the person in charge of the operation of an elevator,
shall handle, operate or manipulate any rope, shifting rod lever or other
apparatus or thing attached to or used to start or stop an elevator, unless
requested to do so by the person in charge thereof.
§ 143-16. Interference with municipal officials.
No person shall interfere by force with a member of the Police or Fire
Department or an officer of the Township of Rochelle Park in the
performance of his duties or shall prevent or attempt to prevent such
member or officer from performing his duty.
(2) Obstructs, molests or interferes with any person lawfully upon any
public street or other public place;
(3) Stands idly or walks about aimlessly with intent to provoke a
breach of the public peace;
(4) Stands idly or walks about aimlessly using loud, wanton or
lascivious speech which warrants alarm for the safety of persons or
property in the vicinity; or
(5) Sleeps in or upon any street, park, public place or public building.
C. For the purposes of this section, the term "other public place" shall be
deemed to include the public or quasi-public area in front of or adjacent
to any store, shop or other place of business and shall also include any
parking lot or other vacant private property not owned or under the
dominion of the person charged with a violation of this section.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both.
§ 143-12 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 143-17
143:385
§ 143-17. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided in this chapter, any person
who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to penalties not exceeding $500 for the first offense, $750 for the
second offense and $1,000 for a third offense and/or a term of imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 144
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solicitation for personal use — See Ch. 143.
§ 143-17 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 143-17
143:386
ARTICLE I
Hawking and Peddling
[Adopted 6-19-1925 by Ord. No. 30]
§ 144-1. Definitions.
§ 144-2. License required.
No person shall hereafter carry on, conduct or engage in the calling,
occupation or business of a hawker, a peddler or an itinerant vendor of
merchandise, medicines or remedies unless he shall have first procured a
license as herein provided and shall at all times when engaged in such
business or occupation have such license upon his person or conspicuously
displayed upon any vehicle or stand which may be used in connection with
such business or occupation.
§ 144-3. Issuance of license.
The licenses herein required shall be issued by the Township Committee
of the Township of Rochelle Park the presentation of a proper application
therefor and the payment of the fee herein fixed, which fee shall be for the
use of the township.
§ 144-4. Application for license; records and reports.
All applications for a license shall be made in writing and filed with the
Township Clerk of the Township of Rochelle Park. The application shall state
the name of the applicant, his address, the nature of the license desired and
such other facts as the Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle
Park may from time to time require. The Township Clerk shall keep a record
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
HAWKER — A person who, in a public street or place, cries forth the
goods, wares and merchandise which he has to sell.
ITINERANT VENDOR — A person who, having no regular place of
business within the Township of Rochelle Park, brings merchandise,
medicines or remedies into the Township of Rochelle Park to be sold in
the streets or public places.
PEDDLER — A person who travels from house to house with goods,
wares or merchandise for the purpose of selling the same. The term
does not include a person peddling the product of a farm owned by him
and situated in this state.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, voluntary
association or an incorporated association.
B. Word usage. Unless otherwise expressly provided, the singular shall
include the plural and the masculine the feminine.
§ 144-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-4
143:387
of all licenses issued, which record shall show the date of the issuance, the
number of the license, the character of the license, the name and address
of the person licensed and the amount of the fee paid. The Township Clerk
shall remit all moneys received from license fees as herein provided to the
Township Committee on or before the first day of the succeeding month
when such fee or fees were received, and shall also make a written report to
the Township Committee for each calendar month, setting forth the number
of each kind of license issued and the amount collected and remitted to the
Township Committee.
§ 144-5. Kinds of licenses.
The licenses issued hereunder shall be of two kinds: annual license and
temporary license. An annual license is a license which will remain in force
continuously until the first day of January next succeeding its issue, unless
previously revoked as herein provided. A temporary license is a license
granted for a single act or permitting the carrying on of a business or
occupation for a limited time, not exceeding three consecutive days.
§ 144-6. License forms.
The forms of licenses and applications therefor shall be prepared and
furnished by the Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park.
All licenses shall be numbered consecutively. Annual licenses shall bear, in
addition to the serial number, the letter "A"; temporary licenses shall bear,
in addition to the serial number, the letter "T." It shall be the duty of the
Township Clerk to keep a record of all license blanks used.
§ 144-7. Licenses not transferable.
No license granted hereunder shall be transferable, and no license shall
apply to any person other than the one named therein.
§ 144-8. Exhibition of license.
Every person engaged in an occupation or business for which a license is
required by the provisions of this article shall exhibit such license at any
time upon the request of a member of the Police Department or any other
person.
§ 144-9. Revocation of license. [Amended 2-28-2018 by Ord. No.
1123-18]
A license may be revoked by the Mayor and Township Committee by reason
of the violation of the terms of the license, the violation of any municipal
ordinance, state or federal statute or falsification in applying for a license.
The licensee shall be granted a hearing by the Mayor and Township
Committee upon his request. A license may be suspended for not more
than two weeks by the Chief of Police without a hearing. No fees shall be
returned for any unexpired period of a license, whether revoked or not.
§ 144-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 144-10
143:388
§ 144-10. Limited effect of license.
No license granted in pursuance of this article shall create any vested rights
or grant any privileges other than the privilege of conducting such business
or occupation in accordance with the statutes of this state, this article and
any other ordinance of the township.
§ 144-11. Operating at fixed location.
No person holding a license as a hawker, peddler or itinerant vendor shall
remain in any one place for the purpose of conducting such business or
occupation for more than 15 minutes at any one time unless he shall have
procured a license from the Township Committee to conduct such business
or occupation at such location, which location must be stated in such
license.
§ 144-12. Purpose of fees.
The license fees herein imposed are imposed for the purpose of revenue.
§ 144-13. License fees.
§ 144-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable for each offense by a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $200 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both.
A. The fees for licenses herein provided for shall be as follows for a
hawker, huckster, peddler or itinerant vendor of merchandise,
medicines or remedies: [Amended 8-24-1930 by Ord. No. 102;
5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
(1) For an annual license: $100.
(2) For a temporary license: $25.
B. In case an annual license is issued on or before the first day of August in
any year, a full license fee shall be paid. In case an annual license is
issued after the first day of August in any year, the fee for the remainder
of such year shall be 1/2 of that herein provided for an annual license.
All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December of each year.
§ 144-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-14
143:389

ARTICLE II
Soliciting
[Adopted 4-25-1949 as Ord. No. 158]
§ 144-15. Title.
This article shall be known as and referred to as "Solicitors Licensing
Ordinance."
§ 144-16. Permit required for soliciting.
No person shall sell, solicit or canvass for future delivery any article or
thing in the Township of Rochelle Park, New Jersey, without first obtaining
a permit therefor.
§ 144-17. Permit required for distribution of circulars and samples.
No person shall distribute circulars, posters, periodicals, magazines, tracts,
pamphlets, samples of merchandise or any similar article or thing in the
Township of Rochelle Park, New Jersey, without first obtaining a permit
therefor.
§ 144-18. Issuance of permits; fee. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
All permits required by this article shall be issued or denied in writing by
the Chief of Police of the Township of Rochelle Park within 10 days after
application therefor, and all applications therefor shall be directed to him.
Each application shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.
§ 144-19. Contents of application.
The application referred to in § 144-18 hereof shall contain:
A. Full name.
B. Address.
C. Age.
D. Sex.
E. Marital status.
F. Height.
G. Weight.
H. Place of birth.
I. Legal residence for last five years.
J. Criminal record, if any.
§ 144-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-19
143:391
§ 144-20. Denial of permit.
If it shall appear for the best interest of the township that the permit applied
for be denied, the Chief of Police shall refuse to issue said permit.
§ 144-21. Hours for use of permit; revocation.
Said permit shall be good only from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., prevailing time,
for the day or days set forth therein and shall be subject to immediate
revocation and is invalid on Sundays.
§ 144-22. Possession of permit; exhibition.
Any person receiving a permit under this article, while occupied in
accordance herewith, shall carry the permit upon his or her person and
exhibit same when requested to any resident or official.
§ 144-23. Conduct of solicitors.
Any person receiving a permit under this article, while occupied in
accordance herewith, shall be courteous to all residents and persons within
the Township of Rochelle Park and shall conduct himself or herself properly
at all times.
§ 144-24. Solicitor's badge; failure to return.
Any person receiving a permit under this article, while occupied in
accordance herewith, shall display conspicuously upon his or her person a
badge or button furnished by the Chief of Police, for which a deposit of $2
is required and which deposit shall be returned upon the surrender of said
badge or button within 24 hours after expiration of said permit. The failure
to return said badge or button within 24 hours will constitute a violation of
this article.
§ 144-25. Exceptions.
This article shall not affect any person engaged in the delivery of goods,
wares or merchandise or other article or thing in the regular course of
business to the premises of persons ordering or entitled to receive the same.
K. Name and address of employer.
L. Purpose for which permit is required.
M. Fingerprints.
N. Any other information the Chief of Police may require.
§ 144-19 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 144-26
143:392
§ 144-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200 or
imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days in the county jail, or both,
in the discretion of the Judge by whom such person shall be convicted.
§ 144-26 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-26
143:393

ARTICLE III
Peddling, Soliciting and Canvassing by Minors
[Adopted 12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 764-97]
§ 144-27. Prohibited acts; exceptions.
A. No child under the age of 18 years shall go door-to-door within the
Township of Rochelle Park for the purpose of peddling, soliciting or
canvassing, as those terms are used and defined in this chapter, unless
accompanied by a parent or guardian or an adult supervisor 25 years of
age or older.
B. Prohibition to knowingly suffer or permit. No parent, guardian or other
person having legal charge over a child under 18 years of age shall
knowingly suffer or permit such child to go door-to-door within the
Township of Rochelle Park for the purposes of peddling, soliciting or
canvassing, as those terms are used and defined in this chapter.
C. Inducement prohibited. No person, organization, corporation or other
legal entity shall induce a child under the age of 18 years to go door-todoor
within the Township of Rochelle Park for the purpose of peddling,
soliciting or canvassing, as those terms are used and defined in this
chapter:
(1) By distributing to such children goods or merchandise to be sold
door-to-door;
(2) By requesting such children, either in writing or orally, to go doorto-
door for the purpose of peddling, soliciting or canvassing; or
(3) By offering such children prizes or awards for such door-to-door
peddling, soliciting or canvassing, unless prior thereto each such
child is personally served with a copy of this article and without
first obtaining a signed written statement from the parent,
guardian or legal representative of each such child acknowledging
receipt of such article, that they have read and understand said
article and giving their permission for their child or ward to go
door-to-door for the purpose of peddling, soliciting or canvassing.
Said written and signed statements shall be filed with the Clerk for
a period of not less than six months following the conclusion of the
door-to-door peddling, soliciting or canvassing for which the signed
statements were obtained by the person, organization, corporation,
or other legal entity responsible for inducing a child under the age
of 18 years to go door to door peddling, soliciting or canvassing
prior to the commencement of such door-to-door peddling,
soliciting or canvassing by such children.
D. Exceptions. Nothing contained herein is intended nor shall it be
construed to prohibit children below the age of 18 years from going
door-to-door within the Township of Rochelle Park for the purpose of
soliciting treats on Halloween, commonly known as "trick-or-treating,"
§ 144-27 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-27
143:395
§ 144-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $100 nor exceeding $1,000 or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
and for the purpose of distributing leaflets, flyers, pamphlets,
newspapers, periodicals or other written material not involving
personal contact with the intended recipient.
§ 144-27 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 144-28
143:396
ARTICLE IV
Nonsolicitation List
[Adopted 2-28-2018 by Ord. No. 1123-18]
§ 144-29. Collection, preparation and maintenance of
nonsolicitation list.
§ 144-30. Hours of operation.
No peddling, hawking or solicitation, as defined herein and which is covered
by this chapter, shall occur before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Monday
through Saturday. Furthermore, no such activity of any kind shall occur on
Sundays.
A. Collection, preparation and maintenance of a nonsolicitation list. The
office of the Township Clerk shall collect, prepare and maintain a list of
addresses of those premises where the owner and/or occupant has
notified the Clerk that soliciting and canvassing is not permitted on his/
her premises. To be included on the nonsolicitation list, residents shall
complete a form supplied and maintained by the Township, without cost
to the resident. With the adoption of this section, the office of the Clerk
shall make the form available to all residential property owners or
occupants and may distribute same thereafter in any manner directed
by the governing body.
B. The Township Clerk, or her designees, shall submit the nonsolicitation
list to the Chief of Police on a quarterly basis, which nonsolicitation
listing shall be distributed to applicants seeking a license to solicit or
canvass pursuant to the provisions of this chapter by the Township
Clerk. The applicant shall acknowledge, in writing, receipt of this list as
part of the application process. The licensee shall not solicit or canvass
at any address on the nonsolicitation list.
C. On or about January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1 of each year, the
Office of the Clerk shall update the list. The updated list shall then be
forwarded to the Chief of Police for distribution to solicitors and/or
canvassers, and said list shall not contain residents' names. Nothing
herein shall prohibit the more frequent updating of the list by the
appropriate Township official.
D. Any solicitor or canvasser violating the provisions of this section as
described above shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000
or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or both, in
the discretion of the court, and the revocation of his or her permit.
§ 144-29 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 144-30
143:397
Chapter 150
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 70.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 112.
Housing — See Ch. 117.
§ 150-1. Adoption of standards. [Added 8-20-2014 by Ord. No.
1074-14103]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office the
Township Clerk of the Township of Rochelle Park, being marked and
designated as the "International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition,"
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the Property Maintenance Code of the Township of Rochelle Park in
the State of New Jersey for regulating and governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit
for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures
unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in
the office of the Township Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made
a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 150-2 of this chapter.
§ 150-2. Additions, insertions and changes. [Added 8-20-2014 by
Ord. No. 1074-14104]
A. The following sections are hereby revised:
(1) Section 101.1: The Township of Rochelle Park.
(2) Section 103.5: See fee schedule attached.
(3) Section 112.4: A fine of not less than $250 or more than $1,200.
(4) Section 302.4: Eight inches.
(5) Section 304.14: March 1 to October 1.
(6) Section 602.3: October 15 to April 15.
103. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 150-1, Adoption of standards.
104. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 150-2, Repealer. See now § 150-3.
§ 144-30 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 150-2
143:398
(7) Section 602.4: November 1 to April 1.
B. The following sections are hereby added: [Added 9-27-2017 by Ord.
No. 1115-17]
(1) Dead or diseased trees or tree limbs.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of all property owners within
the Township of Rochelle Park to remove any loose or overhanging
dead or diseased trees or tree limbs which could threaten the
health and safety of persons or property by reason of their location
above ground level and which constitute an actual hazard to
persons, property or vehicles in the vicinity thereof. In order to
facilitate the enforcement of this provision, the Health Department
or Property Maintenance Officer shall:
1. Investigate the potential hazard and, if necessary, request
access to the property to complete the investigation. If access
to the property is denied, a determination may be made with
evidence available or from other sources.
2. Make a determination as to whether circumstances exist to
identify the condition as hazardous and also determine if the
hazardous condition poses a risk to other properties in the
vicinity or contiguous to the subject property;
3. Advise the property owner, in writing, of the hazardous
condition and provide a period of not less than 10 days for the
correction or abatement of the same; and
4. In the event that the condition is not so abated or corrected,
enforcement proceedings may be commenced, including,
without being limited to, imposition of a fine and other costs or
penalties as set forth in the Code of the Township of Rochelle
Park.
5. In the event that the property owner disputes the conclusion of
the municipal official that a dangerous condition exists, the
Township shall retain a qualified tree care expert or arborist in
order to evaluate the condition and render an opinion as to the
same. The opinion of the tree care expert or arborist shall be
conclusive and final. The property owner shall have a period of
10 days from service of the final determination of the
municipality's expert in order to abate or correct the condition.
6. If the property owner wishes to address the condition by
attempting to revive/rehabilitate the tree, they may do so
under the guidance of a tree care expert. A written plan of
treatment and a timeframe to complete the treatment must be
submitted to the Township Arborist for review. Active
treatment of the hazardous tree is subject to review every
§ 150-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 150-2
143:399
§ 150-3. Repealer. [Added 8-20-2014 by Ord. No. 1074-14105]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
§ 150-4. Affect on suits, proceedings and rights.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereto
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed as cited in § 150-2 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right
or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 150-5. Completion of construction; property maintenance during
construction. [Added 6-16-2004 by Ord. No. 908-04]
three months until the tree is deemed healthy or the tree is
removed.
7. In the event that the property owner fails to address the hazard
and the services of an arborist or tree care expert are required
to remove the hazard, all costs incurred by the municipality for
such expert shall be the responsibility of the property owner
deemed responsible for the condition.
The property owner in receipt of a notice from the municipality
of a potentially dangerous condition shall immediately provide
written notice of receipt of same to his or her homeowners'
insurance company.
A. Completion of construction. All construction for which a permit has
been issued pursuant to the provisions of the Uniform Construction
Code must be completed within the time period set forth in the Uniform
Construction Code. Construction permits, once issued, shall be
permitted to remain open for the period set forth in the Code.
B. Notice to property owner of permits open for more than one year. The
Construction Official of the Township of Rochelle Park shall provide
written notice of the requirements of the within ordinance to all owners
of property for which construction permits have been open for a period
of one year or more. The notice shall be forwarded to the property
address and owner as the same appears on the records of the Tax
Assessor of the Township of Rochelle Park and a copy of same shall be
provided to the owner, agent or contractor which secured construction
permits.
C. Substantial completion. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code, exterior construction must be substantially
105. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 150-3, Additions, insertions and
changes. See now § 150-2.
§ 150-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 150-5
143:400
complete within one year of the issuance of construction permits.
"Substantial completion" shall be deemed to provide for the completion
of major elements of the exterior of the structure, modification, addition
or improvement, including roofing, siding, masonry, windows and
doors.
D. Property maintenance during construction. All construction projects
that provide for construction which extends for more than one year
beyond the date of issuance of the initial construction permit shall
comply with the following:
(1) All property maintenance requirements of the 2003 BOCA National
Property Maintenance Code shall apply notwithstanding the
ongoing nature of the construction.
(2) No construction materials may be stored outside. All construction
materials must be stored inside or stored in the rear yard, covered
at all times, and shall not be visible from the street.
(3) Construction debris must be stored in a manner which shall not be
visible from the street or from adjacent properties. All construction
debris must be placed in dumpsters or containers which must be
removed within 24 hours of placement.
(4) Pest control and extermination services must he provided at all
times. A service agreement with a licensed pest control company
shall be required and proof of same must be supplied to the
Construction Official as a further condition of all outstanding
permits.
(5) All construction equipment and vehicles must be removed from the
property when not in use. No construction equipment or vehicles
may remain on site on Sundays or overnight.
E. Storage of materials/equipment. Notwithstanding the provisions of
Subsection D above, and commencing six months after issuance of the
first construction permit, no construction equipment, vehicles,
materials, tools or machinery may be stored or maintained, while not in
use, in the front yard of any property which is the subject of
construction. "Front yard" shall be defined in accordance with the
Township of Rochelle Park Zoning Code.106
F. Continuation of construction. It shall be the duty and responsibility of
the property owner and contractor to commence construction within a
reasonable period of time after issuance of permits and proceed as
expeditiously as possible to completion of construction. Construction
may not be suspended for a period of more than 30 days throughout
construction, including during the first year of construction. The
exterior of the premises shall be kept free of the following matter,
materials or conditions:
106. Editor's Note: See Ch. 185, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 150-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 150-5
143:401
(1) Except in connection with the municipal collection of same,
garbage and all abandoned, discarded, useless for its intended
purposes, and unused solid waste matter or materials, including, by
way of example and not limitations, appliances, bedding, hot water
heaters, construction materials, furniture, machinery and metal
scrap;
(2) Structurally unsound, loose, dangerous, crumbling, missing,
broken, rotted or unsafe exterior portions of buildings or
structures, including but not limited to porches, landings,
balconies, stairways, handrails, steps, walls, overhangs, roofs,
fences, supporting members, timber abutments, fire escapes, signs,
loose or crumbling bricks, stones, mortar or plaster;
(3) Abandoned, uncovered or structurally unsound shafts, towers,
television antennas, satellite dish antennas, exterior cellar
openings, basement hatchways, foundations or excavations (as
determined by the enforcement officers hereinafter set forth);
(4) Structurally unsafe or unsound fences;
(5) Hidden or uncovered ground or surface hazards such as holes,
depressions, tree roots, sharp or jagged projections or obstructions
in areas accessible to the general public;
(6) Loose and overhanging objects, including but not limited to dead
trees or tree limbs, accumulations of ice or any object, natural or
man-made, which could threaten the health and safety of persons
or other similarly overhanging objects which by reason of their
location above ground level, constitute an actual hazard to persons
or vehicles in the vicinity thereof;
(7) Exterior surfaces or parts of buildings or structures containing
sharp, rough or projecting surfaces or objects which may cause a
safety hazard to persons coming in contact therewith in areas
accessible to the general public;
(8) Broken glass or windows; rotted or missing or substantially
destroyed window frames, exterior doors or other major exterior
components of buildings or structures;
(9) Automotive parts and lubricating oils;
(10) Substantial peeling or flaking paint on two or more sides of a
structure or building, loose siding or insulation, shingles, shutters
and awnings; and
(11) Exposed exterior surfaces remaining in a state of disrepair for a
period of more than 30 days, or incomplete exterior construction
which has been suspended for a period of more than 30 days.
G. Exemptions.
§ 150-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 150-5
143:402
§ 150-6. Enforcement. [Added 8-17-2016 by Ord. No. 1103-16]
In addition to the enforcing agencies set forth in the international property
maintenance code and other ordinance of the Township, the provisions
of this ordinance may also be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Code
Enforcement and all inspectors appointed within that department.
Chapter 150A
(1) State, county and local construction projects.
(2) Work being done by a not-for-profit organization with work being
done by volunteers or using donated material.
(3) Construction being undertaken under the control of a Planning or
Zoning Board resolution, which specifically indicates time limits
different from those contained within the Code.
(4) Construction done under multiple permits with different start
dates.
H. Violations. Any person, persons or entity who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section or any other promulgated hereunder shall,
after a summons is issued under the terms hereof, upon conviction, be
punished as follows:
(1) For a first offense, by a fine not to exceed $500;
(2) For a second offense, by a fine not to exceed $ 1,000;
(3) For a third offense, or any subsequent offenses, by a fine not to
exceed $1,250 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not
to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment;
(4) In addition to the monetary penalties set forth above, upon
conviction, the Court shall order that the violation be corrected
within a reasonable time as determined under the circumstances
by the Court. If the order is not complied with, the Township may
without further notice correct the violation at the expense of the
violator. If the violator does not reimburse the Township for the
expense of correcting the violation, such amount shall be certified
to the Township Tax Collector and shall constitute a lien upon the
subject premises.
(5) In addition, the Construction Official may, in his discretion, revoke
any open permits for failure to comply with the requirements of this
section.
(6) Each violation of any of the provisions of this section and each day
that a summons is issued shall be deemed to be a separate and
distinct offense, which may be merged into one offense in the
discretion of the Court.
§ 150-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 150-6
143:403
PROPERTY, RENTAL
§ 150-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 150-6
143:404
ARTICLE I
Short-Term Rentals
[Adopted 6-21-2017 by Ord. No. 1111-17]
§ 150A-1. Findings.
The Mayor and Township Committee hereby find and adopt, as if set forth
more fully herein, the fact assertions of the "whereas" clauses of this
article,107 as their findings of fact.
§ 150A-2. Prohibited Uses.
§ 150A-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISE OR ADVERTISING — Any form of solicitation, promotion and
communication for marketing, used to solicit, encourage, persuade or
manipulate viewers, readers or listeners into contracting for goods and/
or services in violation of this article, as same may be viewed through
various media, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, flyers,
handbills, pamphlets, commercials, radio, direct mail, Internet websites,
or text or other electronic messages for the purpose of establishing
occupancies or uses of rental property, for consideration, which are
prohibited by this article.
CONSIDERATION — Soliciting, charging, demanding, receiving or
accepting any legally recognized form of consideration, including a promise
or benefit, a quid pro quo, rent, fees, other form of payment, or thing of
value.
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or portion thereof, whether furnished or
unfurnished, which is occupied in whole or in part, or intended, arranged
or designed to be occupied, for sleeping, dwelling, cooking, gathering and/
or entertaining, as a residential occupancy, by one or more persons. This
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Borough
Code, it shall be unlawful for an owner, lessor, sublessor, any other
person(s) or entity(ies) with possessory or use right(s) in a dwelling
unit, their principals, partner or shareholders, or their agents,
employees, representative and other person(s) or entity(ies), acting in
concert or a combination thereof, to receive or obtain actual or
anticipated consideration for soliciting, advertising, offering, and/or
permitting, allowing, or failing to discontinue the use or occupancy of
any dwelling unit, as defined herein, for a period of 30 days or less.
B. Nothing in this article will prevent formation of an otherwise lawful
occupancy of a dwelling unit for a rental period of more than 30 days.
107. Editor's Note: "This article" refers to Ord. No. 1111-17, adopted 6-21-2017. The complete
text of the ordinance, including the "whereas" clauses, are on file in the Township offices.
§ 150A-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 150A-3
143:405
definition includes an apartment, condominium, building, cooperative,
converted space or portions thereof, that is offered to use, made available
for use, or is used for accommodations, lodging, cooking, sleeping,
gathering and/or entertaining of occupants and/or guest(s), for
consideration, for a period of 30 days or less.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — Constitutes a family-type situation, involving
one or more persons living together, that exhibit the kind of stability,
permanency and functional lifestyle equivalent to that of a traditional family
unit, as further described in the applicable reported and unreported
decisions of the New Jersey Superior Court.
OCCUPANT — Any individual using, inhabiting, living, gathering,
entertaining, being entertained as a guest, or sleeping in a dwelling unit,
or portion thereof, or having other permission or possessor right(s) within a
dwelling unit.
OWNER — Any person(s) or entity(ies), association, limited liability
company, corporation or partnership or any combination, who legally use,
possess, own, lease, sublease or license (including an operator, principal,
shareholder, director, agent or employee, individual or collectively) that
has charge, care, control or participates in the expenses and/or profit of a
dwelling unit pursuant to a written or unwritten agreement, rental, lease,
license, use, occupancy agreement or any other agreement.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
limited liability company, association, entity and any person(s) and/or
entity(ies) acting in concert or any combination therewith.
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY — The use of a dwelling unit by an occupant(s).
§ 150A-4. Permitted Uses.
The residential occupancy of an otherwise lawful and lawfully occupied
dwelling unit for a period of 30 days or less by any person who is a member
of the housekeeping unit of the owner, without consideration, such as house
guests, is permitted.
§ 150A-5. Advertising Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to advertise, solicit or promote by any means actions in
violation of this article.
§ 150A-6. Enforcement; Violations and Penalties.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Building Code
Official, Fire Official, Health Department, other Subcode or Code
Official, as their jurisdiction may arise, including legal counsel for the
Borough or other persons designated by the Township Committee, to
issue municipal civil infractions directing alleged violators of this
article and/or to appear in court or file civil complaints.
§ 150A-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 150A-6
143:406
B. A violation of this article is herby declared to be a public nuisance per
se, and is hereby further found and declared to be offensive to the
public health, safety and welfare.
C. Any person found to have violated any provision of this article without
regard to intent or knowledge, shall be liable for the maximum civil
penalty, upon adjudicated violation or admission of a fine not exceeding
$1,250. Each day of such violations shall be a new and separate
violation of this article.
D. The penalty imposed herein shall be in addition to any and all other
remedies that may accrue under any other law, including, but not
limited to, eviction proceedings and/or injunction, reasonable
attorneys' fees or other fees and costs, in the Borough's Municipal
Court or the Superior Court of New Jersey in the vicinage of Bergen
County or in such other court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, by
either summary disposition or by zoning or construction code municipal
proceeding.
§ 150A-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 150A-6
143:407
Chapter 151
PROPERTY, VACANT AND ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 150.
§ 150A-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 150A-6
143:408
ARTICLE I
Registration and Maintenance
[Adopted 10-15-2014 by Ord. No. 1078-14]
§ 151-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Any title holder, any agent of the title holder having authority to
act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity subject to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, § 17, as amended by P.L.
2009, c. 296), or any other entity determined by the Township of Rochelle
Park to have authority to act with respect to the property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used as a residence which
is not legally occupied or at which substantially all lawful construction
operations or residential occupancy has ceased, and which is in such
condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without repair or
rehabilitation, including but not limited to any property meeting the
definition of abandoned property in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80; provided, however,
that any property where all building systems are in working order, where
the building and grounds are maintained in good order, or where the
building is in habitable condition, and where the building is being actively
marketed by its owner for sale or rental, shall not be deemed a vacant
property for purposes of this article.
§ 151-2. Registration requirements.
Effective January 1, 2015, the owner of any vacant property as defined
herein shall, within 30 calendar days after the building becomes vacant
property or within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of the vacant
property, whichever is later; or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice
by the municipality, file a registration statement for such vacant property
with the Property Maintenance Officer on forms provided by the Township
for such purposes. Failure to receive notice from the municipality shall not
constitute grounds for failing to register the property.
A. Each party having a separate block and lot number as designated in
official records of the municipality shall be registered separately.
B. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of a person 21
years or older, designated by the owner or owners as the authorized
agent for receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process
in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on
behalf of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of
any applicable code; and the name, street address, telephone number,
and e-mail address (if applicable) of the firm and the actual name(s) of
the firm's individual principal(s) responsible for maintaining the
property, who shall be available by telephone or in person on a twenty-
§ 151-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-2
143:409
§ 151-3. Access to vacant properties.
The owner of any vacant property registered under this article shall provide
access to the Township to conduct exterior and interior inspections of the
building to determine compliance with municipal codes, upon reasonable
notice to the property owner or the designated agent. Such inspections shall
be carried out on weekdays during the hours of 9:00 a.m. through 4:00 p.m.,
or such other time as may be mutually agreed upon between the owner and
the Township.
§ 151-4. Responsible owner or agent.
four-hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week basis. The two entities may be
the same or different persons. Both entities shown on the statement
must maintain offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the
State of New Jersey.
C. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration except for the initial registration time, which shall be
prorated through December 31. The owner shall be required to renew
the registration annually as long as the building remains a vacant
property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount
prescribed in this article for each vacant property registered.
D. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1 each year. The
initial registration fee shall be prorated for registration statements
received less than 10 months prior to that date, but not the escrow fee.
E. The owner shall notify the Property Maintenance Officer within 30
calendar days of any change in the registration information by filing an
amended registration statement on a form provided by the Property
Maintenance Officer for such purpose.
F. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township against the
owner or owners of the building.
A. An owner who meets the requirements of this article with respect to the
location of his or her residence or workplace in the State of New Jersey
may designate himself or herself as agent or as the individual
responsible for maintaining the property.
B. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
§ 151-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 151-4
143:410
§ 151-5. Fee schedule.
§ 151-6. Requirements of owners of vacant property.
The owner of any building that has become vacant property, and any person
maintaining or operating or collecting rent for any such building that has
become vacant, shall, within 30 days thereof:
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the
Township of Rochelle Park, in writing, of a change of authorized agent
or until the owner files a new annual registration statement.
C. Any owner who fails to register a vacant property under the provisions
of this article shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting
on the building, in plain view, and by service of notice at the last known
address of the owner of the property on record with the Township of
Rochelle Park, by regular and certified mail, any and all notices of code
violations and all process in an administrative proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the building.
A. The initial registration fee for each building shall be $100. The fee for
each subsequent year renewal shall be $100. In addition to such
registration fee, the owner shall post an escrow for each and every
vacant property according to the annual fee schedule below. Said
escrow shall be used for any costs expended by the Township in
maintaining, abating, or correcting any nuisance or property
maintenance violation, or securing the premises from unauthorized
entry and any other matter that the Township deems appropriate for the
public's health, safety and welfare.
B. Vacant property escrow schedule.
(1) Initial registration: $500 (year of registration).
(2) First renewal: $1,500 (second calendar year).
(3) Second renewal: $3,000 (third calendar year).
(4) Subsequent renewal: $5,000 (fourth or more calendar years).
C. The initial escrow shall be deposited at the time of registration, and all
subsequent years shall be posted by January 31 of the following year. If
at any point the escrow shall become deficient, the owner shall
replenish the escrow account according to years since initial
registration. Any unused escrow amount shall be refunded to the owner
at the time the premises becomes occupied and shall not be subject to
the requirements of this article.
A. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in the applicable provisions of the Township Code, or as set forth in the
rules and regulations supplementing those codes, until the building is
§ 151-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-6
143:411
§ 151-7. Rights of Township.
§ 151-8. Enforcement.
The Property Maintenance Officer shall enforce this article.
§ 151-9. Violations and penalties.
again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of
the building is complete; and
B. Ensure that the exterior grounds of the structure, including yards,
fences, swimming pools, sidewalks, walkways, rights-of-way, alleys,
retaining walls, attached or unattached accessory structures and
driveways, are well maintained and free from trash, debris, loose litter,
and grass and weed growth.
A. If the owner is in violation of any terms and conditions of this article,
the Township shall send notice to the owner, via certified and regular
mail, as identified on the registration, that such violation must be
remedied within 30 days. If such violation is not remedied within 30
days of such notice, the Township shall cause a summons to be issued.
B. In addition to such summons, the Township shall have the right to
expend public funds in order to abate the nuisance, correct or remedy
the violation, or secure the premises against unauthorized entry, and
such costs shall be paid from the escrow established pursuant to
§ 151-5B.
C. If the amount of escrow posted shall be insufficient to reimburse the
municipality for such costs, then notice shall be given to the owner, and
any unpaid costs after 30 days shall become a lien upon the property
and shall be added to and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed
and levied and shall be certified to the person or persons whose duty it
is to collect the taxes of the Township and shall be collected in the same
manner and at the same time as other taxes.
D. For the purposes of obnoxious weeds or growth, the cutting of the
grass, or removal of snow and ice, the notice provided to the owner
pursuant to Subsection A above, shall include such notice that unless
the owner shall object, a regular schedule shall be established between
the contractor and the Township to trim said obnoxious weeds or
growth, to cut the grass, or to remove the snow and ice on the property.
Said regular schedule of work shall be no more than twice a month.
A. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement
within 30 calendar days after a building becomes vacant property or
within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of a vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
municipality, and failure to provide correct information on the
§ 151-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 151-9
143:412
registration statement, or failure to comply with the provisions
contained herein, shall be deemed to be violations of this article.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $100 and not
more than $2,000 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under
this chapter shall be recoverable from the owner.
§ 151-9 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 151-9
143:413
Chapter 152
REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
Police Department — See Ch. 28.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 102.
§ 152-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish any fire and/or stop
or control or contain any leak or spill involving any hazardous material
which cannot be reused or cannot be replenished without cost after that
particular fire, leak or spill. Those include but are not limited to firefighting
foam, chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand,
recovery drums and specialized protective equipment to include, but not be
restricted to, acid suits, acid gloves, goggles and protective clothing.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed as a
hazardous substance or material, including, but not necessarily limited to,
such substances and materials listed under the N.F.P.A. Guide of Hazardous
Material, the Department of Transportation Guide Book and the list of
hazardous substances and toxic pollutants designated by the Federal
Environmental Protection Agency and the New Jersey State Department of
Environmental Protection.
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment registered or unregistered, including
but not limited to a passenger car, motorcycle, truck, tractor trailer,
construction equipment, farm machinery, watercraft, aircraft and trains.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder, bottle or tank used to hold,
contain, carry or store any hazardous material.
§ 152-2. Reimbursable items.
Costs incurred by the township and/or other mutual aid responding units for
the following items in connection with the suppressing, control or cleanup
of a fire, leakage or spillage involving any hazardous substance or
hazardous material shall be reimbursed to the aforesaid respective
organizations by the responsible parties as set forth in § 152-3 below:
A. The cost of replacement of expendable items.
B. The expenses incurred by the township for the wages (regular and/or
overtime) paid to its employees/agents as a result of a hazardous
material incident.
§ 151-9 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 152-2
152:414
§ 152-3. Responsible parties.
Reimbursement to the township for any reimbursable items, as set forth
above, shall be made by the following parties:
§ 152-4. Period for payment.
Any responsible party shall reimburse the township for the full price of any
reimbursable items used to extinguish such a fire, stop or contain such a
leak, or control and clean up such a spill within 45 days after receipt of a
bill for such items from the township.
§ 152-5. Violations and penalties.
Any responsible party who fails to reimburse the Township for reimbursable
items within 45 days shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $500 or imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or
both. Upon the failure to reimburse the township for the cost of such items
within said forty-five-day period, and in addition to any penalty provided for
herein, the township may take such action as may be provided by law, to
recover such costs from the responsible party.
Chapter 153
C. Any and all medical costs incurred by responding personnel.
D. Any and all environmental costs required to ensure a hazard-free
environment (soil-water-air).
E. A fixed hourly rate for the use of apparatus at incidents computed at the
rate of $200 per hour for the use of specialized equipment and/or
vehicles and one hundred fifty ($150.) per hour for the use of any other
equipment and/or vehicles to the township.
F. All expenses incurred by other mutual aid responding units.
G. Services rendered by any recovery company, towing company or other
technical assistance called for by the Fire Department or Emergency
Management Coordinator to handle such incidents.
A. The owner or operator of any vehicle responsible for any fire, leak or
spill of hazardous material.
B. The owner or person responsible for any vessel containing hazardous
material involved in any fire, leak or spill on public or private property,
whether stationary or in transit, whether accidental or through
negligence.
C. The owner or person responsible for any property from which any leak
or spill of hazardous material emanates.
D. Any person responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous material
on public or private property.
§ 152-2 RESPIRATORY EQUIPMENT § 152-5
153:415
RESPIRATORY EQUIPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 14.
First aid and emergency squad — See Ch. 16.
Multiple Dwelling Review Board — See Ch.
22.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 102.
§ 153-1. Purpose.
The Township of Rochelle Park recognizes the necessity of providing
information to its public safety personnel regarding dangerous conditions
that may exist when responding to emergencies. Because of this, the
Township Committee directs, by this chapter, to require owners and
occupants of multifamily dwellings to provide the type and size of
respiratory equipment and its location.
§ 153-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — As defined in § 22-1, shall refer to any
building containing three or more dwelling units.
OXYGEN SYSTEM — Any system used for respiratory purposes which shall
comply with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 8:40-3.16(a)
RESPIRATORY EQUIPMENT — Any tank or container or cylinder containing
oxygen. Cylinders, tanks or containers shall be of the kind and type
approved for home medical care.
§ 153-3. Registration.
A. All owners or their agents shall obtain the following information
relating to tenants or occupants that have in their possession
respiratory equipment containing oxygen, which information shall be
readily available to emergency service personnel:
(1) Name of occupant or tenant.
(2) Phone number of occupant or tenant.
(3) Apartment number or floor location of occupant or tenant.
(4) Type and size of oxygen container.
(5) Location in tenant or occupant's apartment of oxygen container.
B. Documentation of the above information shall be made available by the
owner or its representative upon request by emergency service
personnel of the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 152-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 153-4
153:416
§ 153-4. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this chapter shall be under the jurisdiction of the Fire
Prevention Bureau.
§ 153-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 154
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales — See Ch. 110.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 144.
Used car sales — See Ch. 174.
§ 154-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEALER — Any person, partnership or corporation, who or which through
any means buys or sells secondhand gold, silver, precious metals or jewelry,
and includes anyone advertising the purchase or sale of any of the
aforementioned items.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 154-2. License required; fee.
A. Should the Fire Prevention Officer or his designee determine that there
has been noncompliance with the conditions of this chapter, notification
shall be given to the owner of the premises or its resident agent that
compliance must occur within 15 days of the date of service of the
notice. Should the owner or resident agent fail to comply after said
notice, the Fire Prevention Officer or his designee shall be authorized to
issue summonses returnable in the Municipal Court for violation of this
chapter.
B. For a first offense, the penalty shall be not less than $50 nor more than
$100.
C. For the second or subsequent offenses, the penalty shall be not less
than $100 nor more than $500.
D. Each day of noncompliance shall be considered a separate violation.
A. No dealer shall conduct business within the Township until said dealer
has secured a license from the Township Clerk authorizing said dealer
to conduct business within the Township. Applicants for a dealer license
§ 153-4 RESPIRATORY EQUIPMENT § 154-2
153:417
§ 154-3. Records to be kept by dealer; inspections.
shall file an application with the Township Clerk containing the
following information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is operating
under a trade name said applicant shall provide a certified copy of a
filed trade name certificate. If the applicant is a partnership, the
applicant shall supply a copy of the partnership certificate and the
general partners of the partnership shall comply with all individual
disclosure requirements and criminal background information and
checks required by this section. If the applicant is a corporation,
the applicant shall provide a copy of the certificate of incorporation
for the corporation and all directors, shareholders and officers of
the corporation shall comply with all individual disclosure
requirements and criminal background information and checks
required by this section.
(2) A statement that the applicant is over the age of 18, is a citizen or
legal resident of the United States, and proof of citizenship or
residency status.
(3) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
a crime, disorderly persons offense or violation of a municipal
ordinance, including a description of any such violations that have
occurred.
(4) Two photographs of the applicant taken not more than 60 days
prior to the filing of the application.
B. Each applicant shall submit to a criminal background search, including
fingerprinting, conducted by the Township Police Department.
C. Each applicant shall pay an annual fee of $100 for a license and a fee of
$100 covering the fee for the criminal background check.
D. No license shall be granted to any applicant in the following cases:
(1) To an applicant who has been convicted of any crime, disorderly
persons offense involving moral turpitude, dishonesty or which
reflects adversely upon the applicant's ability to operate his
business in an honest manner.
(2) To an applicant found by any court to have engaged in fraud,
deceit, misrepresentation or similar activity.
(3) To an applicant whose license under this chapter has at any time
been revoked or suspended.
A. Each dealer shall keep a bound record book in which every purchase
and sale shall be legibly written in English, including the following
information:
§ 154-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 154-3
153:418
§ 154-4. Description of transactions.
§ 154-5. Unlawful acts.
No dealer shall sell, melt, change the form of or dispose of any articles
purchased or received within five days from the date the notification is
made to the Chief of Police, and all such items shall remain on the premises
where the purchase was made for at least five days.
§ 154-6. Transaction restrictions.
Each dealer must require identification of the person with whom it is
transacting business, and no transaction may be made with any minor, as
hereinabove defined.
§ 154-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, as defined above, who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties under the general penalty
provisions of this Code.108 A separate offense shall be deemed committed in
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(1) A description of each item involved in the sale.
(2) The number or numbers of any identification appearing on each
item, including monograms, if any.
(3) The name, address and general description of the person from
whom the purchase was made or to whom the sale was made.
(4) The date and time of the purchase or sale.
(5) Copies of two forms of identification from the person making the
purchase or sale, at least one of which must be a photo
identification.
B. The above records shall be subject to the inspection of any authorized
police officer of the Township of Rochelle Park at any time.
A. Each dealer doing business in the Township of Rochelle Park shall
deliver to the Chief of Police the description of all items purchased,
received or sold within 72 hours of the completion of the transaction, on
forms prescribed by the Chief of Police.
B. All applicants for a license as required by this section shall upload all
transaction details such as product description, seller identification and
relevant photographs to the Regional Automated Property Information
Database (RAPID). The uploading of the required information shall be
coordinated through the Rochelle Park Police Department. [Added
8-16-2017 by Ord. No. 1114-17]
108. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 154-3 RESPIRATORY EQUIPMENT § 154-7
153:419
Chapter 155
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 97.
§ 154-7 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 154-7
155:420
ARTICLE I
Sewer Use Regulations
[Adopted 5-20-1998 by Ord. No. 775-98109]
§ 155-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Bergen County Sewer Authority that maintains the
district sewer system with which the municipal sewer system shall connect.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Township of Rochelle
Park or any officer, employee or agent designated by the Board of Health to
act in a matter on behalf of the Board.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quality of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20º C. expressed in parts per million by
weight.
BUILDING CONNECTION — That part of the sewer system which begins
five feet outside the inner face of the building wall and which receives
sewage from the building drain and conveys it to the building sewer lateral.
BUILDING SEWER LATERAL — That part of the public sewer which runs
from the sewer main to the curb or property line.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking or dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage or sale of produce.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — A device installed in the drain line of
dishwashing equipment and sinks, which mechanically skims grease
particles from the wastewater so as to keep them from entering the sewer
system.
GREASE TRAP — A device installed in the drain line of dishwashing
equipment and sinks to entrap particles of grease to prevent them from
entering the sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — The liquid waste from industrial processes, as
distinct from domestic sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — An outlet into a stream, watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake or other body of ground-, storm- or surface water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, corporation,
partnership, society or group, or any combination thereof.
pH — The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the weight of
hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
109. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 775-98 enacting this article also superseded former Ch. 155,
Sewers, Art. I, Regulation and Control, adopted 3-9-1931 by Ord. No. 105, as amended,
and Art. II, Sewer User Charges, adopted 11-5-1979 by Ord. No. 427.
§ 155-1 SEWERS § 155-1
155:421
PLUMBING — The practice of installing, maintaining, extending, repairing
and altering plumbing systems. It shall also mean the plumbing system as
herein defined.
PLUMBING SUBCODE OFFICER — A person licensed and authorized to
inspect plumbing pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, and who is in the employ of the Township. 110
PLUMBING SYSTEM — The system or network of facilities within or
adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance (including piping
materials, controls and fixtures, together with their venting systems and
other appurtenances) up to the point of connection of such system to a
public or private sewer, a public or private water supply for potable or
nonpotable purposes, a natural outlet or any other point of discharge or
supply.
RESTAURANT — As defined in § 185-97 of Chapter 185, Land Use and
Development Regulations, an establishment where food and drink are
prepared, served and consumed primarily within the principal building and
including serving prepared food which is also intended for consumption off
the premises, such as pizza parlors, bakeries and similar establishments;
provided, however, that the term "restaurant" shall not be deemed to
include what is commonly known as a "supermarket," "grocery store" or
"delicatessen."
SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal, chemical or vegetable
matter in suspension or solution.
SEWAGE, DOMESTIC — Ordinary nonindustrial sewage (but not including
stormwater, groundwater or surface water), for example, sewage
discharging from toilets, washbowls, bathtubs and like sanitary
conveniences installed in dwellings, apartment houses and hotels, office and
commercial buildings and factories and institutions.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit used for carrying sewage.
SEWERAGE WORKS — All facilities for the collection, pumping and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER, SANITARY — A sewer that has been designed to carry sewage and
not stormwater, surface water and groundwater.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer, gutter, culvert, catch basin
or like facility that has been designed to carry stormwater, surface water
and groundwater and not domestic sewage or industrial wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and that are removable by
laboratory filtering.
110. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 155-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 155-1
155:422
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Rochelle Park or any officer, employee or
agent designated by the Township Committee to act in a matter on behalf of
the township.
§ 155-2. Connection to sanitary sewers.
§ 155-3. Use of sanitary and storm sewers.
A. Authorized persons to make connection. No person, other than a person
authorized by the township, shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, repair, alter or disturb any public sewer lateral and
the appurtenances thereof.
B. Barricades and protective devices. Each person performing work on
public property of the township for the purpose of installing or making
connections to building sewer laterals shall cause the work to be
adequately guarded with barricades, lights and other measures for the
protection of the public. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, curbs and other
public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored or
replaced in a manner satisfactory to the township.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:60-8,111 the Department of
Public Works is hereby vested with the power, authority, right and
privilege, and there is hereby imposed upon said Department the duty,
to provide for the maintenance and operation of the public sanitary
sewer line up to the main sewer line. Any work to be performed in
connection with the maintenance of this area of the sanitary sewer
system shall be performed by the Department of Public Works or other
person authorized by the Township. The area of the sanitary sewer
system between the main line and the property line which is described
herein as the "building sewer lateral" shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the property which is serviced by the lateral. Amended
11-12-2003 by Ord. No. 900-03]
A. Prohibited acts. No person shall:
(1) Place or deposit or cause or permit to be placed or deposited in an
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
township or in any street or other area under the jurisdiction of the
township any human or animal excrement, garbage, industrial
waste, foul liquids or any other liquids or solid waste that is
malodorous or unsanitary.
(2) Discharge or cause or permit to be discharged to any natural outlet
or storm sewer in the township or any street or other area under
the jurisdiction of the township any domestic sewage, industrial
waste or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with this chapter.
111. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 155-1 SEWERS § 155-3
155:423
(3) Uncover or cause or permit to be uncovered any portion of the
public sewer or any storm drain or the connecting branches thereof
or open any manhole or flush tank unless authorized, in writing, by
the township to do so.
(4) Open or cause or permit to be opened any public street or place for
the purpose of making any sewer connection or make or cause to
be made any connection with the public sewer or any building
connection or other branch of the public sewer unless authorized,
in writing, by the township to do so.
(5) Make or cause to be made any excavation within four feet of any
public sewer or blast any rock within 10 feet thereof unless
authorized, in writing, by the township to do so.
(6) Use or cause or permit to be used any metal, mechanical or
electrical cutters, eels or snakes or any other sewer cleaning
apparatus within the township without first having been authorized
by the township to do so.
(7) Breach, cut or remove or cause or permit to be broken, cut or
removed any pipe of the public sewer unless authorized, in writing,
by the township to do so.
(8) Direct the discharge or cause or permit the direction of the
discharge into any portion of the public sewer, directly or indirectly,
of any clear drainage, such as the discharge from air-conditioning
units, groundwater, surface water or rainwater from sidewalks,
yards, areas, courts, roofs or any sump, cistern or tank overflow,
combined sewers being hereby prohibited.
(9) Discharge or cause or permit the discharge into any building
connection, building sewer lateral or any portion of the public
sewer, directly or indirectly, of any drainage or overflow from
privies or other receptacles storing or designed to store organic
wastes or any underground drains or channels unless the
connection thereof to the building connection, building sewer
lateral or public sewer shall have been authorized and approved, in
writing, by the township.
(10) Connect or cause or permit the connection with any portion of the
public sewer, directly or indirectly, of any exhausts, boiler blowoffs,
sediments, drips or any pipes carrying or constructed to carry
acids, dyes, brine, germicides, greases, gasoline, naphtha,
radioactive materials or any other substance detrimental to the
sewers or their appurtenances or to the operation of the township
or the authority sewer systems.
(11) Throw or deposit or cause or permit to be thrown or deposited in
any fixture, vessel, receptacle, inlet or opening connected, directly
or indirectly, with any portion of the public sewer anything other
than sewage. It is the intent hereby to prohibit any straw, garbage,
§ 155-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 155-3
155:424
wood, glass, plastic, grease, ashes, cinders, fabrics or tar or other
viscous material or any other substance capable of causing
obstruction from being introduced into the public sewers.
B. Discharge restriction. Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall
discharge or cause or permit to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes into any public sewer:
(1) Any liquid which may contain more than 100 parts per million by
weight of fat, oil or grease.
(2) Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(3) Any liquid having a pH factor lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
a hazard to the structure, equipment and personnel of the
township.
(4) Any liquid containing a toxic or poisonous substance in a sufficient
quantity so as to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
processes, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(5) Any liquid containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such matters at the sewage treatment plant.
(6) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
C. Interceptors/traps.
(1) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the township, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that
such interceptors shall not be required for one-family-dwelling
houses. All interceptors or traps shall be of a type and capacity
approved by the Township Engineer and shall be located so as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(2) Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of a substantial construction and
watertight and shall be equipped with easily removable covers
which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. All
grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the
owners, at their expense, in continuously effective operation at all
times.
D. All restaurants, as defined herein, within 90 days from adoption of this
chapter, shall be required to install and maintain an approved grease
§ 155-3 SEWERS § 155-3
155:425
§ 155-4. Damages.
§ 155-5. Administration and enforcement.
interceptor or trap on all dishwashing equipment, sinks or any other
areas where sewage is discharged into the township's sanitary sewer
system. It shall be the responsibility of each owner to maintain the
interceptor or trap to avoid grease entering the sewer system and
to post and maintain a log adjacent to said interceptor or trap for
each cleaning. Any designated representative of the Board of Health
or the Department of Public Works shall have the right to inspect said
equipment to ensure proper maintenance. Failure to properly maintain
said equipment shall be a violation of this chapter. Further, the
clearance and cleaning of any blockages in the sanitary sewer mains
attributable to a specific restaurant owner shall be paid by the owner.
Such charges shall include, but not be limited to, the full cost for
township labor, including fringe benefits and equipment costs. Any
property damage caused by sewer backups shall also be borne by the
owner causing the blockages.
E. Any grease arising out of any cooking, grilling, frying or meat trimming
shall be recycled, using a qualified firm equipped to handle such
materials.
A. Destruction or tampering prohibited. No person shall break, damage,
destroy, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the township sewer system.
B. Liability. Any person who, by reason of a violation of the provisions of
this chapter or any other improper use of the township sewer system or
any of its branches, appurtenances or connections, shall cause damage
to said township sewer system or to the system or facilities of the
authority to which the township sewer system is connected shall be
liable to the township for all costs and expenses that may be incurred by
the township for the correction of any such damage. The township shall
have the right to recover such costs and expenses and the cost and
expense of prosecuting its claim from any such person by the
appropriate action at law in a court of competent jurisdiction. The right
of the township to be reimbursed for any costs and expenses incurred
shall be an additional remedy, and such person shall also be subject to
the penalties contained in this chapter for violation of its provisions.
A. Jurisdiction. The Board of Health and the Department of Public Works
and the Construction Code Officials shall have concurrent jurisdiction
in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Right of entry for inspections. The authorized officers, agents and
employees of the township and of the Board of Health, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 155-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 155-6
155:426
§ 155-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter or who shall participate or assist in such violation or failure to
comply or who, as owner, tenant or other person in occupancy, architect,
contractor or agent, servant or employee, shall permit the commission of
such violation or maintain such violation or shall suffer such violation to
continue shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the court before whom such conviction shall be had. Each day that
such violation shall continue or is permitted or suffered to be continued or
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 155-7. User charge and industrial cost recovery system.
A. Use of sewers. The use of all sanitary sewers of the Township of
Rochelle Park shall be in compliance with the rules and regulations
enacted by the Bergen County Utilities Authority.
B. Adoption of county standards. The Township of Rochelle Park hereby
adopts and enacts the user charge system and industrial cost recovery
system contained in the rules and regulations of the Bergen County
Utilities Authority and authorizes their immediate implementation by
the Township Collector-Treasurer.
C. Copies on file. Not fewer than three copies of the rules and regulations
of the Bergen County Utilities Authority have been and are filed in the
Office of the Clerk of the Township of Rochelle Park and are available
for public inspection during normal business hours.
D. Cost of copies. Copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen County
Utilities Authority can be obtained from the Bergen County Utilities
Authority for the cost of publication.
§ 155-6 SEWERS § 155-7
155:427

ARTICLE II
Sewer Connection Fees
[Adopted 3-16-2005 by Ord. No. 922-05]
§ 155-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONNECTION FEE — The charge imposed by the Township of Rochelle
Park for each new connection with its sewer system or an existing
connection where a new use or expanded use would increase the sewer flow.
DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling as defined in § 185-97 of this Code.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING AND INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS — Those uses
allowed in the Rochelle Park Zoning Districts Industrial A and B.
RETAIL AND COMMERCIAL BUSINESS — Those uses as allowed in the
Township of Rochelle Park Zoning Districts A, B, C, and BA-1.
SEWER UNIT — A number upon which the sewer connection or hookup fee
shall be calculated. The sewer unit shall be a multiplier for the fee as set
forth herein.
§ 155-9. Permit required.
No sewer connection shall be made without a permit therefor issued by
the Building Department of the Township of Rochelle Park. The Department
may make any regulations governing the manner and method of making
such connections. No connection shall be covered until the same has been
inspected and approved by the Department.
§ 155-10. Imposition of fee.
A. As a condition of every certificate of occupancy for new construction,
renovation or expansion, there shall be imposed upon every applicant a
sewer connection or hookup fee, which shall be in addition to any other
fees imposed pursuant to local ordinance or state law.
B. The application for extension of new sewer connections or the
alterations to existing sewer connections shall be accompanied by a
diagram showing the relative elevation of the lowest plumbing fixture
and the invert and diameter of the sanitary sewer where such
connection is to be made.
C. Upon approval of such diagram by the Building Department and prior to
the issuance of the permit for the installation of the plumbing system or
any other work to be performed, the applicant shall pay a fee in
accordance with the schedule contained herein.
§ 155-8 SEWERS § 155-11
155:429
§ 155-11. Fees.
The following fees shall be collected by the Building Department in
furtherance of the within article:
§ 155-12. Minimum fee, commercial connections.
A. Each sewerage unit shall be equal to $1,200.
B. There shall be imposed upon the following uses a sewerage unit value
as defined therein:
(1) For each dwelling unit: a sewerage unit value of one.
(2) For restaurants, cocktail lounges and taverns: a sewerage unit of
one for each 20 seats authorized for patrons.
(3) For manufacturing and industrial uses, except as otherwise
separately classified herein: a sewerage unit value of one for each
2,200 square feet of gross floor area. Additional information
submitted or required to be submitted by the Construction Official/
Zoning Officer/Township Engineer may result in an increase or
decrease of the sewerage units imposed.
(4) For all automatic car-washing businesses: one sewerage unit for
each 10 cars served per day.
(5) For all self-serve and nonautomatic car-washing businesses: one
sewerage unit for each 20 cars served per day.
(6) For all other commercial uses: one sewerage unit for each 2,200
square feet of gross floor area. But in no case shall the fee be less
than $2,000.
C. The Township Committee shall annually, no later than May 1 of each
calendar year, review the fee recommendations made by the
Construction Official to the Sewer Connection Fee Ordinance for each
of the classes of potential sewer users. The Township Committee shall,
thereafter, by resolution, fix the sewer connection or hookup fee for the
following year. If the Township Committee does not act upon those
recommendations, the fees currently in place will continue until the
next review period.
A. In the event of a new connection for commercial premises as a result of
a change of use, expansion of use or new use, where such use does not
result in an increase in sewer load, and in such cases where there is no
dwelling unit calculation as described herein, there shall be a minimum
connection fee imposed in the amount of $2,000.
B. In the event that there is any change in use for any existing property, a
review will be conducted and a sewer connection fee shall be assessed
by making a comparison between the new use and the existing use. The
§ 155-11 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 155-12
155:430
§ 155-13. Fee/uses not specifically listed.
A use not specifically described in this article shall be charged a fee under
the category which most closely matches its operation from among those
classes described in this article. The determination pursuant to this
subjection shall be made by the Construction Official. The Construction
Official shall consider any relevant factors in making this determination,
including, without being limited to, review of surveys, engineering reports
or technical data.
§ 155-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this article or who shall participate or assist in such violation or failure to
comply or who, as owner, tenant or other person in occupancy, architect,
contractor or agent, servant or employee, shall permit the commission of
such violation or maintain such violation or shall suffer such violation to
continue shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the court before whom such conviction shall be had. Each day that
such violation shall continue or is permitted or suffered to be continued or
maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
connection fee shall be based upon the change in use or increase in flow
as determined by the Building Department.
§ 155-12 SEWERS § 155-14
155:431
Chapter 156
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
§ 156-1. Prohibition.
No person over the age of 18 who has been convicted of a violation of any
crime against a minor as listed in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2 and who, as a result of
said conviction is required to register with the proper authorities pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq., Registration and Notification of Release of Certain
Offenders, shall be permitted to reside or live within 2,500 feet of any
school, park, playground, day-care center or Board of Education approved
bus stop in the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 156-2. Time limit for compliance.
A person who resides or lives within 2,500 feet of any school, park,
playground, day-care center or Board of Education approved bus stop in
the Township of Rochelle Park shall have 60 days from receipt of written
notice of the prohibition set forth herein to move. Failure to move to a
location which is in compliance with this section within that time period
shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 156-3. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$1,250; imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 156-4. Statement required.
The Construction Official for the Township shall place, on all certificates of
occupancy or continued certificates of occupancy, a statement directing all
purchasers of residential property within the Township of Rochelle Park to
the requirements and restrictions of the within ordinance.
Chapter 157
SHADE TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Division of Shade Trees — See Ch. 31.
Cutting of brushes and hedges — See Ch. 70.
Removal of grass and weeds from
sidewalks — Ch. 161, Art. II.
§ 155-14 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 157-1
156:432
§ 157-1. Prohibited acts.112
No person, firm or corporation shall do or cause to be done any of the
following acts upon a public highway, park, parkway or public place within
the Township of Rochelle Park without a written permit from the
Department of Public Works issued by the Superintendent of Public Works:
§ 157-2. Electric wires. [Amended 4-16-1997 by Ord. No. 752-97]
§ 157-3. Protection during construction.
Throughout the period of erection or repair of any building or structure
or in the improvement or repairs of a highway, the owner thereof or the
contractor shall place such guards around all nearby trees on the public
highway as shall effectually prevent injury to such trees.
§ 157-4. Protection from injurious substances.
No person, firm or corporation shall permit any brine, gas or injurious
chemical to come in contact with the stem or roots of any tree or shrub upon
a public highway.
A. Cut, trim, break, climb with spikes, disturb the roots of or otherwise
injure, spray with any chemical or remove any tree or shrub or injure,
misuse or remove any structure or device placed to support or protect
such tree or shrub.
B. Plant any tree or shrub.
C. Fasten any rope, wire, electrical attachment, sign or other device to a
tree or shrub or any guard about such tree or shrub.
D. Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree or
shrub to permit the access of air, water or fertilizer to the roots of such
tree or shrub.
E. Pile any building material or make any mortar or cement within six feet
of a tree or shrub.
A. Every person having or maintaining any underground utility lines in any
street or park shall maintain such lines in such a manner as will
safeguard the trees against any damage therefrom and shall make
periodical adjustments whenever necessary to prevent damage to trees.
B. This section and any other references in this chapter in which the term
"electric wires" is used, is hereby amended to include the term "utility
lines."
112. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 585 enacting this chapter also repealed former Chapters 42 and
209 and provided for the creation of a Division of Shade Trees. (See § 31-5.)
§ 157-1 SHADE TREES § 157-5
157:433
§ 157-5. Interference with work of Department of Public Works.
No person, firm or corporation shall prevent, delay or interfere with any
lawful work undertaken by the Department of Public Works or its authorized
agent, with respect to the care, maintenance, removal or planting of shade
trees and shrubs.
§ 157-6. Miscellaneous damages.
No person, firm or corporation shall do or cause to be done any damage to
or litter or destroy any grass, shrub or tree in the parks, parkways or public
places.
§ 157-7. Clearance over sidewalks.
Every person, firm or corporation having control of any tree or shrub whose
branches hang over or extend over the public sidewalk shall cause said
branches extending over said sidewalk to be cut so that a ten-foot clearance
is at all times maintained.
§ 157-8. Branches extending over public right-of-way.
Every person, firm or corporation having control of any trees or shrubs
whose branch or branches extend over the public right-of-way and which
branch or branches are dangerous to the public safety must remove said
branch or branches at his expense within 10 days after receipt of written
notice by the Superintendent of Public Works. Such notice shall be final
unless an appeal is taken therefrom.
§ 157-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be liable to a penalty either by imprisonment in the county jail for
a term not exceeding 90 days or a fine not exceeding $1,000 or both, for
each offense. Each 24 hours of a continued violation of this chapter after a
complaint is made shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 157-10. Appeals.
Appeals from the issuance or revocation of a permit or failure or refusal
to issue any permit or approval required hereunder or any other notice
or determination of the Superintendent of Public Works hereunder may be
taken by filing a written notice of appeal with the Township Clerk within 10
days of receipt of such notice or decision. The Township Committee shall
conduct a hearing and render a decision thereon within 45 days from the
date of the filing of the notice of appeal. The Township Committee shall
afford the parties or their attorneys an opportunity to be heard and present
evidence. Testimony shall be taken under oath although the formal rules of
evidence shall not be controlling.
§ 157-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 157-11
157:434
§ 157-11. Restitution. [Added 4-16-1997 by Ord. No. 752-97]
In addition to the penalties authorized by § 157-9 of this chapter, the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the Township
Committee, on appeal, may require a person who removes or otherwise
destroys a tree, in violation of a municipal ordinance, to pay a replacement
assessment to the municipality. The replacement assessment shall be the
value of the tree as determined by the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works. Should said replacements be required of more than one tree
or other shrubbery, the cost of said replacement shall be determined by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works.
Chapter 158
(RESERVED)
Chapter 159
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tobacco — See Ch. 171.
§ 157-11 (RESERVED) § 157-11
158:435

ARTICLE I
Municipal Buildings
[Adopted 12-16-1992 by Ord. No. 640-92]
§ 159-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — A nonlighted, noncombustible device
that employs a mechanical heating element, battery, or circuit, regardless
of shape or size, to produce aerosolized or vaporized nicotine for inhalation
into the body of a person, including devices marketed as an e-cigarette,
e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, vape pen, or any other similar product name or
descriptor.[Added 7-24-2019 by Ord. No. 1140-19]
SMOKING — The burning of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other
matter or substance which contains tobacco.
§ 159-2. Smoking and use of electronic smoking devices prohibited
in municipal buildings and on municipal property. [Amended
7-24-2019 by Ord. No. 1140-19]
Smoking and the use of electronic smoking devices, as defined above,
are hereby prohibited in the following municipal buildings and properties,
specifically:
§ 159-3. Conformity with state provisions; violations and penalties.
All necessary measures shall be taken to conform the Township of Rochelle
Park smoking policy to P.L. 1985, c. 381,113 as set forth in the following
regulations:
A. In the Township chambers during all public meetings.
B. In the caucus room at times when the work session of the Township
Committee is open to the public.
C. In the hallways and corridors of the Municipal Building.
D. In all offices in the Municipal Building, including Police Department
offices.
E. In the ambulance building.
F. In the Fire Department building.
G. In the Community Center.
H. Carlock Field, including all buildings.
I. Matthew's Field, including all buildings.
113. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:3D-46 et seq.
§ 159-1 (RESERVED) § 159-3
158:437
A. The supervisor who shall ultimately control the activities and conduct of
employees shall be the Township Administrator.
B. The Township Administrator, in order to protect the health, welfare and
comfort of the employees from the detrimental effect of tobacco smoke,
shall establish a smoking area outside the front door of the Municipal
Building. In the Ambulance Building, smoking shall be allowed in the
lounge and smoking bay area. In the Fire Department Building,
smoking shall be allowed in the meeting room and bay area. In the
Community Center, smoking shall be allowed outside the front door.
There shall be placed in said area signs designating "Smoking Area,"
and there shall be sufficient receptacles in which smoking residue shall
be placed.
C. The supervisor shall give notice of this Article and proposed rules to all
employees, and all employees and/or their duly elected representatives
shall have the right to be heard concerning these proposed rules. These
rules shall become effective after 30 days from the delivery of the
written notice to the employees.
D. Any disciplinary action that shall be taken for violation of these rules
shall not involve suspension or termination until at least six months
following the date of the act.
E. The supervisor shall cause to be placed in the affected areas signs with
letters at least one inch in height stating "Smoking Permitted" or
"Smoking Prohibited." The supervisor shall be entitled to use the
appropriate international symbol. The signs shall also indicate that
violators are subject to a fine and that persons who are smoking in
nonsmoking areas may be denied the services of the municipal
government.
F. A municipal or county health officer, the supervisor or a representative
of the Police Department shall be designated to enforce this Article and
the regulations appended thereto. Any member of the public or
employee in the buildings who smokes in violation of this Article,
regulation or state statute shall be fined in an amount not to exceed
$25.
G. Any penalty recovered pursuant to this Article or regulation shall be
recovered in the name of the local Board of Health.
H. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over the proceedings to
enforce and collect any penalty imposed because of a violation.
I. All of the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A. 26:3D-46 et seq., P.L. 1985, c.
381, shall be incorporated by reference herein, and any inconsistencies
or discrepancies between this article and the above-cited statute shall
result in the Article or sections therein being declared null and void,
and the terms of the statute shall prevail.
§ 159-3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 159-3
158:438
Chapter 160
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Feeding of migratory waterfowl — See Ch. 68,
Art. I.
Disposal of dog litter — See Ch. 88, Art. III.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 104.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 112.
Littering — See Ch. 127.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
§ 159-3 (RESERVED) § 159-3
158:439

ARTICLE I
Illicit Connection
§ 160-1. Purpose.
An article to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate storm
sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Rochelle Park so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 160-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Rochelle Park, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are
not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Rochelle Park or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 17:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
§ 160-1 (RESERVED) § 160-2
158:441
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 160-3. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of Rochelle Park, any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 160-4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Police Department
and the Building Department of the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 160-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,200.
§ 160-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 160-5
158:442
ARTICLE II
Pet Waste
§ 160-6. Purpose.
An article to establish requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid
waste in the Township of Rochelle Park so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 160-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 160-8. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 160-9. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 160-6 (RESERVED) § 160-10
158:443
§ 160-10. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the Board of Health of the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 160-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,200.
§ 160-10 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 160-11
158:444
ARTICLE III
Litter Control
§ 160-12. Purpose.
An article to establish requirements to control littering in the Township of
Rochelle Park so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 160-13. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 160-14. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
§ 160-15. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the Building Department of the Township of Rochelle Park.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall be deemed to have violated this
article.
§ 160-12 (RESERVED) § 160-16
158:445
§ 160-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,200.
§ 160-16 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 160-16
158:446
ARTICLE IV
Containerized Yard Waste
§ 160-17. Purpose.
An article to establish requirements for the proper handling of yard waste
in the Township of Rochelle Park, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 160-18. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
§ 160-19. Prohibited conduct.
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste, unless
the yard waste is containerized, in the street. If yard waste that is not
containerized is placed in the street, the party responsible for placement of
yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall
be deemed in violation of this article.
§ 160-20. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Township of Rochelle
Park.
§ 160-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,200.
§ 160-17 (RESERVED) § 160-21
158:447

ARTICLE V
Improper Disposal of Waste
§ 160-22. Purpose.
An article to prohibit the spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other
than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
operated by the Township of Rochelle Park, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 160-23. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Rochelle Park or
other public body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 160-24. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate sewer system operated by the Township of Rochelle
Park is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 160-25. Exceptions to prohibition.
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
§ 160-22 (RESERVED) § 160-25
158:449
§ 160-26. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the Department of Public Works of the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 160-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,200.
C. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
(3) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 160-25 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 160-27
158:450
ARTICLE VI
Wildlife Feeding
§ 160-28. Purpose.
An article to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public park or
on any other property owned or operated by the Township of Rochelle Park,
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 160-29. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 160-30. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by the Township of Rochelle Park, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 160-31. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department of
the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 160-32. Violations and penalties.114
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,200.
114. Editor’s Note: See also Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 160-28 (RESERVED) § 160-32
158:451

ARTICLE VII
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Added 10-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1039-11]
§ 160-33. Purpose.
An article requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of Rochelle Park as well as those systems operated by the County
of Bergen and/or the State of New Jersey as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 160-34. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Rochelle Park or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer
systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 160-35. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
§ 160-33 (RESERVED) § 160-35
158:453
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering of any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm
drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 160-36. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 160-35 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this section, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard, see § 160-36C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 160-36 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
§ 160-35 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 160-36
158:454
§ 160-37. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department or Code
Enforcement Official.
§ 160-38. Violations and penalties.
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(This option does not apply for outfall netting facilities.); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
A. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $450 for each storm
drainage inlet that is not retrofitted with an inlet grate to meet the
design standard.
B. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $375 for each storm
drainage inlet that is not retrofitted with a restrictive-flow curb piece to
meet the design standard.
C. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $825 for each storm drain
inlet that is not retrofitted with both an inlet grate and restrictive-flow
curb piece.
§ 160-36 (RESERVED) § 160-38
158:455

ARTICLE VIII
Fertilizer Application
[Added 10-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1040-11]
§ 160-39. Purpose; applicability.
An article to regulate the outdoor application of fertilizer so as to reduce
the overall amount of excess nutrients entering waterways, thereby helping
to protect and improve surface water quality. This article does not apply to
fertilizer application on commercial farms.
§ 160-40. Findings.
§ 160-41. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
A. Elevated levels of nutrients, particularly phosphorus, in surface water
bodies can result in excessive and accelerated growth of algae and
aquatic plants (eutrophication). Excessive plant growth can result in
diurnal variations and extremes in dissolved oxygen and pH, which, in
turn, can be detrimental to aquatic life. As algae and plant materials die
off, the decay process creates a further demand on dissolved oxygen
levels. The presence of excessive plant matter can also restrict use of
the affected water for recreation and water supply.
B. While healthy vegetated areas are protective of water quality by
stabilizing soil and filtering precipitation, when fertilizers are applied to
the land surface improperly or in excess of the needs of target
vegetation, nutrients can be transported by mean of stormwater to
nearby waterways, contributing to the problematic growth of excessive
aquatic vegetation. Most soils in New Jersey contain sufficient amounts
of phosphorus to support adequate root growth for established turf.
Over time, it is necessary to replenish available phosphorus, but
generally not at the levels commonly applied. Other target vegetation,
such as vegetable gardens and agricultural/horticultural plantings, will
have a greater need for phosphorus application, as will the repair or
establishment of new lawns or cover vegetation. A soils test and
fertilizer application recommendation geared to the soil and planting
type is the best means to determine the amount of nutrients to apply.
Timing and placement of fertilizer application is also critical to avoid
transport of nutrients to waterways through stormwater runoff.
Fertilizer applied immediately prior to a runoff-producing rainfall,
outside the growing season or to impervious surfaces is most likely to
be carried away by means of runoff without accomplishing the desired
objective of supporting target vegetation growth. Therefore, the
management of the type, amount and techniques for fertilizer
application is necessary as one tool to protect water resources.
§ 160-39 (RESERVED) § 160-41
158:457
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUFFER — The land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any water body.
(The Department believes that 25 feet is the appropriate buffer width to be
protective of water quality. However, in situations that warrant additional
flexibility, such as where lot sizes are exceptionally small or where the
twenty-five-foot buffer constitutes the majority of the available property, the
municipality may reduce the buffer to 10 feet in width, with the additional
requirement that a drop spreader be used for fertilizer application.)
FERTILIZER — A fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other substance
containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its
plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed to have value in
promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for sale, or intended for
sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This term shall
be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or
other material that prevents infiltration of water into the soil.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P2O5 with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero; except
that it shall not be considered to include animal (including human) or
vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood ashes that have
not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATER BODY — A surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary.
§ 160-42. Prohibited conduct.
No person may do any of the following:
A. Apply fertilizer when a runoff-producing rainfall is occurring or
predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer
movement off site exists.
B. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the
target surface or returned to either its original or another appropriate
container for reuse.
§ 160-41 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 160-42
158:458
§ 160-43. Phosphorus fertilizer application.
No person may do the following:
§ 160-44. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department or Code
Enforcement Official.
§ 160-45. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed the penalty set forth in the general penalty
section of the Township Code.115
C. Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any water body.
D. Apply fertilizer more than 15 days prior to the start of or at any time
after the end of the recognized growing season spring/summer
applicable to the municipality as identified by the United States
Department of Agriculture Plant Hardiness Zones. United States
Department of Agriculture Plant Hardiness Zones mapping can be
found in the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey, July 1999. The growing seasons are identified as follows:
(1) Zones 5b and 6a (northwestern New Jersey): March 15 to October
31;
(2) Zone 6b (northeastern, central and part of southern New Jersey):
March 1 to November 15.
A. Apply phosphorus fertilizer in outdoor areas except as demonstrated to
be needed for the specific soils and target vegetation in accordance
with a soils test and the associated annual fertilizer recommendation
issued by Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
(a) Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided the application is in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules.
(b) Re-established or repairing a turf area.
(2) Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular
fertilizer under the sails surface, directly to the feeder roots.
(3) Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens.
§ 160-42 (RESERVED) § 160-45
158:459
115. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 160-45 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 160-45
158:460
ARTICLE IX
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Added 10-19-2011 by Ord. No. 1041-11]
§ 160-46. Purpose.
An article requiring dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Rochelle Park and/or the State of
New Jersey or the County of Bergen.
§ 160-47. Definitions; word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Rochelle Park or
other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. In municipalities with MS4s do not include combined sewer
systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary
sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets
and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 160-48. Prohibited conduct.
§ 160-46 (RESERVED) § 160-48
158:461
§ 160-49. Exceptions.
Exceptions to prohibition:
§ 160-50. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department or Code
Enforcement Official.
§ 160-51. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the penalty set forth in the general
penalty section of the Township Code.116
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Rochelle
Park.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside of pickup).
116. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 160-48 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 160-51
158:462
Chapter 161
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Basketball hoops — See Ch. 64.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 70.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 97.
Filming and videotaping — See Ch. 101
§ 160-51 (RESERVED) § 160-51
158:463

ARTICLE I
Care of Streets and Highways
[Adopted 4-26-1954 by Ord. No. 200]
§ 161-1. Prohibited uses of streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person:
§ 161-2. Authority of Road Department.
This article shall in no way prohibit the Township of Rochelle Park's Road
Department from spreading or disbursing necessary materials for the
protection of the road or roadways or for the protection of movement of
traffic.
§ 161-3. Terminology.
The word "person" as used in this article shall include any individual,
partner or member of any partnership or association and the officers,
agents or employees of any corporation who are responsible for any
violation of any of the provisions hereof.
A. To cast, throw or spill any dirt, sand, ashes, gravel, brick, stones,
wastepaper or other loose material on any street or highway in the
Township of Rochelle Park, New Jersey.
B. To mix any dry or wet concrete, cement, plaster or other material of any
kind or description upon the surface of any street or highway in the
Township of Rochelle Park, New Jersey.
C. To spill any turpentine, kerosene, gasoline, petroleum, lubricating oil or
other highly flammable oils or their volatile products or to allow any of
such fluids to escape upon the surface of any street or highway in the
Township of Rochelle Park, New Jersey, or to operate or permit to
operate any tank trucks or other vehicle from which any of such fluids
are permitted to escape.
D. To flush or cause to be drained or pumped to the surface of streets or
highways in the Township of Rochelle Park, New Jersey, any wastewater
or fluid of any kind.
E. To place or cause to be placed on any street or highway in the Township
of Rochelle Park, New Jersey, any permanent obstruction of whatever
kind.
F. To burn leaves or any other material on any street or highway in the
Township of Rochelle Park, New Jersey, which may cause sufficient heat
to affect asphalt or other pavements.
G. To place or throw snow or ice on the traveled portion of any street or
highway in the Township of Rochelle Park, New Jersey, after the same
has been plowed.
§ 161-1 (RESERVED) § 161-4
158:465
§ 161-4. Purpose.
This article is adopted by the Township Committee of the Township of
Rochelle Park for the purpose of keeping streets and highways within the
Township of Rochelle Park in good repair and safe and convenient for travel
during all seasons of the year.
§ 161-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519; 11-9-2011 by Ord. No. 1042-11]
Each and every person, firm, corporation, private or public or its agent,
violating any of the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 161-6. Continuing violations.
Each day any such violation shall be continued shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense, and conviction shall not excuse the violation or permit
its continuance.
§ 161-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 161-6
158:466
ARTICLE II
Removal of Snow, Ice, Grass and Weeds
[Adopted 2-21-1984 by Ord. No. 481]
§ 161-7. Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks; casting of snow
and ice. [Amended 8-20-2014 by Ord. No. 1072-14]
§ 161-8. Grass and weeds between curb and sidewalk. [Amended
8-20-2014 by Ord. No. 1072-14]
All grass, weeds or growth of any kind which may grow between the
curbline and the line of the sidewalk of any such street shall be kept cut
below the height of eight inches from the ground and shall be cut to that
length within seven days of notice to so cut the same. All grass, weeds or
growth of any kind or other impediments upon the sidewalks of such streets
shall be removed within seven days of notice to remove same.
A. Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. The owner or occupant of land
abutting or bordering upon the sidewalks of the public streets, avenues
and highways within the limits of the Township of Rochelle Park shall
remove all snow and ice from the same within 24 hours after the same
has been formed or fallen thereon.
B. Casting of snow and ice. No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises
abutting any street, avenue or highway within the limits of the
Township of Rochelle Park, nor any person working for or on behalf of
any owner, tenant or occupant, shall throw, place or deposit any snow or
ice upon the public street in front of his/her property or upon any
municipal fire hydrant. The intent of this subsection is to prohibit all
persons from throwing, placing or depositing snow or ice from the
private driveway or parking areas or on the sidewalk in front of the
property, upon the municipal streets or sidewalks of the Township or
upon any municipal fire hydrant.
C. Clearance of fire hydrants. [Added6-17-2015 by Ord. No. 1086-15]
(1) The owner of any real property abutting any fire hydrant shall clear
such fire hydrant of snow within 24 hours of snow coverage. A
three-foot clearance around the fire hydrant shall be required.
(2) If the party responsible for fire hydrant clearance under this
subsection fails to perform the required clearance within the
specified time, the Township, or any department thereof, may
perform the clearance and bill the responsible party no more than
$75 for this service. This charge shall be in addition to any penalty
imposed for the violation of this section, in accordance with the
provisions of § 161-9.
§ 161-7 (RESERVED) § 161-8.1
158:467
§ 161-8.1. Alteration of premises between curb and sidewalk.
[Added 7-17-1996 by Ord. No. 727]
No owner of premises shall be allowed to construct, remove or in any
way alter the area of the premises located between the sidewalk and the
curb without first obtaining a permit from the Township Construction Code
Department.
§ 161-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-9-2011 by Ord. No.
1042-11; 8-20-2014 by Ord. No. 1072-14]
Any violation of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as follows:
§ 161-10. Performance of work by Township; costs.
Upon the refusal or neglect of such owner or occupant to remove such
snow or ice, grass or weeds or other impediments within the time herein
provided, the same may be removed by the Township under the direction
of its Supervisor of Roads or other person or officer designated by the
Township Committee for that purpose. The cost thereof, as nearly as can be
ascertained, shall be charged against the lands abutting or bordering upon
the sidewalks from which removal is made, and with the interest thereof,
shall forthwith become a lien upon said lands, and shall be added to and
form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied and shall be certified
to the person or persons whose duty it is to collect the taxes of the Township
and shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as other
taxes.
A. For the first offense in any calendar year, by a fine of $75.
B. For the second offense in any calendar year, by a fine of $150.
C. For the third offense in any calendar year, by a fine of between $250 and
$500. A court appearance shall be mandatory for a third offense.
D. For the fourth offense, by a fine up to $1,000, and/or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. A court
appearance shall be mandatory for a fourth offense.
E. If the owner of any property who is charged with violating this article
chooses to enter a plea of guilty for a first, second or third offense, he/
she shall be entitled to pay the fine without the necessity of a court
appearance.
F. Separate violation. Except as otherwise provided, every day that the
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate violation.
G. This article may be enforced by the Department of Public Works, Health
Department, Police Department, Building Department or Property
Maintenance Department.
§ 161-8.1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 161-10
158:468
ARTICLE III
Newsracks
[Adopted 4-18-2001 by Ord. No. 828]
§ 161-11. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place,
maintain or operate on any public street or sidewalk, or in any other public
way or place, in the Township of Rochelle Park any newsrack without first
having obtained a permit from the Township Clerk specifying the exact
location of such newsrack or newsracks. One permit may be issued to
include any number of newsracks and shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 161-12. Application for permit.
Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the Township
Clerk, and approved by the Township Committee upon such form as shall be
provided by them and shall contain the name and address of the applicant,
the proposed specific location of said newsrack or newsracks and shall be
signed by the applicant.
§ 161-13. Conditions for permit.
§ 161-14. Standards for maintenance and installation.
Any newsrack which, in whole or in part rests upon or over any public
sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards:
A. Permits may be issued for the installation of a newsrack or newsracks
without prior inspection of the location but, such newsrack or
newsracks and the installation, use or maintenance thereof, shall be
conditioned upon observance of the provisions of this article. An annual
permit fee of $10 per newsrack is required. The permit shall be granted
or denied within 15 days of submitting the application.
B. Such permits shall be valid for a period of one year beginning June 1,
and expiring on May 31 of the following year, and shall be renewable
pursuant to the procedure for original applications referred to above
and upon payment of the per newsrack permit fee of $10.
C. No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the applicant
and any other persons, organizations, firms or corporations on whose
behalf the application is made, by filing such application, do represent,
stipulate, contract and agree that they will jointly and severally defend,
indemnify and hold the Township harmless against liability for any and
all claims for damage to property or injury to or death of persons arising
out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or the control,
maintenance or ownership of the newsrack permitted.
A. No newsrack shall exceed 36 inches in height, 24 inches in width or 20
inches in thickness.
§ 161-11 (RESERVED) § 161-14
158:469
§ 161-15. Location and placement.
Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon or on any portion of
a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a
public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this
section:
B. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
newspaper sold therein.
C. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in
the event he is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin
return mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.
D. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it a readily visible place so as to be
seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting forth the name and
address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working
telephone service to call to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in
the event of a malfunction of the coin return mechanism, or to give the
notices provided for in this article.
E. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be served and maintained so that:
(1) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereof.
(3) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed, are unbroken and reasonably free
of cracks, dents, blemishes and discolorations.
(4) The paper or cardboard parts of inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading.
A. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or
over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly
or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street.
B. No newsrack shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public
sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property; or
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle;
or
§ 161-14 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 161-15
158:470
§ 161-16. Violations and penalties.
Enforcement of this article shall be by the police or Zoning Enforcement
Officer. For a first offense under this article, the penalty shall not exceed
$100, plus costs. The penalty for second and subsequent offenses shall not
exceed $500, plus costs. The enforcement of these provisions shall be within
the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court. Should successive violations occur,
the owner of said newsrack or newsracks shall be given 30 days' notice to
remove said newsrack at the conclusion of which the municipality may file
an action in the Superior Court to remove said newsrack or newsracks.
(3) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress to or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
(4) Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals,
hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
C. Newsrack or newsracks shall be chained, bolted or otherwise secured
so as to prevent their being blown down or around the public right-ofway.
D. Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of
newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than four feet along a
curb.
E. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk;
(2) Within 12 feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
(3) Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility;
(4) Within five feet of any driveway;
(5) Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping; or
(6) Within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the
sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to impede or interfere
with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes.
§ 161-15 (RESERVED) § 161-16
158:471

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Construction and Removal
[Adopted 5-21-2003 by Ord. No. 883-03]
§ 161-17. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or remove or cause to be
constructed or removed any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter or any
part thereof within any public right-of-way in the Township of Rochelle Park,
New Jersey.
§ 161-18. Application information.
Application for a permit under this article shall be made to the Construction
Official or his designee by the owner of the premises or his agent upon
forms provided by the Township of Rochelle Park and shall contain the
following information:
§ 161-19. Specifications.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the person who is to perform the proposed
work, and the name and address of the owner of the property on which
the work is to be performed, if other than the applicant.
C. The location, by street number or otherwise, of the premises where the
work is to be done.
D. The estimated cost of the proposed work.
E. A line and grade plan showing the proposed work, including its exact
location with respect to a street intersection or some other fixed and
prominent object, as well as its width and relationship to the grade of
the street and the adjacent property and, in the case of a driveway
apron, its slope or pitch.
F. Any other information that the Construction Official or his designee
deems necessary in order to determine whether the work will comply
with this chapter.
A. All materials and work shall be in accordance with the specifications on
file in the Building Department.
B. Any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter which is removed shall be
promptly replaced within 10 days of removal in accordance with
specifications on file in the Building Department. The Construction
Official may allow longer periods of time as required for special
circumstance.
C. No concrete sidewalk shall be replaced or covered with blacktop.
§ 161-17 (RESERVED) § 161-19
158:473
§ 161-20. Notice required.
The applicant shall notify the Construction Official or his designee at least
24 hours prior to the time of removal or pouring or laying any sidewalk,
driveway apron, curb or gutter.
§ 161-21. Exception. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
This article shall not apply to:
§ 161-22. Sidewalk and curb construction responsibility.
D. Whenever a curb cut or driveway depression is required, the entire
section or sections of curb and gutter shall be removed and replaced.
The breaking and recapping of curbing is specifically prohibited. The
curb cuts at residential property shall be limited to the greater of 20%
of the total front width of the lot or 15 feet for single-car driveways or
22 feet for properties with two-car garages and/or driveways.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon or over any
curb or sidewalk on any street, avenue or highway within the limits of
the Township of Rochelle Park without properly protecting the curb or
sidewalk from damage.
A. The initial installation of sidewalks, driveway aprons, curbs or gutters
in a major subdivision where the work is covered by performance
guaranties required by the Planning Board.
A. Duty of abutting landowner. The construction of curbs and sidewalks
and all repair, alteration, relaying and maintaining of sidewalks and
curbs are hereby declared to be the duty of the abutting landowner.
B. Designation of public officer. The Construction Official or his designee
is hereby designated as the public officer to exercise the powers
prescribed by this section. The Construction Official or his designee and
his office shall be responsible for the enforcement and implementation
of this section. Upon inspection and determination by the Construction
Official or his designee that the sidewalk and/or curb abutting lands
owned by a landowner are in need of repair or replacement, the
Construction Official or his designee shall issue a notice requiring
replacement and/or repair of any deteriorated sidewalk or curb. Said
notice shall provide the landowner with 30 days in which to repair and/
or replace the sidewalk and curb specified by the Building Department.
In the event that the abutting lands are unoccupied or the owner cannot
be found within the Township, the notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the owner’s post office address if it can be ascertained. In
the event that the abutting owner is a nonresident of the Township or
his post office address cannot be ascertained, than the notice may be
inserted once in the designated paper of general circulation in the
Township.
§ 161-19 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 161-22
158:474
§ 161-23. Violations and penalties.
For a violation of any provision of this article, the maximum penalty, upon
conviction thereof, shall be a fine not exceeding $1,000, or imprisonment
for up to 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days,
or any combination thereof.
C. Performance by Township. In the event that the owners or occupant
shall fail to comply with the requirements of the notice, the Township,
upon filing proof of the services or publication of the aforesaid notice in
the appropriate department of the Township, shall cause the required
work to be done at its expense.
D. Certification of costs. Upon performance of the required work by the
Township pursuant to Subsection C, the cost of the work shall be
certified to the Tax Assessor. Upon the filing of the certificate, the
amount reflected therein shall become a lien upon the abutting lands to
the same extent that assessments for local improvements are liens and
shall be collected in the manner provided by law for collection of
assessments, bearing interest at a like rate.
E. Legal action. In the event that the owner shall default in the payment of
an assessment, the Township may proceed against him in an action at
law.
F. Compliant. All work performed under the terms of this section shall be
under the supervision and direction of the Construction Official or his
designee, who shall have exclusive authority to inspect and approve
replacement of sidewalks and/or curbs which have been ordered by the
Construction Official or his designee.
G. Certificate of continued occupancy. The Construction Official or his
designee shall inspect sidewalks and curbs in conjunction with
applications for certificates of continued occupancy issued upon resale
of a residence or change in use application for commercial premises.
§ 161-22 (RESERVED) § 161-23
158:475
Chapter 164
(RESERVED)
Chapter 166
TAXATION
§ 161-23 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 161-23
164:476
ARTICLE I
Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 8-20-2003 by Ord. No. 891-03]
§ 166-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003,
c. 114, which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1%
on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but before
July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy
on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation
pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3)
which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the
occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 166-2. Imposition of tax.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the
Township of Rochelle Park which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate
of 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Rochelle Park on or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004,
and 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in
the Township of Rochelle Park on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms
in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L.
1966, c. 40, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 166-3. Tax to be in addition to other taxes.
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 166-4. Payment of tax; vendor regulations; violations and
penalties.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this article.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
§ 166-1 TAXATION § 166-4
166:477
§ 166-5. Collection of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the Township
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each
person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable
for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any
such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a
customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time;
provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall be joined as
a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. Any violation of this section shall be subject to penalties imposed by the
municipal court, not to exceed $1,000.
§ 166-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 166-5
166:478
Chapter 167
(RESERVED)
Chapter 169
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
§ 166-5 (RESERVED) § 166-5
167:479

ARTICLE I
Taxicabs
[Adopted 2-14-1949 by Ord. No. 155]
§ 169-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, copartnership, association, corporation or jointstock
company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court
whatsoever.
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other public
place.
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motorcar, commonly called "taxi," engaged
in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run over
any of the streets or public highways of the state, and particularly accepts
and discharges such persons as may offer themselves for transportation
from points or places to points or places within or without the state.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — The Township Committee of the Township of
Rochelle Park, Bergen County, New Jersey.
§ 169-2. Taxicab owner's license required.
No taxicabs shall be used for the transportation of passengers for hire in
the Township of Rochelle Park, Bergen County, New Jersey, unless same
shall be licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article and the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq. and consent for the operation
thereof obtained from the Township Committee. The license required by this
section shall be known as "taxi owner's license."
§ 169-3. Taxi driver's license required.
No person shall drive or operate as driver or chauffeur, or otherwise, any
taxicab used for the transportation of passengers for hire in the Township of
Rochelle Park, Bergen County, New Jersey, unless such person shall have a
license issued for said purpose pursuant to the provisions of this article. The
license required by this section shall be known as "taxi driver's license."
§ 169-4. Application for owner's license.
No taxi owner's license shall be issued for any taxicab herein required
to be licensed until the owner thereof shall have filed an application for
same, addressed to the Township Committee, setting forth the following
information:
A. Description of the vehicle for which the license is applied for.
B. Name of the owner.
§ 169-1 (RESERVED) § 169-4
167:481
§ 169-5. Requirements for licensing of taxicab.
No taxicab shall be licensed unless the following requirements are met:
§ 169-6. Application for taxicab driver's license.
§ 169-7. Requirements for taxicab driver's license.
No person shall receive a taxi driver's license until the following
requirements are met:
C. Residence or address of principal office of the owner.
D. Telephone numbers in whose name listed and time in which they are in
service.
E. Complete schedule of fares.
F. Such other facts as the Township Committee or the Chief of Police of
the Township of Rochelle Park shall require to be furnished.
A. The Chief of Police shall inspect said taxicab and approve same in
writing and such approval shall be filed with the Township Clerk.
B. All requirements of N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 have been complied with.
[Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 519]
C. The license fee therefor, as hereinafter provided, is paid to the
Township Clerk.
A. No taxi driver's license shall be granted to any person unless such
person is at least 18 years of age and is a citizen of the United States of
America and until such person shall have filed an application for same,
addressed to the Township Committee, setting forth the following
information:
(1) Full name of applicant.
(2) Age of applicant.
(3) Place of his residence.
(4) Certificate as to good moral character and ability, signed by at least
two citizens of Bergen County.
(5) Such other facts as the Township Committee or the Chief of Police
of the Township of Rochelle Park shall require to be furnished.
B. Each application for a taxi driver's license must be accompanied by two
recent photographs of the applicant of a size which may be easily
attached to the license when issued, one to be attached thereto, the
other to be filed with the application in the Township Clerk's office.
§ 169-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 169-7
167:482
§ 169-8. Residence requirements.
No license under this article shall be issued to any person who has not been
a resident of Bergen County for at least 30 days prior to the date of making
application. No license under this article shall be issued to any firm, the
individual members of which have not been residents of Bergen County for
at least 30 days prior to the date of making application.
§ 169-9. Licensing authority.
The Township Committee shall have the sole licensing authority under this
article and shall have the power to grant or reject any license applied for
hereunder, as shall appear for the best interest of the residents of the
Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 169-10. Issuance of licenses.
Any license granted hereunder shall be issued and signed by the Township
Clerk after the granting thereof by the Township Committee and the
payment of the fee therefor, and shall be sealed with the Township Seal.
§ 169-11. Temporary taxi driver's license.
The Chief of Police of the Township of Rochelle Park shall have the power
to grant a temporary taxi driver's license upon compliance with all of the
requirements herein, which temporary taxi driver's license shall not extend
beyond the date of the next regular Township Committee meeting of the
Township of Rochelle Park after the issuance thereof.
§ 169-12. License fees. [Amended 5-2-1960 by Ord. No. 232;
11-16-1981 by Ord. No. 453]
The fee required to paid for the taxi owner's license is $50 annually for each
taxicab, and the fee required to be paid for a taxi driver's license shall be
$5 annually. Licenses issued shall be in effect one year from April 1.
§ 169-13. Driver's license to include photograph and signature.
The taxi driver's license herein provided for shall be in such form as
to contain the photograph and signature of the licensee of the license,
which photograph shall be a duplicate of the photographs filed with the
application, which photograph shall be so attached to the license that it
cannot be removed and another photograph substituted without detection.
Any licensee who willfully or maliciously defaces, damages or obliterates
A. A certificate is issued by the Chief of Police of the Township of Rochelle
Park certifying that he has fingerprinted the applicant and same is on
file at the Rochelle Park police headquarters.
B. The license fee therefor, as hereinafter provided, is paid to the
Township Clerk.
§ 169-7 (RESERVED) § 169-13
167:483
any official entry made upon his license shall be subject to the penalty of
revocation of the said license.
§ 169-14. Display of owner's license.
The taxi owner's license shall, at all times, be openly and conspicuously
exhibited in any automobile or motor vehicle licensed under this article
and it shall briefly describe the taxicab licensed and contain the motor
vehicle registration number as well as the serial and motor numbers of such
taxicab.
§ 169-15. Register of licenses.
The Township Clerk shall keep a register of all licenses granted under the
provisions of this article, which register shall show the character of the
license, the number, date of issue, name of person licensed and any other
information pertaining thereto. The Clerk shall keep all applications and
shall endorse on such applications as licenses are granted by the Township
Committee the number of the license issued in pursuance thereof.
§ 169-16. Rates for carrying passengers.
§ 169-17. Possession of driver's license; badge.
Every holder of a taxi driver's license, when driving or operating any vehicle
herein required to be licensed, shall have in his possession the license
issued to him and, in addition thereto, shall wear on the outside of his hat
or clothing a license badge to be furnished to him by the Township Clerk.
In case any such licensee shall lose such license badge, he may procure a
duplicate thereof from the Township Clerk upon payment of the actual cost
thereof.
§ 169-18. Operational regulations.
A. The charge for carrying passengers shall not exceed the rates set out in
the application for the taxi owner's license unless said change in rates
shall be approved by the Township Committee.
B. Every taxicab licensed hereunder shall have fastened in a conspicuous
place therein a printed card showing the rates provided for in the
approved application, in letters and figures of not less than 1/2 inch in
height, which card shall bear the license number of such vehicle and
also the name of the owner thereof. The charging of any fare or fares in
excess thereof shall constitute a violation of this article by the owner or
operator, or both.
A. No driver, owner or other person interested in or connected with any
taxicab licensed hereunder shall solicit customers in a noisy or
offensive manner nor at any place other than public hack stands in any
manner whatsoever.
§ 169-13 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 169-18
167:484
§ 169-19. Physical requirements for taxicabs.
All taxicabs herein required to be licensed, used or operated for the
carrying of passengers within the scope of this article shall be automobile
sedans with a minimum of three doors. At least two of said doors shall be
for the exclusive use of the passengers. The said automobiles shall be, at all
times, clean and in good repair.
§ 169-20. Disputes as to fares; receipts; driver's compartment.
Any dispute as to the fare shall be determined by the officer in charge of the
Rochelle Park police station.
§ 169-21. Public hack stands.
§ 169-22. Revocation or suspension of license.
B. No driver of any taxicab which is disengaged shall refuse to carry any
orderly person upon the payment of the rate of fare herein fixed.
C. No driver of any taxicab licensed hereunder shall permit such vehicle
when disengaged to stand in any public street or place other than at a
taxi stand, provided that nothing herein shall prevent such driver from
waiting for a passenger in front of any building or place.
A. Every driver of a taxicab shall, when requested, give a passenger a
receipt for the fare paid.
B. No person other than the licensed driver or a paying passenger of a
taxicab shall ride or sit in the compartment of the taxicab reserved for
the driver.
A. Public hack stands are hereby established at such places as may be
from time to time designated by the Township Committee, which shall
designate the character of vehicles which may stand at any such public
hack stand and may exclude all other vehicles from such stand.
B. The location and capacity of any such public hack stand shall be
indicated by a sign substantially as follows: "Taxicab stand. Capacity .....
taxicabs"
C. No vehicle other than one licensed hereunder and prepared to accept
passengers upon request shall stand or park at any such public hack
stand.
A. The Township Committee is hereby authorized and empowered to
revoke or suspend any license issued hereunder for the violation of any
of the provisions of this article or for the violation of any of the rules and
regulations made, adopted and promulgated by the Township
Committee in connection herewith.
§ 169-18 (RESERVED) § 169-22
167:485
§ 169-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
Any person, firm, corporation or association who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article shall, in addition to the suspension or revocation
of license heretofore mentioned, be punishable by a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $500 or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and every day of
such violation shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
B. Any such suspension shall be noted on the license, together with a
statement of the reasons therefor, and if the license be a taxi driver's
license, the driver shall be deprived of his badge by the Chief of Police,
the badge to be returned at the expiration of the period for which the
license was suspended.
C. A second suspension for the same reason or, in any case, a third
suspension of any license issued hereunder shall revoke the license.
§ 169-22 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 169-23
167:486
ARTICLE II
Limousines
[Adopted 2-19-1997 by Ord. No. 746]
§ 169-24. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRIVER — Any person who drives a limousine within the Township of
Rochelle Park.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate subsections of
this article, unless otherwise stated.
LIMOUSINE — Includes any automobile or motor car, with the capacity
of five but less than 10 passengers, plus driver, engaged in the business
of carrying passengers for hire and which is hired by charter or for a
particular contract or by the day or hour or other fixed period or to
transport passengers to a specified place or places or which charges a fare
or price agreed upon in advance between the operator and the passenger;
provided, however, that the term "limousine" shall not include taxicabs,
hotel buses or buses employed solely in transporting school children or
teachers or autobuses which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Board
of Public Utility Commissioners or interstate autobuses required by federal
law or the rules of the Board of Public Utility Commissioners to carry
insurance against loss from liability imposed by law on account of bodily
injury or death. Furthermore, limousine shall not be deemed to include
a vehicle utilized for the pickup and discharge of passengers within the
Township of Rochelle Park. A vehicle used for that purpose shall be deemed
a "taxicab."
NUMBER OF OWNERS' LICENSES — The total number of limousine
owners' licenses that may be issued and outstanding at one time is hereby
fixed at three as of April 2003.[Amended 8-21-2002 by Ord. No. 862-02;
5-21-2003 by Ord. No. 884-03]
OPERATION OF A LIMOUSINE — Consists of accepting and transporting
in such limousine one or more persons for hire from a point within the
Township. The operation of a limousine by one other than the owner shall
be deemed operation by the owner thereof as well as by the person actually
driving the same. Operation shall also be deemed to include parking, storing
or otherwise maintaining said vehicle within the borders of the Township of
Rochelle Park.
OWNER — Any person, corporation or association in whose name title
to any limousine is registered with the New Jersey Department of Motor
Vehicles or who appears in such records to be the conditional vendee or
lessee thereof.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Rochelle Park.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — The members of the Township Committee of
Rochelle Park.
§ 169-24 (RESERVED) § 169-25
167:487
§ 169-25. License required for limousine and driver.
No limousine shall be operated within the Township of Rochelle Park unless
both the limousine and the driver thereof are licensed pursuant to this
article and conform to all of the provisions hereof.
§ 169-26. Class of license.
There are hereby established two classes of limousine licenses to be known
as "limousine driver's license" and "limousine owner's license," respectively.
§ 169-27. Limousine driver's license.
A limousine driver's license shall entitle the person named therein to
operate within the Township of Rochelle Park any limousine duly licensed
hereunder until the license either expires or is surrendered, suspended or
revoked and shall not be transferable.
§ 169-28. Limousine owner's license.
A limousine owner's license shall entitle the limousine therein described to
be operated in this Township by a driver duly licensed hereunder until the
license either expires or is surrendered, suspended or revoked and shall not
be transferable.
§ 169-29. Expiration of license.
Any license issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall expire at 12:00
midnight on December 31 of the year in which it was issued, unless sooner
surrendered, suspended or revoked.
§ 169-30. Applications in general.
A. All applications for the issuance or the renewal of any license of either
class shall be made by the Township Clerk and designed to elicit
information respecting the identification, responsibility and law-abiding
habits of the applicant.
B. Each applicant for a license of any class shall supply the information
requested on the application in full and verify the correctness thereof
by his oath or affirmation and thereafter file the completed application
with the Township Clerk, together with the full amount of the proper fee
hereinafter fixed therefor.
C. All applications shall be submitted to the Construction Code
Department for review regarding compliance with municipal planning
and zoning regulations.117 Said applicant, if requested by the
Construction Code Official, shall submit plans or drawings showing the
location of the vehicles on the premises in which the vehicles are to be
located. Said license shall not be issued by the Township Clerk unless or
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 185, Land Use and Development Regulations.
§ 169-25 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 169-30
167:488
§ 169-31. Application for limousine owner's license.
§ 169-32. Application for limousine driver's license.
until approval is obtained from the Construction Code Department.
The Construction Code Department shall have the right, if it deems
necessary, to require the applicant to submit a formal application to the
Planning Board for site plan approval. In that event, the applicant shall
comply with all the municipal land use requirements pertaining to site
plans. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by
Ord. No. 1038-11]
A. All applications for the issuance or renewal of a limousine owner's
license shall be made, in writing, in duplicate, and shall contain the full
name and address of the owner, the serial number, type, color, year and
make of the limousine, the number of persons it is to carry and a
detailed description of the manner in which all vehicles shall be parked
or otherwise stored in accordance with the provisions of this article.
Any and every change of address of the owner shall be reported to the
Township Clerk within three days after such change.
B. Every person obtaining a limousine owner's license shall be at least 18
years of age, and if operating more than one vehicle with the owner's
license, shall have a regularly registered business office located within
the Township of Rochelle Park in compliance with all local building and
zoning ordinances and shall therein have a telephone operating.
C. No limousine owner's license shall be issued until the limousine has
been thoroughly inspected by the Police Department and found to be in
a safe, clean and sanitary condition for the transportation of
passengers.
D. No limousine licensed under this article shall be maintained or
operated on the streets of the Township, except by a driver licensed in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
E. No limousine owner's license shall be issued without satisfactory proof
of the availability of off-street parking for all vehicles. Said proofs must
be approved, in writing, by the Construction Code Department.
F. No limousine owner's license shall be issued unless the applicant shall
possess a valid New Jersey driver's license.
G. No limousine owner's license shall be issued unless the applicant first
submits fingerprints to the Township of Rochelle Park Police
Department which shall conduct an appropriate background check of
the limousine owner prior to the issuance of a limousine owner's license
pursuant to this section. [Added 7-17-2002 by Ord. No. 856-02]
A. Each applicant for a limousine driver's license shall be at least 18 years
of age and a holder of a valid driver's license issued by the Division of
Motor Vehicles, State of New Jersey.
§ 169-30 (RESERVED) § 169-32
167:489
§ 169-33. Insurance policy or bond.
B. Each applicant for a limousine driver's license shall file with his
application two photographs, each 3 1/2 inches square, clearly
depicting the facial features of the applicant, both of which
photographs shall thereupon become the property of the Township and
be retained with the application form unless the application shall be
issued, in which event one of the photographs shall be permanently
affixed to the license card in a space provided therein.
C. (Reserved)118
D. All changes of residence on the part of the holder of any limousine
driver's license issued under this section shall be reported, in writing,
to the Township Clerk within three days after such change and shall be
directed to the Police Department of the Township.
E. The Township Clerk is hereby authorized to issue a temporary
limousine driver's license pending the approval by the Township
Committee of any application for a limousine driver's license submitted
in accordance with the provisions of this section, provided that the
Chief of Police of the Township shall first certify to the Township Clerk,
that after due investigation, the applicant is not ineligible under the
provisions of this section.
A. Every applicant for a limousine driver's license shall submit the
insurance policy or bond required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-14 and 48:16-15119
of the Statutes of New Jersey covering the limousine to be licensed and
shall execute and deliver to the Township Clerk, concurrently with the
filing of the policy or bond aforesaid, a power of attorney, wherein and
whereby the owner shall appoint the Township Clerk his true and lawful
attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of
a court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by
virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy or bond filed
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-16 of the Statutes of New Jersey.
B. The Township Clerk, upon filing of the required insurance policy or
bond, shall issue a certificate, in duplicate, showing the owner of the
limousine has complied with the terms of the New Jersey Statutes
aforementioned, which certificate shall recite the name of the insurance
company, the number and date of expiration of the policy or bond, a
description of the limousine insured thereunder and the registration
number of the same. The duplicate certificate shall be filed with the
Department of Motor Vehicles before any such car is licensed as a
limousine. The original certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous
place with the limousine.
118. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding fingerprinting of applicants, was repealed
5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 830-01.
119. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 48:16-15 was repealed by Chapter 224 of the Laws of 1979.
§ 169-32 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 169-34
167:490
§ 169-34. License fees.
The annual license fee for each limousine driver's license hereafter issued
or any renewal thereof shall be $25 for each year or portion of a year for
which the license is issued or renewed. The annual fee for each limousine
owner's license hereafter issued or any renewal thereof shall be $50, plus
$30 for each limousine for each year or portion of a year for which the
license is issued or renewed, and all such licenses shall be under the charge
and control of the person applying therefor and he shall be responsible for
the operation of all cars so licensed to him.
§ 169-35. Licenses revoked or suspended.
The Township Committee may, in its discretion, refuse to issue or renew or
may, after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend:
§ 169-36. Display of limousine driver's card.
A. Any license of either class if the applicant or licensee has been once
convicted of a crime in this or any other jurisdiction or convicted of
being a disorderly person or of a violation of Title 39, Motor Vehicles
and Traffic Regulations, of the Statutes of New Jersey or has been
dishonorably discharged from the Armed Forces of the United States of
America or who violates any provisions of this article or has any
judgment unsatisfied of record against him arising out of an automobile
accident or who has made false answers in his application for such
license or any renewal thereof or who has failed or fails to render
reasonably prompt, safe and adequate limousine service or who has not
complied fully with all requirements of this section for such class of
license.
B. Any limousine driver's license if the licensee or the applicant has in any
degree contributed to any injury to persons or damage to property
arising out of negligent operation of a motor vehicle or has any
communicable or contagious disease.
C. Any limousine owner's license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be
licensed, by reason of unsafe or unsanitary conditions, is dangerous or
unsafe to the occupants or others or if the policy of insurance or bond or
power of attorney required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-14, 48:16-15120 and
48:16-16 of the New Jersey Statutes of the aforementioned has not been
furnished or kept in force or if the owner fails to comply with any terms
or conditions imposed by the Township Committee, or any law of this
state.
A. Each applicant granted a limousine driver's license shall be issued a
license card in evidence thereof, in a form approved by the Township
Committee and signed by the Township Clerk on its behalf. Such license
card shall at all times be prominently displayed and adequately
120. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 48:16-15 was repealed by Chapter 224 of the Laws of 1979.
§ 169-34 (RESERVED) § 169-36
167:491
§ 169-37. Operation regulations.
§ 169-38. Type of vehicle specified.
§ 169-39. Insurance required.
No limousine shall be licensed until an insurance policy or certificate in lieu
thereof shall have been filed with the Township Clerk with liability limits
not less than $100,000/$300,000 for bodily injury and $10,000 for property
damage.
protected in the interior of any vehicle operated by the licensee so
that the fact thereof shall be at all times in full view of and plainly
legible to any passenger seated on the rear seat of such limousine; and
the license card shall at all times be and remain the property of the
Township and on direction of the Township Committee shall at once be
surrendered to the Township Clerk.
B. No limousine driver's license card, other than that of the licensee
actually operating the limousine at the time, shall be displayed therein.
A. Drivers of limousines shall not receive or discharge passengers in the
roadway, but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk or as nearly as
possible thereto or, in the absence of sidewalk, to the extreme right
hand-side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers,
except on one-way streets where passengers may be discharged on
either right- or left-hand sidewalks or at the side of a roadway in the
absence of a sidewalk.
B. No limousine shall be operated about the streets of the Township so as
to solicit passengers or to bring the presence of the limousine to the
attention of prospective passengers.
A. All vehicles herein required to be licensed, or used or operated for the
carrying of passengers within the scope of this article, shall be
automobile sedans with a minimum of three doors, at least two of which
doors shall be for the exclusive use of the passengers. These
automobiles shall at all times be clean and in good repair.
B. No person, other than the licensed driver of the limousine, shall ride or
sit in the compartment of the limousine reserved for the driver.
§ 169-36 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 169-39
167:492
Chapter 171
TOBACCO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoking — See Ch. 159.
§ 169-39 TOBACCO § 169-39
171:493

ARTICLE I
Sale to Minors; Vending Machines
[Adopted 11-17-1997 by Ord. No. 761-97]
§ 171-1. Prohibited acts; sign to be posted; enforcement.
§ 171-2. Identification required.
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer to sell, or permit to be sold, any
tobacco product to any individual without first requesting and positively
establishing the purchaser's age as 18 years or greater, unless the seller has
some other conclusive basis for determining the buyer is over the age of 18
years.
§ 171-3. Tobacco vending machines.
In view of the indiscriminate sales of tobacco products to minors through
tobacco vending machines, all tobacco vending machines are hereby
prohibited in the Township of Rochelle Park. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm, corporation or association to possess, own, operate, rent or
permit the use of or operation of a tobacco vending machine in, on or about
the premises under his or her ownership, control or management or to sell,
or offer to sell, any tobacco product through a tobacco vending machine in
the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 171-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. It shall be unlawful to sell tobacco products to a minor, that is, a person
under the age of 18 years.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase a tobacco product with
funds furnished by a minor or with the intent to sell such product to a
minor.
C. Sign requirement. The following six-inch-by-eight-inch sign shall be
posted in a conspicuous place near each cash register in all retail
establishments which sell tobacco products:
SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF
18 OR SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES BY MINORS IS PROHIBITED
BY LAW. Legal proof of age must be shown. A person who sells or
offers to sell a tobacco product to a person under 18 years of age may
be prosecuted in accordance with the State Statutes and Rochelle
Park Township Ordinances.
D. It is understood that the above subsections are to be enforced in
accordance with New Jersey statutes prohibiting the sale of cigarettes
to minors.
§ 171-1 TOBACCO § 171-4
171:495
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Township of Rochelle Park Board of Health, and
may be referred to in this article as the "Board of Health," "Department" or
"Board."
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Township of Rochelle Park
and/or his or her authorized representative.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any building or enclosed structure open to the general
public and any street, road, sidewalk, walkway, park or open space located
within the township and maintained for use by the general public.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any place or business that sells to the public
at retail.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product made from the tobacco plant or
containing tobacco leaf for the purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling or
other personal use, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff and dipping tobacco. This prohibition
includes products and materials of any kind which are used or intended
for use in inhaling, smoking or otherwise introducing into the human body
a tobacco substance, including but not limited to rolling paper, metal,
wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE — Any mechanical, electrical or electronic
self-service device which, upon insertions of moneys, tokens or any other
form of payment, dispense tobacco or tobacco products, either exclusively
or as one kind of an available item.
§ 171-5. Enforcement.
§ 171-6. Severability; construal.
A. Whenever a police officer of the Township of Rochelle Park reasonably
believes there exists a violation of this article, such officer may issue a
summons and complaint not later than 90 days after discovery of the
alleged violation. The complaint shall be written and shall state with
reasonable particularity the nature of the violation, including reference
to the section and subsection of this article alleged to have been
violated. The complaint shall be delivered personally or sent via
certified mail to the alleged violator.
B. A police officer of the Township of Rochelle Park, after giving proper
identification, and if no search or other warrant is required by law, may
summarily inspect any matter, thing, premises, place, person, record
incident or event as necessary to enforce the provisions of this article.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose or
otherwise act to interfere with or obstruct any police officer in the
performance of duties under this article.
D. Citizens may bring complaints for violation of this article.
§ 171-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 171-6
171:496
§ 171-7. Violations and penalties.
A. If the provision of any article, section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision, application or clause of this article shall be judged invalid
by any court of competent jurisdiction, this order or judgment shall not
affect or invalidate the remainder of any such article, section,
subsection, paragraph, subdivision, application or clause, and, to this
end, the provisions of the ordinance are hereby declared severable.
B. This article shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the people of the Township of Rochelle Park,
Bergen County, State of New Jersey.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any minor
violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction for a first
offense, be given a verbal warning with parental notification. For a
second offense, there shall be parental notification and nicotine
rehabilitation. For a third offense, there shall be a more severe nicotine
rehabilitation. For a fourth offense there shall be a Municipal Court
appearance and a fine of $50, plus costs. For a fifth and subsequent
offenses, there shall be a Municipal Court appearance and a fine of
$200, plus costs.
B. Any retail establishments or possessors of tobacco vending machines or
anyone else selling or distributing tobacco or tobacco products to
minors, unless otherwise provided by law, shall, upon conviction, pay a
fine of not less than $100 or more than $500 for each offense. The
complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the Township of
Rochelle Park or before such other judicial officers having authority
under the Laws of the State of New Jersey.
C. Each day of possession or use of a tobacco vending machine shall
constitute a separate violation of this article.
D. The Board of Health may suspend the retail food establishment license
of any person convicted of a violation of this article for a period of not
more than three days, pursuant to the authority of the health
commission to license and regulate establishments as provided by
N.J.S.A. 26:3-31c.
E. Notwithstanding Subsections A and B above, for violations of § 171-5 of
this article, the penalties shall be as determined pursuant to the Code of
Juvenile Justice, particularly N.J.S.A. 2A:4A-43b.
§ 171-6 TOBACCO § 171-7
171:497
Chapter 172
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking on posted lands — See Ch. 141.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 177.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
§ 172-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE — A motor vehicle of a private passenger or station wagon
type that is owned or leased and is neither used as a public or livery
conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a driver; and a motor
vehicle with a pickup body, or delivery sedan, a van or a parcel truck or a
camper-type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned by an individual
or husband and wife who are residents of the same household, not
customarily used in the occupation, profession or business of the owner(s).
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road, or a
parking area, or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm. Basic towing only includes providing
access to the vehicle during normal business hours. Any additional services,
including tow outs, will be negotiated with the party requesting same.
CALENDAR YEAR — The period of time between January 1 and December
31 of any given year.
CLASS I VEHICLE — Detachable trailer capable of hauling vehicles,
machinery and/or equipment, commonly referred to as "lowboy."
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which a private
passenger automobile comes in contact with any other object for which the
private passenger automobile must be towed or removed for placement in
a storage facility. This includes all situations which are accidental as to the
licensed owner or operator of the motor vehicle even if they were caused
by the intentional acts of a perpetrator where the perpetrator was not the
licensed owner or operator of the motor vehicle.
OFFICIAL TOWER — A person or company licensed by the Township of
Rochelle Park to tow and/or store vehicles.
OUTSIDE SECURED — The automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least six
§ 171-7 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 172-1
171:498
feet high and is installed with a locked gate. The facility is to be lighted at
night.
SPECIAL RECOVERY SERVICES — Constitutes any action that is not
normally associated with roadside towing, e.g., winching, righting
overturned vehicles, or other services required when a vehicle will not roll
on its own wheels.
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or underreach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of motor vehicles.
§ 172-2. Licensing and identification of official towers.
§ 172-3. Exception for owner-requested service.
No license shall be required for the on-site repair and/or towing or storage
of any vehicle when the request is received by the towing operator from
the owner prior to a police request or if the owner or operator of a vehicle
requests the police contact a tow company of their choice.
§ 172-4. Services to be furnished; possession of special equipment.
A. The governing body of the Township of Rochelle Park, or its designated
agent or officer, may license persons or companies meeting the criteria
set forth in this chapter and engaged in the business of or offering the
services of motor vehicle towing, wrecking or storage (service),
whereby damaged, (or) disabled and/or impounded motor vehicles are
towed or otherwise removed from the place where they are damaged,
(or) disabled, and/or impounded by use of tow vehicle, as defined
herein. Such person(s) or company shall be known as an "official tower."
B. Official towers shall be identified by means of a license, which shall be
issued by the Township as hereinafter provided. Each licensed official
tower shall also have issued by the Township a decal or insignia for
each vehicle used in the towing operation by the official tower and
which shall be placed on each vehicle in a prominent portion of such
vehicle as required by the Chief of Police or his/her designee. No
vehicle or motorized equipment shall engage in towing vehicles unless
such insignia or decal is affixed as set forth and the name of the official
tower permanently affixed to the vehicle. ("Permanently affixed" herein
shall mean attached to or placed directly on the vehicle in such a
manner as such cannot be removed or repositioned.)
A. The official tower shall furnish adequate and proper towing, wrecking,
storage and emergency repair service to damaged or disabled motor
vehicles within the limits of the Township when requested to do so by
the Chief of Police or his/her designee. The official tower shall be
available to render service 24 hours per day, seven days per week.
B. In the event that a disabled vehicle requires special towing equipment
(and) the official tower does not possess such equipment, then the Chief
§ 172-1 TOBACCO § 172-4
171:499
§ 172-5. Application for official tower license.
of Police or his/her designee shall select the next official tower in the
rotation list who does possess the necessary special equipment to tow
such disabled, (or) damaged or impounded vehicle. No official tower
shall subcontract or assign any work that is to be performed by the
official tower under the provisions of this chapter.
C. The Police Chief or his/her designee shall maintain a rotating list for a
period of 12 months, effective January 1 of each year. Disqualified
licensees will be deleted immediately from the list upon disqualification
and may requalify for the following twelve-month period. Rotation shall
be on a weekly or monthly basis within the discretion of the Chief of
Police.
A. Application for an official tower license shall be made to the Township
Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park upon a form provided by
the Chief of Police or his/her designee and shall contain all of the
following information:
(1) The name, business address, telephone number and federal tax
identification number (where applicable). When the official tower is
owned and operated by an individual, the name, social security
number, residential and business addresses and telephone
number(s) of such individual shall be provided. When the official
tower is a corporation or partnership, the application shall contain
the names, residences, telephone numbers, date of birth and social
security number of all persons owning any interest in the official
tower.
(2) In the event that the official tower is conducting business operating
under a trade or business name, the applicant shall submit a
certificate of such name as proof that such name has been
appropriately filed with the County Clerk's Office of Bergen County
and/or with the Secretary of State of the State of New Jersey.
(3) Any such information as may be required by the Township
Committee (or designee) concerning the personnel, vehicles,
equipment and storage facilities of such applicant, as hereinafter
provided, showing that the applicant meets the maximum
standards of performance.
(4) A certificate or certificates of insurance evidencing adequate
insurance coverage as hereinafter provided.
(5) A fee of $1,000 shall be paid at the time of submission of the
application to cover the administrative expenses incurred by the
Township in processing an application. If an applicant is approved
and placed on the rotational towing list for the Township, then,
prior to the accepted applicant's first rotation, it shall pay an
additional $500 to cover administrative expenses during the term
§ 172-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 172-5
171:500
of the contract. Furthermore, there shall be a fee of $75 for each
vehicle for which an identifying decal is issued.
(6) The names and addresses of two business references not in the
employ of the Township who have known the applicant for at least
two years and who can attest to the applicant's experience and
performance in the towing, wrecking and storage business.
(a) All towing vehicles must be listed on the application, including
the make and model number, year of vehicle and vehicle
identification number (VIN) and any and all other information
that the Township Committee may deem necessary.
(b) No vehicle may be listed on more than one application, nor can
there be a transfer of vehicles between towers.
(7) A complete list, including dates of service, of all other
municipalities, state agencies and/or governmental entities that the
applicant is, or has been, an official tower of or held a towing
permit from. No person applying individually shall be eligible for
approval or appointment as an official tower of the Township of
Rochelle Park unless that person shall have been an official
municipal tower with a minimum of five years' experience in
municipal towing in any municipality of the State of New Jersey,
including a minimum of two years' experience in municipal towing
in any municipality in the County of Bergen, State of New Jersey.
No corporation or partnership shall be eligible for approval or
appointment as an official tower of the Township of Rochelle Park
unless that business entity shall have been an official municipal
tower with a minimum of five years' experience in municipal towing
in any municipality of the State of New Jersey, including a minimum
of two years' experience in municipal towing in any municipality in
the County of Bergen, State of New Jersey.
(8) A complete list of all actions taken against the applicant by a
governmental entity for the applicant's alleged violation of any
towing ordinance or regulation while towing as a licensed or
permitted tower for that governmental entity. If the applicant's
towing license or permit has been revoked, suspended or denied,
the applicant shall list each time, what governmental entity was
involved and a brief description of the event(s) that led up to the
revocation, suspension and/or denial of a towing license or permit.
B. No license shall be granted to a tower unless and until the tower
seeking the license has appointed the Township Clerk as the applicant's
true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service out
of any court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the
applicant.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license, and/or the prior denial of an
application affecting the applicant, from this municipality or any county
§ 172-5 TOBACCO § 172-5
171:501
or state agency granting such license, may be cause for denial of a
license under this chapter.
D. The applicant shall also cause each of its drivers to have a background
check and driver's license check performed at a state-approved facility
approved by the Rochelle Park Police Department prior to that driver
performing any towing services in the Township. Copies of the results of
the background check shall be made available to the Township Clerk
immediately upon receipt.
E. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Chief of Police or his/her
designee shall complete his/her review and recommendation. The
review by the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall consist of the
following: an inspection of the personnel, vehicles, equipment and
storage areas proposed to be utilized by the applicant to verify the
accuracy of the information contained in the application and to
determine compliance with applicable laws and regulations and the
standards of performance required by this chapter.
F. An applicant may be included on the official towers list by an official
action of the Township Committee by resolution adopted at the annual
reorganization meeting or at a regular public meeting when, from a
consideration of the application and from such other information as
may be obtained, the Township Committee find that all of the following
circumstances exist:
(1) The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive made
any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in
the application or in any other document required pursuant to this
chapter.
(2) The applicant has met the standards in this chapter and has
furnished the required hold harmless agreement and certificate(s)
of insurance.
(3) The application has been reviewed and the Chief of Police or his/
her designee has submitted a favorable report.
(4) Neither the applicant nor the applicant's personnel have been
convicted of a crime or have had their driver's license suspended
within the past year.
G. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall conduct his or her review
and render a report to the Township Committee recommending either
the approval or denial of the application within 45 days of receipt of the
application. The Township Committee shall take action with regard to
the report of the Chief of Police. The applicant or its representative
shall be given notice of the date on which the Township Committee will
consider the application and shall be permitted to appear and be heard
at that time. Applications will be considered at the annual
reorganization meeting or at such other meeting designated by the
Township Committee.
§ 172-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 172-5
171:502
§ 172-6. Issuance of license.
H. Written notice of the approval or denial of the application shall be
provided to the applicant within 10 days of the decision of the Township
Committee.
A. Upon approval of the application as herein provided, the Township
Clerk shall issue for the applicant an official tower's license for each
tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle to be utilized in providing services
pursuant to this chapter by submitting such to the Chief of Police or
designee for issuance to the official tower(s).
B. Said license and identifying decal are to be affixed by the Chief of Police
or his/her designee at police headquarters, which shall be in a form so
approved by the Township Committee, and shall be displayed on the
tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle at all times.
C. Expiration; renewal; revocation.
(1) Each official tower's license shall expire on December 31 of each
calendar year, and the license shall run for the calendar year only.
Each applicant for an official tower's license or renewal shall apply
for such license on or before November 1 of any calendar year for
the next succeeding calendar year, and the license shall not be
transferable or assigned and may be subject to revocation by the
Township Committee for any of the following reasons:
(a) If it is subsequently determined that the applicant knowingly
and with intent to deceive made false, misleading or fraudulent
statements of material fact in the application or in any other
document required pursuant to this chapter.
(b) Violation of any federal or state law or municipal ordinance or
regulation relating to the operation of a motor vehicle or the
provision of towing services.
(c) Violation of any rule or regulation promulgated by the New
Jersey Department of Insurance.
(d) Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) No license shall be issued for less than a full calendar year, nor
should a license be issued at any other time than the period set
forth above.
D. Upon the expiration of an official tower's license, the applicant, prior to
performing any service thereafter, shall refile completely for such
official tower's license, setting forth all the information required in the
form provided by the Township Clerk and complying with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 172-5 TOBACCO § 172-7
171:503
§ 172-7. Minimum standards of performance.
To qualify for inclusion on the list of official towers, applicants must meet
the following minimum standards:
A. Minimum vehicle requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall maintain and have available to render
services required by this chapter a minimum of two regular tow
vehicles with wheel lifts, three flatbed vehicles, one medium-duty
towing vehicle of at least 15,000 pounds gross vehicle weight and
one heavy-duty towing vehicle of at least 31,000 pounds gross
vehicle weight. In lieu of a medium-duty towing vehicle, the tower
may substitute an additional heavy-duty towing vehicle in its place.
Registration documents shall be shown to the Township certifying
registration is the same or better than the gross vehicle weight
(GVW) of the vehicle, as plated on the vehicle.
(2) Vehicle classes.
(a) Heavy-duty tow vehicles of 31,000 pounds gross vehicle weight
or more must be equipped with a boom or winch assembly
mounted on the chassis, a tow sling or tow bar and a wheel lift
assembly or underreach. The winch assembly must have 100
feet of at least five-eighths-inch steel cable attached to a
motor-driven winch.
(b) Flatbed vehicles must be equipped with a winch or
hydraulically operated bed which slides or tilts to
accommodate the transporting of vehicles.
B. Each applicant shall submit, along with its application, proof of
ownership or lease of the vehicles which will be utilized to provide
services pursuant to this chapter.
C. Minimum equipment and reporting requirements.
(1) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall have two-way radio or
cellular phone capability with a dispatching center on a twentyfour-
hour basis.
(2) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall be equipped with the
following:
(a) At least one amber rotating beacon or strobe light mounted on
the highest practical location on the vehicle, visible from 360°
when in use and visible at a minimum distance of 500 feet
during daylight hours. An amber light permit, as required by
the state, must be filed in the office of the Chief of Police and
Township Clerk.
(b) Safety tow lights or magnetic tow lights for towing vehicles at
night, amber or red colored.
§ 172-7 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 172-7
171:504
(c) Extra chains and cable for pulling or securing a towed vehicle.
(d) At least one heavy-duty broom, a shovel, a crowbar or prybar, a
set of jumper cables, a flashlight, one two-pound or larger fire
extinguisher of dry chemical type, one dozen flares or similar
warning devices for placement at the scene of an accident or
behind a disabled vehicle, at least 10 pounds of dry sand or a
drying compound for gasoline and oil spilled on the roadway
and containers for removal thereof and a sufficient quantity
and sufficient types of tools to enable the tow vehicle operator
to perform proper and adequate emergency repair services for
the tow.
(3) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall comply with any and all
state, federal and local laws, regulations and ordinances pertaining
to safety, lighting and towing equipment requirements and shall be
subject to inspection by the Chief of Police or his/her designee at
any time. Where applicable, all permits required by other agencies
than the Township shall be provided to the Township upon request
of the Township.
(4) Every tow vehicle or flatbed vehicle shall display the official tower's
decal and shall have the name of the official tower, by a
permanently affixed or painted sign, prominently displayed on the
vehicle in such manner so as to conform to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-46. Such demarcations shall be placed on the outside door
panels of the vehicle. The sign shall be at least three inches in
height and diameter and be visible to the naked eye, and the names
must be the same on both panels.
(5) Within five calendar days of the expiration of each rotation period,
the official tower shall submit to the Township Clerk a copy of all of
the invoices for services rendered to any owner or operator of a
damaged or disabled vehicle on a form of invoice provided by the
Township. In the absence of a Township form, the official tower will
submit the bills which state the name and address of the person
towed, the make and model of the vehicle towed, the plate number
and the in date of the tow and the out date of the tow. Only fees
applicable in this chapter shall appear on said invoice, and there
shall be only one invoice per vehicle towed.
D. Minimum personnel requirements. Official towers shall have available,
at all times, a minimum of two drivers to provide the services required
by this chapter. All drivers employed by official towers to provide the
services required by this chapter shall meet the following requirements
and be subject to the following regulations:
(1) They shall be competent and able to provide minimum road
services for disabled vehicles.
§ 172-7 TOBACCO § 172-7
171:505
(2) All drivers required to have a commercial driver's license (CDL) by
the State of New Jersey and/or federal regulations are required to
furnish such license for the purpose of this chapter.
(3) They shall obey all traffic laws and regulations.
(4) They shall not have been convicted of a crime within the past year.
(5) All drivers who do not possess a CDL must submit to random drug
testing two times each year.
E. Minimum storage requirements.
(1) Every official tower shall maintain an inside building and/or outside
secured storage area meeting the following requirements:
(a) All official towers must have sufficient storage area on their
own premises to store towed vehicles at the licensed site. This
area must be over and above the requirement that is in effect
for requirement of parking for that site. No vertical stacking of
vehicles is permitted. The storage area must be contiguous to
the applicant's principal place of business. Each tow vehicle
must be stored at the office tower's licensed site. Official
towers located within the Township cannot store vehicles on
the thoroughfares of the Township, whether under the
auspices of the Township, County of Bergen, or State of New
Jersey, without Township approval. Storage of vehicles on the
thoroughfares of other municipalities wherein Township
towers are located is subject to the requirements of those
municipalities.
(b) The location of the storage area shall be located within the
limits of the Township or within two miles of the Township
limits.
(c) The storage area shall be fenced with the acceptable screened
material, six feet in height. The fenced area shall be no less
than 5,000 square feet in area. The storage area shall have a
suitable gate and be installed with a locking device or a similar
on-site security measure. The facility is to be lighted at night.
(d) The storage area shall be in an area legally zoned for or legally
nonconforming for such use; the certificate of occupancy is to
be furnished with the application.
(e) The storage facility shall be available from at least 8:00 a.m.
until 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and from at least 8:00
a.m. until 1:00 p.m. on Saturday. The applicant shall
prominently display the hours during which the facility will be
open on weekends. The storage area must have a building
wherein a permanently installed telephone is located. The
building shall be within sight distance and/or within 500 feet of
§ 172-7 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 172-7
171:506
§ 172-8. Utilization of list of official towers.
the entrance of the storage area. On the application for a
towing license, the applicant shall list all business hours
required pursuant to this subsection for the calendar year of
the license in question, which shall not be changed during the
calendar year.
(f) The official tower shall not charge any additional fee or other
charge for releasing vehicles to their owners after normal
business hours or on weekends or for moving a vehicle from
one location to another in the storage area.
(g) The applicant shall, with its application, submit proof of
ownership or lease of the storage area.
(h) The official tower shall be responsible for ensuring the proper
and safe storage of all vehicles towed pursuant to this chapter.
The official tower shall be liable for any damage incurred by
such vehicles while in transit to or while stored in the storage
areas.
(2) To ensure the timely release of a vehicle, the tower shall release a
vehicle to the owner/occupier of the vehicle no later than one hour
from the vehicle's arrival at the tower's facility or within one hour
of being contacted by the owner/occupier of the vehicle that he/she
wishes to take possession of said vehicle during regular business
hours.
F. Credit cards. All official towers must have the ability to receive credit
card payment and will accept same for payment of all towing and
storage services included, specifically or by reference, in this chapter.
A. Official towers shall be placed on the list in the order in which their
application is approved and license issued. Once the initial list has been
established, new official towers, when their applications have been
approved, will be added to the end of that list.
B. The Township shall request wrecking, towing and storage services from
each official tower in rotation. When called, the tower shall advise the
dispatcher if a vehicle is available and the estimated time of arrival. If
no tower vehicle is available or if the response time will exceed 20
minutes, the next official tower on the list shall be called. If none of the
official towers are available or able to provide such services as are
requested by the Township, the Township may request such services
from any other available source. All requests shall be made by the Chief
of Police or his/her designee.
C. The Township shall request service only from official towers; provided,
however, that if no emergency or road hazard exists, the Chief of Police
or his/her designee shall request such service from such other person
§ 172-7 TOBACCO § 172-8
171:507
§ 172-9. Hold harmless agreement.
The applicant shall agree, in writing, to assume the defense of, and
indemnify and hold harmless, the Township, its elected officials, boards,
commissions, officers, employees and agents from all suits, actions,
damages or claims to which the Township may be subjected of any kind
and nature whatsoever resulting from, caused by, arising out of or as
a consequence of the provision of towing, wrecking, storage and/or
emergency services provided at the request of this Township pursuant to
this chapter. Official towers shall enter into a hold harmless agreement
in a form to be prepared by the Attorney for the Township prior to being
included in the official towers list.
§ 172-10. Insurance.
as the owner of the motor vehicle in need of such services may request,
provided that the request is responded to within 30 minutes.
D. During adverse weather conditions, heavy traffic conditions or
emergency conditions, official towers shall give priority to requests
from the Township over any other requests which may be received by
the official towers.
A. No person shall be included on the official towers list unless and until
such person has provided to the Township a certificate(s) of insurance
evidencing that there is in effect the following insurance coverage.
(1) General property damages and liability insurance in an amount not
less than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per
aggregated general liability, including additional garagekeeper's
coverage, shall be primary as respects vehicles of others and shall
include collision coverage.
(2) Garagekeeper's liability insurance in an amount not less than
$500,000 per location shall be required. No deductible amounts are
permitted. The words "no deductible" shall be included on the
policy and/or certificate of insurance.
(3) Workers' compensation as required by law shall be required.
B. Policies of insurance shall be written by insurance companies
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
C. The Township of Rochelle Park shall be named as an additional insured
on all policies of insurance provided pursuant to this chapter. All
certificates of insurance shall provide 30 days' written notice to the
Township. Such insurance shall be primary.
D. Policies of insurance required by this chapter shall be maintained in full
force and effect at all times. In the event that any coverage is cancelled
or terminated or coverage decreased in amount, the tower shall be
§ 172-8 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 172-10
171:508
§ 172-11. Towing and storage fee schedule.
removed immediately from the official towers list until such time as the
required coverage is reinstated or replaced.
A. All charges shall be limited to those included in this chapter.
B. Fees for towing and storage of Class I vehicles damaged in an accident
or recovered after being stolen may not exceed the fees established by
the New Jersey Department of Insurance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.55.121 Those towing and storage fees which are set forth in
N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.1, as amended and supplemented,122 are incorporated
herein by reference. Pursuant to law, the fee schedules shall be
reviewed by the New Jersey State Commissioner of Insurance on an
annual basis and may be revised if necessary. In the event that the
schedules are revised by the New Jersey State Commissioner of
Insurance, the revised fees shall be the maximum fees that may be
charged by official towers, and this chapter shall be amended
accordingly.
(1) The following is the fee schedule for towing services not covered by
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.55123 and N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.1124:
(a) (Reserved)125
(b) The following is the fee schedule for towing services:
Rates at Any Time Fees Per Diem
Day tow 7 miles or less from
point of tow (one way)
$100
Each additional mile over 7
miles from point of pickup (one
way)
$4.50
Police impound (towing of car
to police impound facilities)
$100, plus milage as above
Road service charge $50
Special recovery services (Class
I)
$75 per hour
(2) The following is the fee schedule for storage services:
121. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.55 was repealed by P.L.2007, c. 193, § 24, operative
10-18-2008.
122. Editor's Note: See now 22 N.J.R. 3874(a) and 23 N.J.R. 592(a).
123. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.55 was repealed by P.L.2007, c. 193, § 24, operative
10-18-2008.
124. Editor's Note: See now 22 N.J.R. 3874(a) and 23 N.J.R. 592(a).
125. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), regarding an administrative fee imposed on each
vehicle towed, was repealed 9-26-2018 by Ord. No. 1130-18.
§ 172-10 TOBACCO § 172-11
171:509
Storage Facility Capacity Fee Per Diem
Inside and/or outside building
(secured)
$40
C. The above portion of § 172-11B does not regulate towing or storage of
Class II, III and IV vehicles. Such services shall be provided and
referred by the official tower(s) at the following rates.
(1) Class II vehicles: $135. Said charge covers all actions necessary
and related to towing Class II vehicles. Hookup front or rear, plus
$5 per mile for all miles in excess of seven miles.
(2) Class III vehicles: $175. Said charge covers all actions necessary
and related to towing Class III vehicles. Hookup front or rear, plus
$7.50 per mile for all miles in excess of seven miles.
(3) Class IV vehicles: $325. Said charge covers all actions necessary
and related to towing Class IV vehicles. Hookup front or rear, plus
$10 per mile for all miles in excess of seven miles.
(4) Road service for Class II vehicles: $50 plus materials.
(5) Road service for Class III vehicles: $75 plus materials.
(6) Road service for Class IV vehicles: $95 plus materials.
(7) Storage of Class II, III and IV vehicles is subject to the same
requirements as set forth in § 172-11B with the exception of a
change in the rate for storage. Storage of Class II, III and IV
vehicles shall be charged at the respective rates below.
(a) Class II: $40 per day.
(b) Class II: $50 per day.
(c) Class IV: $85 per day.
(8) Special recovery services of Class II, III and IV vehicles shall be
charged at the respective rates below. This charge shall only be
used in situations deemed necessary, and a notation of fact should
be noted on the official tower's bill. Said charge shall not apply to
winching a vehicle onto a flatbed vehicle.
(a) Class II: $100 per hour.
(b) Class III: $200 per hour.
(c) Class IV: $300 per hour.
(9) Special recovery services.
(a) Special recovery services of all vehicles shall be charged at the
respective rates set. This charge shall only be used in
situations deemed necessary, and a notation of fact should be
§ 172-11 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 172-11
171:510
noted on the official tower's bill. Said charge shall not apply to
winching a vehicle onto a flatbed vehicle when the vehicle rolls
freely.
(b) For special recovery services that require additional and/or
larger equipment, that equipment shall be billed at the
equipment's rate.
(c) Additional personnel for special recovery services shall be
billed at $75 per hour per person.
D. The fees set forth on the schedules for towing rates are the maximum
charges that shall apply to a Class I vehicle for basic towing services.
There shall be no additional charges other than those provided herein
in Subsection B and/or C above.
E. Calculation of rates and fees.
(1) The towing mileage rates, where applicable, shall be calculated
based on the total distance traveled from the site of pickup of the
vehicle in question to the dropoff point, by way of the shortest
available route. Fractions shall be rounded up to the nearest whole.
The first seven miles shall not be subject to the mileage charge.
(2) Tow vehicles transporting multiple passenger cars at one time shall
receive the applicable fees for each vehicle transported.
F. There shall be a maximum charge of $2,500 for Class I or II vehicles
stored, regardless of duration of the storage period.
G. No storage of any disabled or damaged vehicle shall be located on any
public street or sidewalk in the Township.
H. The fees set forth on the schedules set forth in this section contained for
storage fees are the maximum storage charges per twenty-four-hour
period that shall apply to all vehicles stored by an official tower. If the
facility is closed when the vehicle is towed, storage fees shall
commence at the start of the next business day.
I. Motorcycles and all other on/off road vehicles shall be considered
private passenger vehicles for purposes of determining fees which are
allowed under this section. Any other objects not covered herein which
are towed by an official tower at the request of the Township shall be
subject to fees as determined by the Township Committee.
J. The use of Speedi Dri shall be charged the rate of $15 per fifty-pound
bag after the first bag. The first bag is included in the initial towing
cost.
K. Fees for towing and storage of private passenger vehicles damaged in
an accident or recovered after being stolen may not exceed the fees
established by the New Jersey Department of Insurance pursuant to
§ 172-11 TOBACCO § 172-11
171:511
§ 172-12. Miscellaneous provisions.
N.J.S.A. 17:33B-47.126 Those towing and storage fees, which are set
forth in N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.1,127 are incorporated herein by reference.
L. The fees set forth in Subsections B and C of this section do not apply to
vehicles owned and/or operated by the Township of Rochelle Park or
any of its agencies. The towing of and special recovery services
provided to any of the Township's vehicles shall be provided free of
charge by the official tower.
A. Copies of this chapter and the schedule of fees that may be charged by
official towers shall be made available to the public during normal
business hours at the Municipal Building. Copies shall also be made
available to the public at each official tower's place of business.
B. All official towers shall post, in a prominent place at each storage area,
clearly visible to the public, a schedule of fees that may be charged for
all services, provided that the same is pursuant to this chapter.
C. The Township reserves the right to make periodic unannounced
inspections of the personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage areas of
all official towers.
D. The relationship between an official tower and the Township is one of
an independent contractor. Neither party shall be construed in any
manner whatsoever to be an employee of the other, nor shall any
employee or agent furnished by any party be construed to be an
employee or agent of the other party. Inclusion on the official towers list
shall not be construed or considered as a joint venture, partnership,
association, contract of employment or profit-sharing agreement.
E. The Township shall not be liable or responsible for compensating the
official towers for any of the services performed under this chapter
unless those services are performed for Township vehicles.
Compensation shall be the responsibility of the owner of the towed
motor vehicle, and the official tower shall proceed directly against the
owner.
F. The official tower shall, at all times, be solely responsible for the
conduct of its employees.
G. Each official tower shall keep and maintain adequate and complete
records showing all vehicles towed, stored and released, all service
rendered and all fees charged and collected. All records shall be
available for inspection by the Township at any time during normal
business hours. Records shall be kept and maintained by the official
tower at one central location and shall be retained for a period of seven
126. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 17:33B-47 was repealed by P.L.1997, c. 387, § 6, effective 1-19-1998.
127. Editor's Note: See now 22 N.J.R. 3874(a) and 23 N.J.R. 592(a).
§ 172-11 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 172-12
171:512
§ 172-13. Enforcement agency; suspension or revocation of license.
§ 172-14. Violations and penalties.
years. Records may be written, printed or computerized as long as the
requirements of this subsection are met.
A. The Rochelle Park Police Department shall be the enforcement agency.
The enforcement agency shall have the authority to hear complaints
against any official tower whether brought by Township
representatives, the public and/or other official towers.
B. The enforcement agency shall have the power to issue subpoenas to
compel attendance at the hearing.
C. In the event that a complaint (of a noncriminal nature) is received by
the Township, involving the improper or unsatisfactory performance of
services by an official tower, excessive charges or damage to a motor
vehicle while in the custody of the tower, the enforcement agency shall
give written notice of said complaint, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the official tower against whom the complaint is made.
The official tower shall make a written response to such complaint
within five calendar days from receipt of the written notice.
D. The enforcement agency, after hearing the matter, shall have the
authority to suspend the official tower's license until the next rotation.
Any contestation of such action by the enforcement agency shall be
made by way of appeal to the Township Committee within 14 calendar
days of the notice of said suspension. The Township Committee shall
then conduct a hearing regarding the appeal of the suspension at the
next public Council meeting or within 30 calendar days of the tower's
notice of appeal.
E. In the event that two or more complaints are pending for over 30 days
in Municipal Court, then the enforcement agency may suspend the
official tower's license after a hearing and decision by the enforcement
agency.
F. If, after considering the matter and the findings by the enforcement
agency, the Township Committee shall determine that there is good and
sufficient cause for revocation of the official tower's license, the tower
shall surrender said license to the Township Clerk within one calendar
day.
G. Failure to surrender the license upon revocation shall constitute a
violation of this chapter, subject to all legal action available to the
Township, including permanent removal from the official towers list.
H. Nothing contained herein shall prevent or limit the right of any person
to commence or maintain an action for damages or any other relief
directly against an official tower in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 172-12 TOBACCO § 172-14
171:513
Chapter 174
USED CAR SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 177. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
§ 174-1. License required.
No person, firm, company, association or corporation shall engage in the
business, employment or occupation of buying, selling or exchanging used
cars or maintain, conduct or operate any used car lot or pavilion in the
Township of Rochelle Park without first having applied for and obtained
from the Township Clerk of the Township of Rochelle Park a license to do
so.
§ 174-2. Application for license.
Any person, firm, company, association or corporation desiring to engage
in the used car business as set forth in § 174-1 hereof shall first make
application in writing to the Township Clerk, setting forth in said application
an exact description of the premises upon which said proposed business
is to be maintained, conducted or operated; the nature and construction
of the building or buildings to be used in connection with said proposed
business; the location of said buildings and lands with respect to the nearest
A. In addition to any suspension or revocation of license, a person who
shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
following:
(1) Punishment by a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or for a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, or any combination of them, at the
discretion of the Municipal Court. The minimum fine for violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be a fine of $1,000;
(2) Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day
the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and
distinct offense; and
(3) The imposition of a fine or imprisonment, or both, for a violation of
this chapter of the Code shall not be deemed to be in lieu of any
other provision therein providing for revocation or suspension of
any license or permit issued thereunder.
B. In addition to the fine provided above, a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be cause for revocation of the official
tower's license.
§ 172-14 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 174-2
174:514
public street, highway and sidewalks; the name and address of the person
or persons proposing to conduct said business and the name and address
of the person or persons owning the lands and premises upon which said
proposed business is to be maintained, conducted and operated.
§ 174-3. License fee.
The license fee for maintaining, conducting or operating the used car
business shall be $500, which fee must accompany the application.
§ 174-4. Consideration of application.
After receiving the application, the Township Clerk shall present the same
to the Township Committee for its consideration at the next succeeding
regular meeting.
§ 174-5. License limited to one premises and one licensee.
No license shall be granted to cover more than one place of business,
and a license shall apply only to the person, firm, company, association or
corporation to whom granted and shall not be transferable.
§ 174-6. Expiration of license; no proration of fee.
All licenses issued shall be valid only during the calendar year for which
issued and shall expire on December 21 of each year. The license fee shall
not be prorated for any portion of the year. Any license granted pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter may be surrendered to the Township Clerk
but no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made.
§ 174-7. Exhibition of license.
All licenses granted as herein provided shall be exhibited in a prominent
place.
§ 174-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519]
Any person, firm, company, association or corporation violating the terms,
provisions and conditions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $500 or imprisonment
in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each day on
which a violation continues shall be and constitute a separate offense.
§ 174-9. Revocation of license.
The license of any person, firm, company, association or corporation
violating the terms and conditions of this chapter may, after hearing before
the Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park, be revoked.
Chapter 177
§ 174-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 174-9
177:515
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Used car sales — See Ch. 174. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 180.
§ 177-1. Definitions.
The following terms, phrases and words as used in and for the purposes of
this chapter shall be deemed to have the following meanings:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE —
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle propelled otherwise than by muscular
power, excepting such vehicles as run only on rails or tracks.
PERSON — An individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Township of
Rochelle Park.
§ 177-2. Legislative declaration.
It is hereby determined and declared that the placing, abandonment,
leaving, keeping or storage out of doors of any motor vehicle not currently
used for transportation and not being licensed for the current year or any
unused machines on public or private lands in the Township of Rochelle
Park is contrary and inimical to the public welfare in that such vehicles
so placed, abandoned, left, kept or stored attract or may attract persons
of tender years who, being so attracted, may play in and about them and
be injured in so doing and that such motor vehicles so placed, abandoned,
left or stored out of doors, exposed to the elements, deteriorate and in
themselves are unsightly and detrimental to and depreciate the value of
properties in the neighborhood where they are located and in the township
as a whole.
Any motor vehicle found in any public street, highway or lands and
not bearing current license plates or, if bearing current license plates,
remaining stationary and unused on public streets, highways or lands
for more than 10 days consecutively.
A.
Any vehicle so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and
which the driver or person in charge thereof neglects or refuses to
move.
B.
Any motor vehicle not currently in use for transportation and not
licensed for the current year which is left, placed, kept or stored on
private land for 15 days or more shall be presumed to have been
abandoned by the owner.
C.
§ 174-9 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 177-3
177:516
§ 177-3. Abandonment on public or private land prohibited.
No person shall abandon or suffer or permit the abandonment of any motor
vehicle as described in § 177-1 out of doors and upon any public or private
land in the township or between the right-of-way side lines of any public
thoroughfare therein. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit
the placing, keeping or storage of any such motor vehicle in an enclosed
garage, barn or other closed building.
§ 177-4. Service of notice of violation.
§ 177-5. Abandonment on streets prohibited.
Whenever it shall appear to any member of the Police Department of
the Township of Rochelle Park that § 177-3 is being violated and that the
violation exists on public lands, between the right-of-way lines of any public
street, said motor vehicle shall be taken into possession by the Police
Department and removed to a storage place designated by the Township
Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 177-6. Disposal of vehicles.
Upon the taking into possession of a motor vehicle pursuant to § 177-4 or
177-5 hereof, the Police Department shall follow the procedures established
by Title 39, Chapter 10A of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey and shall sell
such vehicle at public auction.
A. Whenever it shall appear to any member of the Police Department of
the township that § 177-3 is being violated and that the land on which
the violation exists is privately owned, he shall, in writing, notify the
owner or tenant in possession of the land on which the violation exists
to abate the violation by removing the motor vehicle or motor vehicles
constituting the violation from the township or into an enclosed garage,
barn or other building within 10 days of the service of the notice, which
notice shall be served upon such owner or tenant, if he resides in the
township, personally, or by leaving it at his usual place of abode with
some member of his household over the age of 14 years, or if any such
owner or tenant shall reside outside the township, a notice shall be
served upon him by registered or certified mail, addressed to him at his
usual residence, if ascertainable, otherwise by notice published in the
newspaper in which legal notices of the township may be published,
and the said owner or tenant shall so abate the violation within the time
fixed by the notice.
B. In the event that the owner, possessor or occupant of such land shall
refuse or neglect to abate or remedy the condition complained of and
which constitutes a violation of this chapter after said 10 days' notice,
said motor vehicle shall be taken into possession by the Police
Department and removed to a storage place designated by the
Township Committee of the Township of Rochelle Park.
§ 177-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 177-7
177:517
§ 177-7. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to a lawfully operated junkyard or to motor
vehicles kept temporarily in the operation of a business primarily conducted
for the sale and repair, or either, of motor vehicles.
§ 177-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
519; 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 903-03]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a fine of not less than $52 nor more than
$500 or imprisonment for a term of not more than 90 days, or both, at the
discretion of the Judge.
Chapter 180
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking on posted lands — See Ch. 141.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 169.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 177.
§ 177-7 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 177-8
177:518
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 180-1. Definitions.128
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 180-2. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Rochelle Park are hereby
repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution
or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 180-3. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are held to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 180-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No.
903-03; 9-15-2004 by Ord. No. 913-04]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey State Statute or
as otherwise specifically provided in Chapter 180, every person convicted
of a violation of a provision of Chapter 180, or any supplement thereto, shall
be liable to a penalty of not more than $80 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 days, or both.
128. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 541 enacting this chapter was approved by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation 1-29-1988.
§ 180-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-4
177:519

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 180-5. Traffic control signals.
§ 180-6. Speed limits.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule II (§ 180-42), attached to and made a part of
this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 180-7. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III (§ 180-43), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 180-8. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule IV (§ 180-44), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 180-9. Prohibited turns at intersections.129
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any
of the locations described in Schedule V (§ 180-45), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 180-10. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 180-46),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 180-11. Through streets.
A. Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection
of those streets described in Schedule I (§ 180-41), attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
B. The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle 1
of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, and shall conform to
the design and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the
Department of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
A. The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 180-47),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as
129. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 913-04, adopted 9-15-2004, provided for a penalty of $105
for violation of no-left-turn regulations.
§ 180-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-11
177:521
§ 180-12. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 180-48), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections.
Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 180-13. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 180-49), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 180-14. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule X (§ 180-50), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 180-15. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained along
those streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI (§ 180-51),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, as authorized by the New
Jersey Department of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated
and numbered as indicated.
§ 180-16. Truck route and bus route system.
through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of
each street intersecting the through street except where yield signs are
provided for in the designations.
B. Harvey Avenue, between West Passaic Street and Plaza Way, is hereby
designated as a street with limited access to and from West Passaic
Street. There shall be no ingress or egress from Plaza Way. [Added
11-21-995 by Ord. No. 704]
A. A truck route and bus route system upon which all trucks having a total
gross weight in excess of four tons and buses are permitted to travel
and operate shall be as set forth in Schedule XII (§ 180-52).
B. All trucks having a total gross weight in excess of four tons and buses
are hereby excluded from all streets except those streets listed in
Schedule XII, except that this exclusion shall not be construed to
prevent the delivery or pickup of merchandise or other property along
the street from which such trucks are excluded.
§ 180-11 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 180-16
177:522
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 180-17. Parking prohibited at all times.130
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIII (§ 180-53), attached to and make a part
of this chapter.
§ 180-18. No stopping or standing.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule XIV (§ 180-54), attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 180-19. Parking prohibited certain hours. [Amended 11-18-1996
by Ord. No. 739-96; 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 903-03; 9-15-2004 by
Ord. No. 913-04]
§ 180-20. No stopping or standing certain hours.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule XVI (§ 180-56) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule XVI, attached to
and made a part of this chapter.
§ 180-21. Time limit parking.133
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVII (§ 180-57) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule XVII of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule XVII, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
A. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule
XV (§ 180-55) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule XV, attached to
and made a part of this chapter.131
B. The violation for overnight parking as set forth in § 180-55 shall not
exceed $30 for each violation. This fine specifically refers to overnight
parking and shall supercede the provisions of § 180-4.132
130. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 913-04, adopted 9-15-2004, provided for a penalty of $65 for
violation, inclusive of § 180-53.
131. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 913-04, adopted 9-15-2004, provided for a penalty of $65 for
violation.
132. Editor’s Note: Penalties in this section do not include court costs and fees.
133. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 913-04, adopted 9-15-2004, provided for a penalty of $65 for
violation, inclusive of § 180-53.
§ 180-17 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-22
177:523
§ 180-22. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule XVIII (§ 180-58) except at the angle designated and
only within the painted stall lines. On all streets or portions thereof where
angle parking is now or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked
thereon shall be parked with the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 180-23. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XIX (§ 180-59), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 180-24. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 180-60), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 180-25. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 180-61), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 180-26. Midblock crosswalks.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197e, midblock crosswalks are established at
those locations designated in Schedule XXII (§ 180-62), attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 180-27. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this Article shall
be deemed a nuisance and menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
Before regaining possession of the vehicle, the owner shall pay the
reasonable costs of the removal and storage which may result from such
removal and will also be subject to the penalties provided for in this chapter.
§ 180-28. Regulation of municipal parking lots.134 [Added 2-20-1990
by Ord. No. 584]
A. There are hereby established the following regulations respecting the
parking of vehicles upon the following lands owned or leased and
maintained by the Township of Rochelle Park or the Board of Education
of the Township of Rochelle Park, including any lands devoted to the
public parking of vehicles, as well as the entrances thereto and exits
therefrom:
134. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 913-04, adopted 9-15-2004, provided for a penalty of $65 for
violation.
§ 180-22 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 180-28
177:524
(1) Carlock Field Parking Lot. The parking lot located adjacent to
Carlock Field is hereby designated as the "Carlock Field Parking
Lot," and parking therein shall be governed by the following
regulations:
(a) Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on any day,
parking shall be restricted to persons using the Carlock Field
facilities.
(b) No person shall park a vehicle whenever snow has fallen and
the accumulation of snow is such that it covers such parking
lot. Such parking prohibition shall remain in effect until after
the snowfall has ceased and until the snow has been cleared.
(2) Midland School Parking Lot. Parking is hereby restricted in the
Midland School Parking Lot to staff members only between 7:30
a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. All vehicles doubled
parked in said lot during said hours, in addition to the above, shall
also be considered as illegally parked. [Added 10-18-1995 by
Ord. No. 703]
(3) Department of Public Works property. Parking is hereby restricted
to employees, vendors, and residents on official business only. All
other vehicles will be considered to be illegally parked and subject
to being towed. [Added 8-17-2005 by Ord. No. 933-05]
(4) Fire Department and Ambulance Corps. properties. Parking is
hereby restricted to Fire Department and Ambulance Corps
members and other official business to the Fire Department and
Ambulance Corps building. All other vehicles will be considered to
be illegally parked and subject to being towed. [Added 8-17-2005
by Ord. No. 933-05]
§ 180-28 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-28
177:525

ARTICLE IV
Parking for Disabled Persons
§ 180-29. Statutory authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 and 39:4-197.5 and
further in accordance with the other provisions of law as provided herein.
§ 180-30. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISABLED PERSON — Any person, who has sustained an amputation of
either or both legs, or of parts of either or both legs, or of either or both
arms, or parts of either or both arms, or who has been otherwise disabled
in any manner rendering it difficult and burdensome to walk.
DISABLED PERSONS PARKING AREA — Such geographical area or parking
place which has been specifically designated for the parking of vehicles
owned or operated by individuals hereinabove as disabled persons.
SPECIAL VEHICLE CERTIFICATE, LICENSE PLATE INSIGNIA OR
MARKER — Such identification issued by the Director of the Division of
Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey in accordance with N.J.S.A.
39:4-206 which shall be affixed to the vehicle indicating that a special
vehicle identification card has been issued for the motor vehicle designated
therein.
SPECIAL VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION CARD — The identification card
issued by the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 39:4-205, which, amongst other things, identifies the disabled
person and the vehicle owned and operated by him, stating that he is a
disabled person validly qualified to receive such card.
§ 180-31. Establishment of restricted spaces.
There is hereby established in the Township of Rochelle Park restricted
parking spaces in front of appropriate residences, in front of all schools
and other public buildings and in shopping and business districts for use
by persons who have been issued the special vehicle identification card and
who otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 180-32. Special vehicle identification required.
Upon the posting of the notice hereinafter described, no person shall stand,
park or cause to be parked any vehicle which does not have a special
vehicle identification, certificate, license insignia or marker posted thereon
as hereinabove defined in any area or parking place which has been
specifically designated as a parking area or parking place for the vehicles
of disabled persons.
§ 180-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-33
177:527
§ 180-33. Notice of space reservation.
Such notice shall consist of a sign containing either wording, markings or
other identification to indicate that the parking space is to be used for
disabled persons only. Such notice may be accompanied by a statement that
vehicles without special vehicle identification constitute a violation of this
chapter and are subject to the penalties herein.
§ 180-34. Placement of identification certificate.
A special vehicle identification certificate shall be posted on the lower righthand
corner of the windshield of the motor vehicle for which it is issued, or
metal insignia or marker, or both, of such design as has been determined
by the Director of Motor Vehicles, shall be attached to the license plate or
plates of the motor vehicle for which such identification card and certificate
has been issued.
§ 180-35. Erection of signs.
Notice in the form of a sign above described shall be posted at the parking
area or parking place so designated for the parking of vehicles of disabled
persons by the owner or occupant, lessee or licensee; and, upon posting, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply thereto.
§ 180-36. Damaging signs.
The damaging or defacing of such signs is hereby prohibited.
§ 180-37. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-12-2003 by Ord.
No. 902-03; 12-17-2003 by Ord. No. 903-03; 9-15-2004 by Ord. No.
913-04]
Any person who violates this article by parking a motor vehicle in a
restricted parking area which is reserved for handicapped individuals
without a special vehicle identification card or other official designation
shall be liable, upon conviction, to the following penalties:
A. For first conviction, a fine of $250.
B. For second and subsequent convictions, a fine of $250, plus a period of
community service of up to 90 days.135
135. Editor’s Note: Penalties in this section do not include court costs and fees.
§ 180-33 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 180-37
177:528
ARTICLE V
Emergency No Parking
§ 180-38. Declaration of emergency. [Amended 4-20-1994 by Ord.
No. 674]
§ 180-39. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this Article shall
be deemed a nuisance and menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any peace officer may provide for the removal and storage which
may result from such removal. Before regaining possession of the vehicle,
the owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal and will also be subject to the penalties
provided for in this chapter.
§ 180-40. Erection of signs.
The effectiveness of this Article is contingent upon signs being erected as
required by law.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police is authorized to
declare an emergency and to direct posting of the aforementioned signs
when weather conditions, accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate
or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere
with the free flow of traffic. Notification that the EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are being posted or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
B. Whenever snow has fallen and accumulation is such that it covers the
street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any street
or part thereof within the Township. The above parking prohibition
shall remain in effect 24 hours after the snow has ceased and until the
streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent that parking will
not interfere with the normal flow of traffic. It shall be unnecessary
during a snow emergency for the Police Department to post
EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs. [Amended 6-17-2015 by Ord. No.
1088-15]
§ 180-38 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-40
177:529

ARTICLE VI
Schedules
§ 180-41. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-5, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 180-42. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-6, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
(Reserved)
§ 180-43. Schedule III: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-7, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street Direction of Travel Limits
(Reserved)
§ 180-44. Schedule IV: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-8, no person shall make a U-turn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Central Avenue Entire length
East Passaic Street Entire length
Essex Street Entire length
Railroad Avenue Entire length
Rochelle Avenue Entire length
West Passaic Street Entire length
§ 180-45. Schedule V: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-9, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
§ 180-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-45
177:531
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At Intersection
of
Peak Street West Left All Rochelle Avenue
Plaza Way [Added
8-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 730]
West Left All Harvey Avenue
Plaza Way [Added
8-21-1996 by Ord.
No. 730]
West Left All Fairfield Drive
First driveway of the
United States Post
Office parking lot on
the west side of
Rochelle Avenue
immediately north of
Central Avenue
[Added 7-15-1991
by Ord. No. 616]
-- Left All Central Avenue
§ 180-46. Schedule VI: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-10, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn
on Red Signal Onto
Harvey Avenue [Added
7-15-1991 by Ord.
No. 616]
South Passaic Street
§ 180-47. Schedule VII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-11, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street, except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations.
Name of Street Limits
Becker Avenue Between Rochelle Avenue and Route 17
Berdan Street Between West Passaic Street and Chestnut
Street
Chestnut Avenue Between Rochelle Avenue and Susquehanna
Avenue
§ 180-45 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 180-47
177:532
Name of Street Limits
Lexington Avenue Between Rochelle Avenue and Midland
Street
Lincoln Drive Between Susquehanna Avenue and Central
Avenue
Madison Avenue Between Rochelle Avenue and Midland
Street
Park Way Between Rochelle Avenue and Becker
Avenue
William Street Between Chestnut Avenue and Central
Avenue
§ 180-48. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-12, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Becker Avenue [Added
5-20-1998 by Ord. No.
770-98]
Both High Street
Berdan Street South Chestnut Street
Brooks Avenue Both Chestnut Street
Cedar Drive [Added
2-21-2001 by Ord. No.
820]
South Crescent Street
Chestnut Avenue [Added
11-17-1997 by Ord. No.
760-97]
East Susquehanna Avenue
Collings Avenue Both East Forest Place
Collings Avenue Both East Terrace Avenue
Collings Avenue North Chestnut Avenue
Crescent Street [Added
8-15-2001 by Ord. No.
835]
North Cedar Drive
East Forest Place West William Street
East Terrace Avenue West William Street
Eldorado Court West Berdan Street
§ 180-47 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-48
177:533
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
Exit road from County of
Bergen Park at Lot No. 1,
Block 107.09 [Added
11-17-1997 by Ord. No.
760-97]
North Howard Avenue
Fairfield Drive North Plaza Way
Grove Avenue West Park Way
Hahn Avenue South Harvey Avenue
Harvey Avenue North Plaza Way
High Street Both Becker Avenue
High Street Both Lexington Avenue
High Street Both Madison Avenue
Hoffman Avenue [Added
7-10-1989 by Ord. No.
569]
West Howard Avenue
James Street [Added
7-10-1989 by Ord. No.
569]
South Howard Avenue and
Whittman Avenue
Lexington Avenue [Added
12-18-2013 by Ord. No.
1065-13]
Both High Street
Lincoln Avenue South Chestnut Avenue
Lincoln Drive [Added
6-17-2009 by Ord. No.
1002-09]
Both Durand Place
Lincoln Drive [Added
11-17-1997 by Ord. No.
760-97]
West Susquehanna Avenue
Madison Avenue [Added
12-18-2013 by Ord. No.
1065-13]
Both High Street
North Drive East Berdan Street
Schlosser Drive East Berdan Street
Somerville Street East Harvey Avenue
Somerville Street [Added
7-10-1989 by Ord. No.
569]
West Howard Avenue
South Drive Both Berdan Street
West Oldis Street Both Berdan Street
§ 180-48 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 180-48
177:534
Stop Sign on
Direction of
Travel At Intersection of
William Street North Chestnut Avenue
§ 180-49. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-13, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
High Street [Added
4-16-1997 by Ord. No.
753]
North Grove Avenue
Powell Avenue [Added
10-16-1996 by Ord. No.
734]
South Hazley Avenue
§ 180-50. Schedule X: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-14, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Intersection
(Location) Lane Reserved Purpose
Central Avenue at
Rochelle Avenue
Left lane Westbound Left turn into Rochelle
Avenue
East Passaic Street at
Rochelle Avenue
Left lane Westbound Left turn into Rochelle
Avenue
Rochelle Avenue at
Central Avenue
Left lane Southbound Left turn into Central
Avenue
Rochelle Avenue at
East Passaic Street
Left lane Southbound Left turn into East
Passaic Street
Rochelle Avenue at
West Passaic Street
Left lane Northbound Left turn into West
Passaic Street
West Passaic Street at
Berdan Street
Left lane Eastbound Left turn into AT&T
Parking Lot
West Passaic Street at
Berdan Street
Left lane Westbound Left turn into Berdan
Street
West Passaic Street at
Berdan Street
Right lane Westbound Right turn into AT&T
Parking Lot
West Passaic Street at
Centre Mack Centre 1
Site
Left lane Westbound Left turn into Mack 1
Parking Lot
§ 180-48 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-50
177:535
Intersection
(Location) Lane Reserved Purpose
West Passaic Street at
Ramada Inn
Left lane Westbound Left turn into Ramada
Inn Parking Lot
West Passaic Street at
Rochelle Avenue
Left lane Eastbound Left turn into Rochelle
Avenue
§ 180-51. Schedule XI: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-15, no-passing zones are hereby
established and shall be maintained upon the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 180-52. Schedule XII: Truck Route and Bus Route System.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-16, a truck route and bus route
system upon which trucks in excess of four tons' gross weight and buses
may travel is hereby established on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
Central Avenue Entire length
East Passaic Street Entire length
Essex Street Entire length
Railroad Avenue Entire length
Rochelle Avenue Entire length
West Passaic Street Entire length
§ 180-53. Schedule XIII: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-17, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Becker Avenue Both From the easterly curbline of Rochelle
Avenue to a point 50 feet east thereof
Berdan Street East From the southeast curbline of West
Passaic Street to a point 90 feet south
thereof on Berdan Street
Berdan Street West From the southwest curbline of West
Passaic Street to a point 266 feet south
thereof on Berdan Street
§ 180-50 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 180-53
177:536
Name of Street Side Location
Central Avenue North From the easterly side of Lincoln Drive to
the boundary line of May-wood. Also from a
point 144 feet east of the easterly curbline
to a point 120 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Susquehanna Avenue
Central Avenue South From the intersection of Rochelle Avenue
to the Maywood boundary line
East Passaic Street Both Entire length
Essex Street North Entire length
Fairfield Drive East Entire length
Forest Place Both From the westerly curbline of Rochelle
Avenue to a point 50 feet west thereof
Gertrude Avenue Both Between East Passaic Street and a point 50
feet north thereof
Marinus Street South From the easterly curbline of Rochelle
Avenue to a point 125 feet north thereof
Oak Street Both From the easterly curbline of Rochelle
Avenue to a point 50 feet east thereof
Overlook Avenue
[Amended
7-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 833]
South From Rochelle Avenue to westerly terminus
of Overlook Avenue
Railroad Avenue North From the westerly curbline of Rochelle
Avenue to a point 50 feet west thereof
Railroad Avenue South Entire length
Rochelle Avenue East From New York, Susquehanna and Western
Railroad to a point 150 feet north thereof
Rochelle Avenue East From the Paramus boundary line to Oak
Street and from the New York,
Susquehanna and Western Railroad
crossing south to the Lodi boundary
Rochelle Avenue West From the Paramus boundary line to the
Lodi boundary line
Terrace Avenue Both From the westerly curbline of Rochelle
Avenue to a point 100 feet west thereof
Ward Street
[Added 2-20-2002
by Ord. No.
848-02]
East From East Passaic Street north for 75 feet
West End Avenue West Between Essex Street and Lexington
Avenue
§ 180-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-53
177:537
Name of Street Side Location
West Oldis Street Both From the westerly curbline of Rochelle
Avenue to a point 50 feet west thereof
West Passaic Street Both Entire length
William Street [Added 4-3-1989 by Ord. No. 565; repealed 9-20-1995
by Ord. No. 699]
William Street [Repealed 3-19-1990 by Ord. No. 586]
§ 180-54. Schedule XIV: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-18, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 180-55. Schedule XV: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-19, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
All streets in
Township
Both 3:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Entire length
Becker Avenue
[Added 10-20-1999
by Ord. No.
799-99]
North 7:00 p.m. to 3:00
a.m., Wednesday
Route 17 to High
Street
High Street [Added
10-20-1999 by
Ord. No. 799-99]
South 7:00 p.m. to 3:00
a.m., Wednesday
Between Grove
Street and Becker
Avenue
Marion Street
[Added 5-15-2002
by Ord. No.
853-02]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
Entire length
Overlook Avenue
[Added 5-16-2001
by Ord. No.
831-01; amended
7-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 833-01]
North 6:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m., Monday
through Friday
From Rochelle
Avenue to its
westerly terminus
§ 180-53 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 180-55
177:538
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Terrace Avenue
[Added 12-17-1990
by Ord. No. 603]
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. on days
school is in
session
From the westerly
curbline of Rochelle
Avenue to a point
336 feet west
thereof
Ward Street [Added
9-17-1997 by Ord.
No. 758-97]
West Every day, except
Fridays, Saturdays
and holidays
limited to twohour
parking
Entire west side of
roadway
West Oldis Street
[Added 11-13-2002
by Ord. No.
868-02]
North 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday,
Wednesday and
Friday
500 feet from the
intersection with
Rochelle Avenue
West Oldis Street
[Added 11-13-2002
by Ord. No.
868-02]
South 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Tuesday and
Thursday
500 feet from the
intersection with
Rochelle Avenue
William Street
[Added 10-20-1999
by Ord. No.
799-99]
East 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m. and 2:30 p.m.
to 3:30 p.m.,
Monday through
Friday while
school is in
session
From Central
Avenue to East
Forest Avenue
§ 180-56. Schedule XVI: No Stopping or Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-20, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 180-57. Schedule XVII: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-21, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
§ 180-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-57
177:539
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Becker Avenue
[Added 10-21-2009
by Ord. No. 1012-09]
Both 8:00 a.m.
through 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From Rochelle Avenue
to High Street
Berdan Street East 2 hours, 7:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From a point 90 feet
south of West Passaic
Street to the
intersection of
Eldorado Court
Berdan Street West 2 hours, 7:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From a point 266 feet
south of West Passaic
Street to the
intersection of
Schlosser Drive
Cedar Drive Both 2 hours, 6:00
a.m. to 3:00
p.m., Monday
to Friday
Entire length
Dorothy Avenue136
[Added 11-13-2002
by Ord. No. 869-02]
Both 2 hours, 7:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
to Friday
Entire length
Fairfield Drive
[Amended
12-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 801-99]
West 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 10:00
p.m., including
Saturdays and
except Sundays
Between West Passaic
Street and Plaza Way
Gertrude Avenue137
[Added 11-13-2002
by Ord. No. 869-02]
Both 2 hours, 7:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
to Friday
Entire length
Grove Avenue [Added
10-21-2009 by Ord.
No. 1012-09]
Both 8:00 a.m.
through 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From Parkway to High
Street
Legion Place Both 2 hours From northerly curbline
of West Passaic Street
to the intersection of
Overlook Avenue
136. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 913-04, adopted 9-15-2004, provided for a penalty of $65 for
violation.
137. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 913-04, adopted 9-15-2004, provided for a penalty of $65 for
violation.
§ 180-57 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 180-57
177:540
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Lexington Avenue Both 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturday and
Sunday
Between Rochelle
Avenue and High Street
Midland Street138
[Added 12-20-2000
by Ord. No. 816-00]
East 1 hour, 7:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
From Essex Street to
termination of Midland
Street at the north end
of the street
Oak Street Both 2 hours, 10:00
p.m. to 3:00
a.m.
Between a point 50 feet
east of Rochelle Avenue
and a point 200 feet
easterly thereof
Overlook Avenue South 2 hours From the westerly
curbline of Rochelle
Avenue to Legion Place
Parkway [Added
10-21-2009 by Ord.
No. 1012-09]
Both 8:00 a.m.
through 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From Rochelle Avenue
to Becker Avenue
Peak Street Both 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 4:00
p.m., except
Saturday and
Sunday and
holidays
Between Rochelle
Avenue and Lincoln
Avenue
Pleasant Avenue139
[Added 11-13-2002
by Ord. No. 869-02]
Both 2 hours, 7:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
to Friday
Entire length
Railroad Avenue
[Added 10-20-1999
by Ord. No. 799-99]
Both 1 hour, 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday
through
Saturday
Entire length to
intersection of Rochelle
Avenue
Railroad Avenue
[Added 7-18-2001 by
Ord. No. 833-01]
North 1 hour, 8:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday
through
Saturday
From Rochelle Avenue
a distance of 150 feet
westbound
138. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 913-04, adopted 9-15-2004, provided for a penalty of $65 for
violation.
139. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 913-04, adopted 9-15-2004, provided for a penalty of $65 for
violation.
§ 180-57 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-57
177:541
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Rochelle Avenue East 30 minutes,
10:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
From a point 150 feet
north of the New York
Susquehanna and
Western Railroad to the
intersection of Oak
Street
St. Anne’s Place
[Added 10-21-2009
by Ord. No. 1012-09]
Both 8:00 a.m.
through 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From Parkway to
Becker Avenue
West Oldis Street [Added 11-13-2002 by Ord. No. 868-02; repealed
11-12-2003 by Ord. No. 901-03]
West Oldis Street
[Added 9-15-2004 by
Ord. No. 913-04140]
Both 2 hours, 8:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday
through Friday
From Rochelle Avenue
to Berdan Street
§ 180-58. Schedule XVIII: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-22, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
(Reserved)
§ 180-59. Schedule XIX: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-23, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 180-60. Schedule XX: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-24, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
140. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for a penalty of $65 for violation.
§ 180-57 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 180-61
177:542
§ 180-61. Schedule XXI: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-25, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel Side Location
Central
Avenue
East South Williams Street (near side)
beginning at the prolongation of
the westerly curbline of Williams
Street and extending 119 feet
westerly therefrom
Central
Avenue
West North Rochelle Avenue (near side)
beginning at the east curbline of
Rochelle Avenue and extending
183 feet east therefrom
Essex Street West North Rochelle Avenue (near side)
beginning at the east curbline of
Rochelle Avenue and extending
105 feet east therefrom
Passaic Street East South Between Plaza Way and Powell
Avenue (midblock) beginning 175
feet east of the prolongation of
the east curbline of Plaza Way and
extending 135 feet east therefrom
Between Harvey Avenue and
Berdan Street (midblock)
beginning 340 feet east of the
east curbline of Harvey Avenue
and extending 172 feet east
therefrom
Berdan Street (near side)
beginning at the west curbline of
Berdan Street and extending 105
feet west therefrom
Rochelle Avenue (far side)
beginning at the east curbline of
Rochelle Avenue and extending
122 feet east therefrom
Passaic Street
[Amended
7-18-2007 by
Ord. No.
970-07]
West North Gertrude Street (near side)
beginning at the east curbline of
Gertrude Street and extending
105 feet east therefrom
§ 180-61 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-61
177:543
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel Side Location
Berdan Street (far side) beginning
at the prolongation of the west
curbline of Berdan Street and
extending 144 feet west therefrom
Harvey Avenue (near side)
beginning at the east curbline of
Harvey Avenue and extending 145
feet east therefrom
Between Plaza Way and Bennett
Avenue (midblock) beginning 175
feet from the east curbline of
Plaza Way and extending 135 feet
east therefrom
Rochelle
Avenue
North East Essex Street (far side) beginning
at the north curbline of Essex
Street and extending 150 feet
north therefrom
Between Central Avenue and Oak
Street (midblock) beginning 162
feet at the south curbline of
Central Avenue and extending 135
feet south therefrom
Chestnut Street (near side)
beginning at the south curbline of
Chestnut Street and extending
105 feet south therefrom
Passaic Street (near side)
beginning at the south curbline of
Passaic Street and extending 235
feet south therefrom
Rochelle
Avenue
South West Crescent Street (near side)
beginning at the north curb-line of
Crescent Street and extending
105 feet north therefrom
Chestnut Street (near side)
beginning at the north curbline of
Chestnut Street and extending
105 feet north therefrom
Between Central Avenue and
Terrace Avenue (mid-block)
beginning 64 feet north of the
prolongation of the north curbline
of Central Avenue and extending
150 feet north therefrom
§ 180-61 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 180-61
177:544
Name of
Street
Direction
of Travel Side Location
Essex Street (near side) beginning
at the north curbline of Essex
Street and extending 120 feet
north therefrom
West Passaic
Street [Added
6-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 754]
East Southerly Roosevelt Avenue (near side)
beginning at the prolongation of
the westerly curbline of Roosevelt
Avenue and extending 105 feet
westerly therefrom
West Passaic
Street [Added
12-20-1995
by Ord. No.
706]
West North At intersection of Harvey Avenue
beginning at the easterly curbline
of Harvey Avenue on the northerly
side of West Passaic Street and
extending 105 feet west therefrom
West Passsaic
Street [Added
6-18-1997 by
Ord. No. 754
West Northerly Roosevelt Avenue (near side)
beginning at the easterly curbline
of Roosevelt Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly
therefrom
§ 180-62. Schedule XXII: Midblock Crosswalks.
In accordance with the provisions of § 180-26, midblock crosswalks are
established at the following locations:
Location
On Passaic Street from a line about 254 feet east of the easterly curbline
of Harvey Avenue extending to a line 10 feet easterly thereof
§ 180-63. Schedule XXIII: Disabled Parking Restrictions. [Added
8-7-1989 by Ord. No. 570]
Disabled parking restrictions (§ 180-29) shall be as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
William Street East From a point 158 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Central Avenue for a distance of 44
feet
§ 180-64. Schedule XXIV: Restricted Parking Area. [Added
11-13-2002 by Ord. No. 868-02]
A restricted parking area to permit "Patient Parking Only" is hereby
established as follows:
§ 180-61 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-64
177:545
Name of Street Side Location
West Oldis Street141 North From a point of the curbline of
Rochelle Avenue, allowing three
parking spaces
141. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 913-04, adopted 9-15-2004, provided for a penalty of $65 for
violation.
§ 180-64 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 180-64
177:546
Chapter 185
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 10.
Multiple Dwelling Review Board — See Ch.
22.
Construction codes — See Ch. 80.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 97.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 104.
Landscaping — See Ch. 123.
Motels — See Ch. 130.
Obscene material display — See Ch. 136.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Shade trees — See Ch. 157.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 161.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 204.
§ 180-64 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 180-64
177:547

ARTICLE I
General
§ 185-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Land Use Ordinance of the Township of
Rochelle Park."
§ 185-2. Purpose.
A. It is the purpose of the Township in adopting this chapter to exercise to
the fullest the powers granted to the Township by the State of New
Jersey to manage land use through zoning, subdivision and site plan
control and through the police power generally. It is the further purpose
of the Township in adopting this chapter to organize and codify all such
powers of land use management into one comprehensive cohesive
system in order to facilitate the administration of land use procedure,
while providing maximum protection of the public health, safety and
general welfare in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2
et seq.
B. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to:
(1) Encourage action to guide the appropriate use or development of
all lands in the Township of Rochelle Park in a manner which will
promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
(2) Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade
disasters.
(3) Provide adequate light, air and open space.
(4) Ensure that the development of the Township of Rochelle Park does
not conflict with the development and general welfare of
neighboring municipalities.
(5) Promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods and the entire municipality as well as the
preservation of the environment.
(6) Encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public
funds by the coordination of public development with land use
policies.
(7) Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open
space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements.
(8) Encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of
such facilities and routes which will result in congestion or blight.
§ 185-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-2
177:549
§ 185-3. Scope.
It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically or impliedly repealed by this chapter or any private
restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private
agreement unless repugnant hereto. Whenever this chapter imposes a
greater restriction upon, including but not limited to the use of buildings or
premises or upon the height of buildings or lot coverage or requires greater
lot area or longer yards or other open spaces than are imposed or required
by such rules, regulations or permits or by such private restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
(9) Promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
(10) Promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land.
(11) Establish orderly and uniform procedures relating to land use and
development regulation.
(12) Generally achieve and advance the various purposes of the
Municipal Land Use Law (c. 291, P.L. 1975), as set forth in the
statement of purposes of said law in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2.
§ 185-2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-3
177:550
ARTICLE II
Planning Board
[Amended 7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 988-08; 6-16-2010 by Ord. No.
1015-10142; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11143]
§ 185-4. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2 et seq., the Township of
Rochelle Park Planning Board shall be comprised of nine members
consisting of the following four classes:
§ 185-5. Terms of members.
A. Class I: the Mayor.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality, other than a member of
the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if there
is an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member for purposes of this chapter in the event that there is among
the Class IV or alternate members of the Planning Board both a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board
of Education.
C. Class III: a member of the Township Committee, appointed by the
Council.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality, to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one such member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission. A member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV Planning Board
member, unless there is among the Class IV or alternate members both
a member of the Zoning Board or Historic Preservation Commission
and a member of the Board of Education, in which case the member
common to the Planning Board and Environmental Commission shall be
deemed a Class II member. Two Class IV members shall be appointed as
alternates. See § 185-9.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The term of the member composing Class II shall be for
one year or terminate at the completion of his first term of office,
whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a
member of the Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or
142. Editor’s Note: This ordinance established a joint Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adustment.
143. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided for the reconstitution of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The ordinance passed at referendum 11-8-2011.
§ 185-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-5
177:551
§ 185-6. Vacancies.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 185-7. Removal for cause.
Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he/she
requests one, may be removed by the Council for cause.
§ 185-8. Organization.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
§ 185-9. Alternate members.
Class IV member who is also a member of the Environmental
Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the completion
of his term of office as a member of the Environmental Commission,
whichever occurs first.
B. The term of the member composing Class III shall be for one year or
terminate at the completion of his term of office, whichever occurs first.
C. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or a Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV
term, whichever occurs first.
D. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first
four years after their appointment as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the terms of any present members of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the terms for which they
were appointed. Thereafter all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years except as otherwise herein above provided. All
terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment is
made.
A. There shall be two alternate members of the Planning Board appointed
by the Mayor and meeting the qualifications of Class IV members of
nine-member Planning Boards. The alternate members shall be
designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as "Alternate No.
1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be
for two years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be
such that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire
§ 185-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-9
177:552
§ 185-10. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms
of the alternate members first appointed exceed two years.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid, the initial terms of the members shall
be arranged so as to accomplish the intent of this section. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
Mayor for the unexpired term only.
B. No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which
he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
An alternate member may, after public hearing if he requests one, be
removed by the Township Committee for cause.
C. The alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order
that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the
event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to
vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Township, including any areas outside its
boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bear essential relation to
the planning of the Township, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To approve conditional use applications as authorized by state statute.
C. To administer the provisions of the Land Use and Development
Ordinance of the Township in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuing planning
process.
F. To review and make recommendations to the Council on the Official
Map of the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26.
G. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects over a term of six years and amendments thereto and
recommend the same to the governing body.
H. To consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
§ 185-9 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-10
177:553
§ 185-11. Time for approval; expiration of approval.
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the
Township Committee pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
I. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant, to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(1) A variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(2) Direct the issuance of a permit for a building or structure either not
related to a street (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36) or in the bed of a mapped
street or public drainageway, flood control basin or public area
reserved on the Official Map (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32).
(3) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of
a hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a
permit as the case may be.
J. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body or other agencies or officers.
A. Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the Planning Board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall
expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board approval unless within
such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions
of the Map Filing Law or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer,
the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat
or deed must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board before it will be accepted for filing by the County Recording
Officer.
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.
C. Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in Article II, § 185-10I, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
§ 185-10 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-11
177:554
§ 185-12. Application procedure.
§ 185-13. Environmental Commission.
Whenever the Environmental Commission (if any Environmental
Commission exists) has prepared and submitted to the Planning Board
an index of the natural resources of the municipality, the Planning Board
shall make available to the Environmental Commission a copy of every
approval of the application within 95 days after the submission by the
developer of a complete application or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application
and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the
Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant.
D. Final approval. Application for final subdivision approval shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of submission of a complete
application or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days
from the date of the signing of the plat unless within such period the
plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the County
Recording Officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown,
extend the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed
190 days from the date of the signing of the plat.
A. Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning
Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. shall be
filed with the Secretary of the Planning Board. The applicant shall file,
at least 25 days before the date of the meeting of the Board, one copy of
an application and one plan. This initial submittal will be reviewed and
returned to the applicant with notations and/or suggestions for the
applicant to prepare the final application. Within 15 days of the
scheduled meeting, the applicant shall submit 16 copies of an
application, 16 plans and reports associated with the application. The
applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the
Planning Board. The submission of an application for either preliminary
or final approval shall be accompanied by a completed application form
and the appropriate completed checklist as adopted as part of this
chapter (see Appendix A).144 The Secretary of the Board shall inform the
applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board.
B. Copies of all applications, plat plans, maps and other papers submitted
to the Planning Board Secretary shall simultaneously with such delivery
be served upon the Planning Board Attorney and Planning Board
Engineer. In addition, if requested to do so by the Board Secretary,
copies shall also be forwarded to the Board's Planner as well as any
other professionals.
144. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-13
177:555
application for development to the Planning Board. Failure of the Planning
Board to make such informational copy available to the Environmental
Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 185-14. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 185-15. Employment of counsel, experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel and such experts and other staff and services
as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which
exceed, exclusive of grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body
for its use.
§ 185-13 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-15
177:556
ARTICLE III
Zoning Board of Adjustment
[Amended 4-16-2008 by Ord. No. 982-08; 6-16-2010 by Ord. No.
1015-10145; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11146]
§ 185-16. Establishment; composition.
§ 185-17. Alternate members.
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven regular members and two
alternate members, appointed by the Township Committee. The regular
members shall serve for terms of four years from January 1 of the year
of their appointment. The terms of the members first appointed shall be
so determined that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration of
such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four years after
their appointment, provided that the initial term of no member shall
exceed four years. Nothing in this chapter shall, however, be construed
to affect the terms of any present members of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion of
the terms for which they were appointed.
B. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality.
C. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
A. There shall be two alternate members of the Board of Adjustment
appointed by the Township Committee. The alternate members shall be
designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two
years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that
the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one
year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of the
alternate members first appointed exceed two years. Notwithstanding
the aforesaid, the initial terms of the members shall be arranged so as
to accomplish the intent of this section.
B. The alternate members may participate in discussion proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular may vote
instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
145. Editor's Note: This ordinance established a joint Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
146. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for the reconstitution of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and passed at referendum 11-8-2011. With the inclusion of the ordinance and
with the reconstitution of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, former Art. IIIA, Matters
Before Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment, added 6-16-2010 by Ord. No.
1015-10, which immediately followed this article, was repealed.
§ 185-16 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-17
177:557
§ 185-18. Officers.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
its members and shall also select a Secretary who may be either a Board
member or another municipal employee.
§ 185-19. Removal for cause.
A member may, after public hearing if he/she requests it, be removed by the
Council for cause.
§ 185-20. Employment of counsel, experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of legal counsel and such experts and other staff and services
as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which
exceed, exclusive of grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body
for its use.
§ 185-21. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 185-22. Powers granted by law.
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law
to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the
enforcement of this chapter.
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Zoning Ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such Board is authorized by this chapter to pass.
(3) Granting of variances.
(a) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation in this chapter would result
in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or
§ 185-17 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-22
177:558
§ 185-23. Board of Adjustment authority.
exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such
property, grant a variance from such strict application, so as
to relieve such difficulties or hardship; provided, however, that
no variance shall be granted under this subsection to allow a
structure or use in a district restricted against such structure
or use and further provided that the proposed development
does not require approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval.
(b) Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district
restricted against such structure or use in particular cases and
for special reasons, but only be the affirmative vote of at least
2/3 of the full authorized membership of the Board.
B. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance.
Any application under any subsection of this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its
report, provided that such references shall not extend the period of
time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., and amendments and supplements
thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
B. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred
upon such Board, including, not by way of limitation, the authority, in
connection with any case, action or proceeding before the Board, to
interpret and construe the provisions of this chapter or any term,
clause, sentence or word hereof and the Zoning Map, in accordance
with the general rules of construction applicable to legislative
enactments.
C. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein and with the general rules hereby laid down that equity shall be
done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of this
chapter would work undue hardship. The powers and duties of the
Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it in said P.L.
1975, c. 291,147 or subsequent statutes in such case made and provided,
and it shall from time to time furnish to any person requesting the same
a copy of its rules and information as to how appeals for applications
may properly be filed with the Board for its decision thereon.
147. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 185-22 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-24
177:559
§ 185-24. Appeals and applications.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Each
appeal shall be taken within the 20 days prescribed by the statute by
filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal was
taken, together with 14 copies of said notice with the Secretary of the
Board of Adjustment. Said notice of appeal shall specify the grounds of
said appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken.
B. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment without prior application to an administrative officer shall
be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The
applicant shall complete all portions of the application form and, along
with one copy of a plan, file with the Board of Adjustment Secretary, no
later than 25 days prior to the date set for the hearing. This initial
application will be reviewed and returned with notations and/or
suggestions for the applicant to prepare the final application. Within 15
days of the scheduled meeting the following material must be submitted
to the Board of Adjustment Secretary: 14 copies of the application, all
plot plans, maps and other papers required by virtue of any provision of
this chapter or any rule of the Board of Adjustment. The Secretary of
the Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate
proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the Board. The
submission of an application for either preliminary or final approval
shall be accompanied by a completed application form and the
appropriate completed checklist as adopted as part of this chapter. (See
Appendix A.)148 Copies of all applications, plat plans, maps and other
papers submitted to the Board of Adjustment Secretary shall
simultaneously with such delivery be served upon the Zoning Board of
Adjustment Attorney and Zoning Board of Adjustment Engineer. In
addition, if requested to do so by the Board Secretary, copies shall also
be forwarded to the Board's Planner as well as any other professionals.
C. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
to which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order of the Superior Court of New
Jersey on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and on due cause shown.
148. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-24 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-25
177:560
§ 185-25. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or amendments
thereto or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought
to be made and to that end have all the powers of the administrative officer
from whom the appeal was taken.
§ 185-26. Expiration of variance.
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the Board
of Adjustment permitting the erection or alteration of any structures or
permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire by limitation unless
such construction or alteration shall have actually commenced on each
and every structure permitted by said variance or unless such permitted
use has actually been commenced, within one year from the date of entry
of the judgment or determination of the Board of Adjustment; except,
however, that the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall
be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Board of
Adjustment to the governing body or to a court of competent jurisdiction,
until the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
§ 185-27. Additional powers.
§ 185-28. Appeals and applications.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in § 185-22 of this article, have power given by law to:
(1) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
public building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
(2) Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Article 6 of P.L. 1975, c.
291, or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67
whenever the Board is reviewing an application for approval of a use
variance pursuant to Article III, § 185-26A(3)(b) of this chapter.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Each
appeal shall be taken within the 20 days prescribed by the statute by
filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal was
§ 185-25 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-28
177:561
§ 185-29. Time for decision.
The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120 days
after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative
officer or of the submission of a complete application for development to
the Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b. Failure of the
Board to render a decision within such one-hundred-twenty-day period or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant shall
constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
taken, together with 14 copies of said notice with the Secretary of the
Board of Adjustment. Said notice of appeal shall specify the grounds of
said appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken.
B. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment without prior application to an administrative officer shall
be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The
applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall complete all portions
of the application form and within three weeks of the scheduled
meeting, submit 12 copies of the application and 12 copies of the plans
and reports associated with the application. The submission of the
application shall be accompanied by a completed checklist as adopted
as part of this chapter. (See Appendix A.149) The Secretary of the Board
shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate
proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the Board.
C. Appeals from Board of Adjustment to governing body. An appeal from
any decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment granting a use variance
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17d may be taken to the
governing body, provided that such appeal shall be made within 10 days
of the date of publication of such final decision of the Board of
Adjustment.
D. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
to which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order of the Superior Court of New
Jersey on application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and on due cause shown.
149. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-28 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-29
177:562
ARTICLE IV
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
[Amended 6-19-2002 by Ord. No. 855-02; 6-16-2010 by Ord. No.
1015-10150; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11151]
§ 185-30. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter or participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 185-31. Meetings.
§ 185-32. Minutes of meetings.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of
the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board and
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which meetings shall be held on
notice to the Board's members and the public in accordance with all
applicable legal requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291.152
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act, P.L. 1975, c. 231.153 An
executive session for the purpose of discussing and studying any
matters to come before either Board shall not be deemed a regular or
special meeting in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
150. Editor’s Note: This ordinance established a joint Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adustment.
151. Editor’s Note: This ordinance provided for the reconstitution of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The ordinance passed at referendum 11-8-2011.
152. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
153. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 185-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-32
177:563
the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall
thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal business
hours at the office of the Municipal Clerk. Any interested party shall have
the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any
legal proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such
interested party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for
his use as provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 185-33. Hearings.
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties
and the provisions of the County and the Municipal Investigations Law,
P.L. 1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67-1 et seq.), shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and the right to cross-examine shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
F. Qualification. When any hearing before the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall carry over two or more meetings, a member
of the Board who was absent for one or more of the meetings shall be
eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conditioned,
notwithstanding his/her absence from one or more of the meetings;
provided, however, that such Board member has available to him/her a
transcript or recording of the meeting from which he/she was absent
and certifies in writing to the Board that he/she has read such
transcript or listened to such recording.
§ 185-32 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-34
177:564
§ 185-34. Fees.
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any services by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or any member of their administrative
staffs which are not otherwise provided by ordinance may be provided for
and adopted as part of the rules of the Board, and copies of said rules or of
the separate fee schedule shall be available to the public.
§ 185-35. Notices of hearings.
Notices of hearings shall be given for all applications for development and
all other applications before the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning
Board, including minor subdivision approval, final subdivision approval and
minor site plan and change of use approval. Whenever a hearing is required
on an application for development pursuant to this section, the applicant
shall give notice thereof as follows:
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality, if there is one or in a newspaper of general circulation
in the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates, located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing, provided
that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to a
condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has
a unit above or below it or a horizontal property regime, in the case of a
co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below it. Such
notice shall be given by either serving a copy thereof on the owner as
shown on the current tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the
property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property
owner at his address as shown on the current tax duplicate. Notice to a
corporate owner may be made by service upon its President, a Vice
President, Secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by
law to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
§ 185-34 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-35
177:565
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State Regional Planning in the Department of
Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for development of
property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
G. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail of a hearing
on an application of a major subdivision or a site plan not defined as a
minor site plan to a public utility, cable television company or local
utility which possesses a right-of-way or easement within the
municipality and has registered with the municipality in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.1.
H. All notices herein above specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing and the applicant shall file an
affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
I. Any notice made by certified mail as herein above required shall be
deemed complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
J. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the
nature of the matters to be considered; identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office; and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
K. Notice regarding Master Plan. The Planning Board shall give:
(1) Public notice of a hearing on adoption, revision or amendment of
the Master Plan; such notice shall be given by publication in the
official newspaper of the Township at least 10 days prior to the date
of the hearing.
(2) Notice by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of an
adjoining municipality of all hearings on adoption, revision or
amendment of the Master Plan involving property situated within
200 feet of such adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to the
date of any such hearing.
(3) Notice by personal service or certified mail in the County Planning
Board of:
(a) All hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment of the
Master Plan at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing;
such notice shall include a copy of any such proposed Master
Plan or any revision or amendment thereto; and
§ 185-35 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-35
177:566
§ 185-36. List of property owners furnished.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Tax Assessor of the
Township of Rochelle Park shall, within seven days after receipt of a request
therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee of $10, make and certify a list
from the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom
the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to Article IV, § 185-35B, of
this chapter.
§ 185-37. Decisions.
(b) The adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan not
more than 30 days after the date of such adoption, revision or
amendment; such notice shall include a copy of the Master
Plan or revision or amendment thereto.
L. Notice of hearing on ordinance or capital improvement program. Notice
of action on capital improvement or Official Map shall be made as
follows:
(1) Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the
Clerk of an adjoining municipality of all hearings on the adoption,
revision or amendment of a development regulation involving
property situated within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality at
least 10 days prior to the date of any such hearing.
(2) Notice by personal service or certified mail shall be made to the
County Planning Board of all hearings on the adoption, revision or
amendment of the municipal capital improvement program or
municipal Official Map not more than 30 days after the date of such
adoption, revision or amendment. Any notice provided hereunder
shall include a copy of the proposed development regulation, the
municipal Official Map or the municipal capital program or any
proposed revision or amendment thereto as the case may be.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which resolution shall include
findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant or if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and have paid the fee prescribed by
the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in
the office of the Municipal Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality.
§ 185-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-38
177:567
§ 185-38. Publications and decisions.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged and paid
for by the applicant with proof of publication being given to the respective
board. Said notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication
within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
§ 185-39. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65,
every application for development submitted to the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are delinquent on the property which
is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown that taxes or assessments
are delinquent on said property, approvals or other relief granted by either
Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in
such a manner that the municipality will be adequately protected.
§ 185-39.1. Criminal background check required. [Added 3-21-2012
by Ord. No. 1045-12]
A. Any individual considered for appointment to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Planning Board must consent to a criminal background
check in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 27 of the Township
Code.154 No person shall be eligible to serve as a member of the
aforementioned boards if it is determined that such person has been:
(1) Convicted under the laws of this state of an offense involving
dishonesty or a crime of the third degree or above or under the
laws of another state or of the United States of an offense or crime
which, if committed in this state, would be such an offense or
crime; or
(2) Said person is convicted of an offense involving or touching such
office, position or employment.
B. All members of the aforementioned boards as of the date of the
adoption of this section shall be required to submit to a criminal
background check within 60 days of the adoption of this section in order
to confirm their qualification to serve in accordance with the foregoing.
154. Editor's Note: See Ch. 27, Personnel Policies.
§ 185-38 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-39.1
177:568
ARTICLE V
Appeals
[Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No.
1038-11]
§ 185-40. Appeals to Zoning Board.
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of this chapter or Official
Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal
in the manner set forth in Article III, § 185-28A, and in accordance with the
provisions of Article 9 of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69.
§ 185-41. Appeals from Zoning Board to governing body.
The Township recognizes that N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17 provides that a
municipality may permit appeals to the governing body from a final decision
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Township of Rochelle Park hereby
elects not to permit such appeal.
§ 185-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-41
177:569

ARTICLE VI
Administration, Enforcement and Fees
§ 185-42. Administration and enforcement.
§ 185-43. Enforcement officer.
A. Administrative officer: receiving applications for development; issuing
approval certificates. The administrative officer, for the purpose of the
enforcement of this chapter, shall be the Zoning Officer, who is hereby
given the duty, power and authority to respectively enforce the
provisions of this chapter under the applicable powers and authority as
provided by law. The Zoning Officer shall examine all applications under
his or her jurisdiction and shall approve all required inspections to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
B. Administration. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
(1) Subdivisions. Any owner of land lying within the Township shall,
prior to subdividing or resubdividing of land as defined in this
chapter and before conveying legal or equitable title to such
subdivision or any part thereof, apply to the Planning Board for
review and approval of the subdivision plat pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) Site plan. Prior to the issuance of any construction permit or
certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, for any new structure
or addition to an existing structure, a site plan shall be submitted to
the Planning Board or to the Board of Adjustment as provided by
statute, for its review and approval.
C. Enforcement. The rules, regulations and standards contained in this
chapter shall be considered the minimum requirements for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Township. Any action taken by the Township under the terms of this
chapter shall give primary consideration to the purposes and provisions
of this chapter and to the welfare of the entire community. Moreover, if
an applicant or his agent can clearly demonstrate that, because of the
peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of one
or more of these regulations is impractical or will exact undue hardship,
the appropriate municipal agency may permit such exceptions or
exceptions as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and
intent of the rules, regulations and standards established by this
chapter.
A. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter and, in so doing, to inspect periodically the
structures and land in the Township, to investigate violations of the
chapter coming to his attention, to serve notice upon property owners
to abate any condition found to exist in violation of any provision(s) of
§ 185-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-43
177:571
§ 185-44. Construction permits and plans; certificates of occupancy.
this chapter, to sign complaints where justified and to cooperate with
other Township officials in the prosecution of violators. The
enumeration herein of the duties of the Construction Code Officer and
Zoning Officer shall not mean that other officials and employees shall
be relieved of their obligation to enforce this chapter. The Construction
Code Enforcement Official and Zoning Officer or other Township
employees authorized by the Township shall have the right to inspect
any lot or building at reasonable times for the purpose of investigating
possible violations of this chapter.
B. If the Zoning Officer finds any substantial deviation from any approved
plans, he shall notify the permittee and the Township Clerk in writing of
the deviation. The Zoning Officer and the Township may take such
action as is provided in this chapter.
A. No construction permit and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued
by the Zoning Officer except upon application therefor in conformity
with all the provisions of this chapter. No sign erection permit shall be
issued by the Zoning Officer except on application therefor in
conformity with the terms of this chapter. [Amended 10-16-2002 by
Ord. No. 867-02]
(1) Submission of surveys. In order to obtain a construction permit for
any residential construction, the applicant must first provide a plot
plan showing the location and configuration of the dwelling as well
as its height. Thereafter, upon completion of foundation, an
additional survey, showing the location of the foundation, shall be
submitted to the Building Department prior to commencement of
the next phase of construction. Thereafter, upon completion of
framing, an additional survey shall be submitted to the Building
Department showing the status of construction, including height.
All surveys submitted in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection shall be signed and sealed by a licensed surveyor or
engineer.
B. Certificates of occupancy. No land shall be occupied or used and no
buildings hereafter erected, altered or changed in tenancy, use or
ownership shall be occupied, in whole or in part, until a certificate of
occupancy shall have been issued by the Construction Official.
(1) A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued to a holder of a
permit prior to completion of construction, provided that such
occupancy shall not endanger life or public welfare and not until all
required utilities, including but not limited to water, sewer, electric
and fuel, are installed and in service.
(2) A posting of a bond to insure the completion of the work pursuant
to other applicable laws and ordinances may be made a condition
for a temporary certificate of occupancy.
§ 185-43 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-44
177:572
§ 185-45. Stop orders and construction permit revocations.
§ 185-46. Violations and penalties.155
(3) Written application shall be made by the owner or his agent for a
certificate of occupancy when all requirements of a construction
permit are met or, in the case of reoccupancy or change in
ownership, when it is established after general inspection of the
visible parts of the premises and investigation of available
municipal records that no violations of the Uniform Construction
Code or Zoning Ordinances of the Township of Rochelle Park have
been found and that no unsafe conditions shall exist.
C. The duties of the Construction Code Official are hereby amended as
more specifically set forth in Article VII, Development Review
Procedures, § 185-53, General procedures for site plan and subdivision
review. [Added 2-21-2001 by Ord. No. 82-01]
D. No construction permit and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued
by the Construction Official, Zoning Officer or Building Inspector unless
a certification is filed, signed by the preparer of the plans and the
property owner that the plans submitted for such action are the same
plans as those which were approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
or Planning Board if such approval was required and granted. [Added
7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 988-08; amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No.
1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
A. Stop orders. In the event that a permittee shall fail to comply with any
condition or regulation or provisions of an approved plan, the Township
Engineer or the Zoning Officer may issue a stop order on all
construction work within the area encompassed by the approved plan
and which order may include requirements for the prompt correction of
adverse conditions. Thereafter, no construction work of any type shall
be performed within the area of the approved plan except such work as
is in accordance with the requirements of the Township official as set
forth in said order or in accordance with the approved plan.
B. Permit revocation. In the event of a failure to comply with any condition
of an approved soil erosion and sediment control plan or tree removal
plan, upon recommendation of the Township Engineer or Zoning
Officer, the Township may revoke any construction permit for any
property upon which such noncompliance occurs or for any property
affected by such noncompliance. The Township may also seek to enjoin
the violation or take such other steps as permitted by law.
C. Revocation of construction permit or certificate of occupancy. In the
event of a failure to comply with any condition of final site plan
approval, the Zoning Officer or Township Engineer, on his or her
initiative, may revoke the construction permit or certificate of
occupancy, as the case may be, and seek to enjoin the violation or such
other steps as permitted by law.
§ 185-44 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-46
177:573
§ 185-47. Fees. [Amended 4-20-2005 by Ord. No. 924-05; 6-16-2010
by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any services by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or any member of their administrative
staffs which are not otherwise provided by this chapter may be provided for
A. If any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who fails
to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, raises,
moves, extends, enlarges, alters or demolishes any structure in
violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted hereunder or who
puts into use any lot or premises in violation of any detailed statement
or plans submitted hereunder or who refuses reasonable opportunity to
inspect any premises shall, upon conviction thereof by any court
authorized by law to hear and determine the matter, be liable to a fine
of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for a term of not more than
90 days, or both, as such court in its discretion may impose. Each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.
B. If before final subdivision approval any person as owner or agent
transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision for which
municipal approval is required, such persons shall be subject to a
penalty not to exceed $1,000 and each lot disposition so made may be
deemed a separate violation.
C. In addition, the Township may institute and maintain a civil action:
(1) For injunctive relief;
(2) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56, but only if the municipality
has a Planning Board and has adopted, by ordinance, standards
and procedures in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38. [Amended
6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No.
1038-11]
D. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the developer
or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any deposits made
or purchase price paid and, also, a reasonable search fee, survey
expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be
brought within two years after the date of the recording of the
instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land or within six
years if unrecorded.
155. Editor’s Note: See also Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 185-46 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-47
177:574
and adopted as part of the rules of the Board, and copies of said rules or of
the separate fee schedule shall be available to the public.
A. General.
(1) Every application for development shall be accompanied by a
payment of a fee in accordance with a schedule hereinafter set
forth. The application charge is a flat fee to cover direct
administrative expenses and is not refundable.
(2) Where one application for development includes several approval
requests, the sum of the individual required fees shall be paid.
(3) No fees shall be returned to the applicant after public hearing has
commenced.
(4) If any applicant desires a court reporter, the cost of taking
testimony and transcribing it and providing a copy of the transcript
for the Board hearing the application shall be at the expense of the
applicant, who shall arrange for the reporter's attendance.
(5) Schedule of fees to be paid at the time of the filing of the
application:
ZONING BOARD
Description/Application Fee
Secretary/administrative fee (all
applications except single-family owneroccupied
dwellings)
$100
Use in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10(d)
$400 plus secretary
fee
Interpretation in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(c)
$400 plus secretary
fee
All other variances, appeals, conditional
uses, amendments or applications to the
Zoning Board
$200 plus secretary
fee
Notwithstanding the above, any variance
applications other than use, conditional use
or interpretations that pertain to singlefamily
owner-occupied residences shall
have a $150 filing fee and no secretarial/
administrative fees shall be charged
PLANNING BOARD
Description/Application Fee
Secretary/administrative fee (all applicants
except single-family owner-occupied
dwellings)
$100
§ 185-47 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-47
177:575
Description/Application Fee
Minor site plan approval, tenant review
(§ 185-104)
$200 plus secretary
fee
Minor subdivision (two lots) $200 plus secretary
fee
Major subdivision (more than two lots) $400 plus secretary
fee
Site plan approval $200 plus secretary
fee
All other appeals, interpretations,
preliminary plans, concept review,
amendments or other applications to the
Planning Board
$200 plus secretary
fee
B. Resolution, publication and copy fees. In addition to application fees,
applicants or appellants to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Adjustment or Township Committee shall pay the following fees:
(1) Copy of decision (resolution) per page or part thereof: $1.
(2) Publication in newspaper of notice of hearing and notice of final
decision: cost of publication.
(3) Copies of minutes of meetings, per page or part thereof: $1.
(4) Copies of rules and regulations, per page or part thereof: $1.
(5) Copies of transcript or duplicate of recording of proceedings: cost.
(6) Copies of notices of all meetings, annual fee: $20.
C. Inspection fees.
(1) In addition to the fees set forth for the review of subdivision plans
and site plans, there shall also be an inspection fee of 2.5% of the
estimated cost of improvements on site plans and an inspection fee
of 5% of the estimated cost of the improvements for subdivision as
estimated by the Township Engineer and payable at the time of the
commencement of construction. This charge shall be for the
purpose of defraying the costs of inspections of the installation of
the improvements required by the Planning Board.
(2) All permits, determinations, resolutions or certificates of approval
are subject to the payment of all fees required in this section.
(3) All applicants or appellants other than a department, board or
agency of the Township shall pay the applicable fees unless such
fee is specifically waived by the Township Council. Such waivers
shall only be considered for nonprofit organizations.
D. Special meetings.
§ 185-47 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-47
177:576
§ 185-48. Appeals.
§ 185-49. Payment for professional services; escrow deposits.
In addition to the filing fees and any other fees or payments required
by this chapter, the applicant for any development application, appeal or
other matter pursuant to this chapter shall be responsible to reimburse the
Township for payments made to professionals for services rendered to the
Township related to such application, appeal or other matter. The following
provisions shall apply to such payments:
(1) In the event that any development application requires more than
two hearings or should an applicant request and be granted a
special meeting date, the Board shall charge the applicant a special
meeting fee in the amount of $1,000 plus an amount equal to the
fee or fees which the Board pays to its attorney, secretary and other
professional advisors who attend the meeting. The cost of these
services shall be charged against the initial deposit and such other
additional deposit posted by the applicant.
(2) In the event that a development application requires more than two
(2) regular meetings, the Board, at its discretion, may hold a
special meeting in order to complete the application.
A. General. Any person aggrieved by any decision or action of the Zoning
Officer or the Township Engineer under this chapter may appeal to the
Township Committee in writing, such appeal to be filed with the
Township Clerk within 10 days from the date of the decision or action
complained of. The appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the
Township Committee, which shall fix a date therefor not less than 20
days nor more than 30 days from the date of the decision appealed
from. Upon such hearing or within 10 days thereafter, the Township
Committee shall affirm, alter or rescind the decision or action
complained of with written findings and conclusions.
B. Appeal. Where the Zoning Officer or the Township Engineer has issued
a stop order or has revoked a construction permit, the permittee shall
have a right to appeal the determination to the Township Committee.
Said notice of appeal shall be filed with the Township Clerk within 10
days of the date of the action of the Township Engineer or the Zoning
Officer in issuing the stop-work order or revocation of the construction
permit. The Council shall, upon receipt of said notification, provide a
hearing to the permittee within 10 days of the date of the filing of the
appeal and shall render its decision upon the conclusion of the hearing
and in no case later than seven days from termination of the hearing.
A. Initial deposits for professional services. The following escrow fees
shall be collected by the Secretary at the time of the filing of the
application. These fees are to be applied for the review of applications
by the professional staff/consultants and shall include all office review,
phone correspondence, preparation of reports, conferences,
§ 185-47 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-49
177:577
appearance at meetings or other purposes under the provisions of this
chapter or the Municipal Land Use Law. For purposes of this section,
professional staff shall include the Township Attorney, Township
Planner and Township Engineer and such other professionals as may
be deemed necessary by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment to review an application. Deposits shall be paid by personal
check, certified check, cashier's check or bank money order. In the case
of proposals requiring a combination of approvals, such as subdivision,
site plan and/or variance(s), the applicant shall deposit an amount equal
to the sum of the deposits required for each application. In the event
that there is no new schedule of fees filed by the professionals, the
schedule previously filed by the professional shall prevail. [Amended
6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
B. Subsequent deposits for professional services. In the event that the
amount in the individual account for professional services should
become depleted to less than 25% of the initial deposit required by this
chapter and if the Secretary determines that additional funds are
necessary to cover the cost of processing said application, the
Secretary shall notify the applicant immediately of such depletion.
Upon receiving such notice, the applicant shall deposit additional funds
as necessary to make the amount in the account not less than 50% of
the initial deposit required by this chapter for professional services.
C. Failure to maintain deposit for professional services. If the required
funds for professional services are not deposited in a timely manner, the
Secretary shall notify the Township agency having jurisdiction over the
application and shall send copies of said notification to the Township
Finance Director. Upon receipt of the copy of notification, the Finance
Officer shall immediately inform the Township Committee of said
notification. No further action shall be taken on the application unless
the deposits have been made by the applicant as required above. In the
event that the time for action by a Township agency as required by this
chapter shall expire prior to the payment of the required deposits, the
reviewing agency shall have the option of dismissing the application.
D. Vouchers for payment of professional services. All payments charged to
a deposit required by this section shall be made pursuant to written
monthly vouchers for each application from the professional(s) stating
the hours spent, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. The
Township shall render a written final accounting to the applicant on the
uses to which the deposit was put.
E. Procedure for payment of vouchers; appeals of charges. The following
procedure shall apply to the payment of vouchers for professional
services pursuant to this section:
(1) Upon receipt of any vouchers for payment of professional services,
the Secretary shall submit a copy of said voucher to the applicant.
§ 185-49 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-49
177:578
§ 185-50. Performance and maintenance guaranties.
(2) Within 14 days of the mailing of said vouchers, the applicant may
request in writing a hearing on the reasonableness of the charges
contained in said vouchers. Any such hearing shall be held by the
Township agency with jurisdiction over the application.
(3) In the event the applicant requests such hearing, no payments shall
be made pursuant to the disputed voucher(s) until the Township
agency shall have ruled on the appeal. If the Township agency find
in favor of the applicant, payment pursuant to said voucher(s) shall
be adjusted accordingly.
(4) All vouchers for payment of professional services pursuant to this
section shall be submitted to the Township agency for whom the
services were performed. The Township agency shall at a public
hearing approve or deny payment of the vouchers. No voucher shall
be denied payment without giving the professional submitting the
voucher an opportunity to be heard concerning the reasonableness
of said voucher.
(5) If no hearing is requested as outlined above or if the Township
agency finds in favor of the professional, payment shall be made
pursuant to the voucher.
(6) If approved by the Township agency, the voucher shall be directed
to the Township Finance Director for reimbursement to the
professional for services rendered.
F. Unpaid fees establishes liens. Any professional or consultant fees
incurred as part of site plan or subdivision approval shall become a lien
upon the subject property and shall remain as such until paid directly or
satisfied by payment from escrow accounts. Any professional or
consultant vouchers which remain unpaid for 30 days or which cannot
be satisfied from existing escrow accounts shall be certified by the
Administrator to the Township Assessor and Tax Collector. The sums
shall be levied and collected at the same time and in the same manner
as Township taxes. All such moneys received by the collector shall be
paid over to the Administrator to be applied only to the purposes for
which they were levied.
A. Before execution of the final subdivision plat, as a condition of final site
plan approval or as a condition to the granting of a development
approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall have
installed all improvements required by the Planning Board, except that
the Township Committee may require and shall accept in accordance
with the standards adopted herein for the purpose of assuring the
installation and maintenance of on-tract improvements, the following:
[Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No.
1038-11]
§ 185-49 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-50
177:579
(1) The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the Township
in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for all
improvements not installed prior to final approval.
(2) A maximum of 10% of the total guaranty required shall be in cash.
All of the improvements shall be subject to inspection and approval
by the Township Engineer who shall be notified by the developer at
least 48 hours prior to the start of the construction. No
underground installations shall be covered until inspected and
approved.
B. Provision for a maintenance guaranty to be posted with the Township
Committee for a period not to exceed 2 years after final acceptance of
the improvements, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the
improvement.
C. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
Township Committee by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guaranty shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of installation as determined as of the time of the passage of the
resolution.
D. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected and the Township may
either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete
such improvements.
E. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements and
the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may request of
the Township Committee in writing, by certified mail, that the Township
Engineer prepare, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Township Engineer and appended to the performance
guaranty pursuant to Subsection A of this section, a list of all
uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed improvements. A copy of the
request shall be sent to the Township Engineer. The request shall
indicate which improvements have been completed and which
improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor.
Thereupon the Township Engineer shall inspect all improvements
covered by the request and shall file a written list and report with the
Township Committee, with a copy to the obligor, not later than 45 days
after the receipt of the obligor's request.
(1) The list prepared by the Township Engineer shall state, in detail,
with respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each
incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of and remedy
§ 185-50 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-50
177:580
for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement
determined to be unsatisfactory or the nature and extent of and
remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed
improvement determined to be unsatisfactory.
(2) The report shall also identify each improvement determined to be
complete and satisfactory together with a recommendation as to
the amount of reduction to be made in the performance guaranty
relating to the completed and satisfactory improvement, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
Township Engineer and appended to the performance guaranty
pursuant to Subsection A of this section.
F. The Township Committee, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
Township Engineer or reject any or all of these improvements and shall
approve and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the
performance guaranty relating to the improvements accepted, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Township
Engineer. This resolution shall be adopted not later than 45 days after
receipt of the list and report prepared by the Township Engineer. Upon
adoption of the resolution by the Township Committee, the obligor shall
be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty, with
respect to those approved improvements, except for that portion
adequately sufficient to secure completion or correction of the
improvements not yet approved, provided that 30% of the amount of the
performance guaranty posted may be retained to ensure completion
and acceptability of all improvements. In the event that the obligor has
made a cash deposit with the Township or approving authority as part
of the performance guaranty, then any partial reduction granted in the
performance guaranty pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to
the cash deposit in the same proportion as the original cash deposit
bears to the full amount of the performance guaranty.
G. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete or correct such
improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure
of notification as set forth in this section shall be followed.
H. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination or lack of a
determination of the Township Committee or the Township Engineer.
I. The obligor shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable inspection
fees paid to the Township Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements, provided that the Township may require of the
developer a deposit for the inspection fees in an amount not to exceed,
except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of
the cost of improvements, which cost shall be determined pursuant to
Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4). For those
developments for which the reasonably anticipated fees are less than
§ 185-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-50
177:581
$10,000, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in two
installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer shall be
50% of the reasonably anticipated fees. When the balance on deposit
drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid
to the Township Engineer for inspection, the developer shall deposit
the remaining 50% of the anticipated inspection fees. For those
developments for which the reasonably anticipated fees are $10,000
or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four
installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer shall be
25% of the reasonably anticipated fees. When the balance on deposit
drops to 10% of the reasonably anticipated fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid
to the Township Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make
additional deposits of 25% of the reasonably anticipated fees. The
Township Engineer shall not perform any inspection if sufficient funds
to pay for those inspections are not on deposit.
J. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to Subsection a of Section 29 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38), the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or
section.
K. To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
Township on the subdivision plat or site plan, the Township Committee
shall be deemed, upon the release of any performance guaranty
required pursuant to Subsection A of this section, to accept dedication
for public use of streets or roads and any other improvements made
thereon according to site plans and subdivision plats approved by the
approving authority, provided that such improvements have been
inspected and have received final approval by the Township Engineer.
L. Building permits in a subdivision or site plan or approved subsection
thereof, except for model buildings in the first subsection, will be issued
only when all improvements, with the exception of the following, shall
have been installed to serve all lots and structures within the
subdivision or site plan or approved subsection thereof and approved by
the Township Engineer:
(1) The final bituminous surface course of streets;
(2) Street signs;
(3) Dry wells and swales as may be required;
(4) Monuments;
(5) Shade trees;
(6) Sidewalks; and
(7) In the case of site plans only, landscaping.
§ 185-50 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-50
177:582
§ 185-51. Developer's agreement; fees.
§ 185-52. Off-tract improvements.
M. Permits for model buildings in the front subsection or 10% of the total
number to be built in said subsection, whichever is less, not to exceed
six, may be issued on commencement of construction of improvements.
N. Installation of sidewalks on a lot shall be completed prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for that lot.
O. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, upon
completion of all improvements but prior to acceptance by the
Township Committee of such improvements and prior to the release of
any performance guaranty which may have been posted, deeds must be
received, free and clear of all mortgages and encumbrances, for all fee
and other property interests and improvements to be conveyed to the
Township.
P. A site plan bond shall be posted prior to earth disturbance.
A. Within 90 days of the adoption of a resolution granting final subdivision
approval and prior to the execution of the final subdivision plat or, in the
case of an application for a multiple dwelling or commercial
development, prior to the issuance of construction permits, there shall
be executed and delivered to the Township an agreement between the
developer and the Township incorporating all of the terms and
conditions of final approval. The agreement shall be drawn by the
attorney for the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board, at the
expense of the developer, and shall be executed by the owner and
developer of the property which is the subject of the approvals. The
developer's agreement shall also provide for the payment of
appropriate professional fees and escrows as well as payment of
development fees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
developer's agreement shall be executed by the developer prior to the
issuance of any permits. [Amended 7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 988-08;
6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
B. In the event that all of the improvements have not been installed within
the time period set forth in the developer's agreement, the developer
may request, in writing, to the Township Committee, a one-year
extension of the time in which to complete all improvements. No more
than two such extensions will be considered unless the developer's
agreement shall be accompanied by an application fee of $300 to cover
the engineering and legal fees associated with the processing of the
application.
A. Pursuant to the powers established in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42, the following
standards are hereby promulgated with respect to determining the
proportionate or pro rata share of an applicant for a required off-tract
improvement. Prior to the granting of final approval, the applicant shall
§ 185-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-52
177:583
have installed or made cash payments, in the manner provided for
below, with respect to the immediate or ultimate installation of any
required off-tract improvement.
(1) Allocation of costs; criteria in determining allocation. The
allocation or costs for off-tract improvements, as between the
applicant, other property owners and the Township, or any one or
more of the foregoing, shall be determined by the Planning Board
with the assistance of the appropriate Township agencies on the
basis of the total cost of the off-tract improvements, the increase in
market values of property affected and any other benefits
conferred, the needs created by the application, population and
land use projections for the general area of the applicant's property
and other areas to be served by the off-tract improvements, the
estimated time of construction of the off-tract improvements and
the condition and periods of usefulness, which periods may be
based upon the criteria of N.J.S.A. 40A:2-22. The following criteria
may also be considered as well as any other reasonable criteria
which would aid in said determination: [Amended 6-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
(a) Street improvements (such as curb, gutter, sidewalk, shade
trees, streetlights, street signs and traffic light improvements)
may also be based upon the anticipated increase of traffic
generated by the application and the anticipated benefit
thereto.
(b) Stormwater and drainage improvements may also be based
upon or be determined by the drainage created by or affected
by any particular land use considering:
[1] The percentage relationship between the acreage of the
application and the acreage of the total drainage basin;
[2] The use of a particular site and the amount of area to be
covered by impervious surfaces on the site itself; and
[3] The use, condition or status of the remaining area of the
drainage basin.
(c) Sanitary sewer and water improvements may also be based on
the ratio of the developments flow to the sum of the capacity
deficiency in the existing system and the estimated daily flow
from the proposed development.
(2) Improvements to be construed at the sole expense of the applicant.
In cases where reasonable and necessary need for an off-tract
improvement or improvements is necessitated or required by the
proposed development application and where no other property
owners receive a special benefit thereby, the Board may require the
applicant, as a condition of approval, at the applicant's expense, to
provide for and construct such improvements as if such were on-
§ 185-52 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-52
177:584
tract improvements in the manner provided hereafter and as
otherwise provided by law.
(3) Payment of allocated costs. In the event that the improvement
required shall be constructed as a general or a local improvement,
the estimated cost of the off-tract improvement allocated to the
applicant shall be deposited with the municipality in the form of
cash. Said deposit shall be paid by the applicant to the Township
Treasurer who shall provide a suitable depository therefor and
such funds shall be used only for the off-tract improvements for
which they are deposited or shall be refunded to the subdivider as
hereinafter set forth.
(4) Deposit of funds. All funds paid by an applicant pursuant to this
chapter shall be used only for the improvements for which they are
deposited or improvements serving the same purpose.
(5) Redetermination of assessment upon completion of improvements.
Upon completion of off-tract improvements required pursuant to
this chapter, the applicant's liability hereunder shall be
recalculated in accordance with the actual as compared with the
estimated cost of the improvements. To the extent that such
recalculation shall increase or decrease the amount of any cash
deposit made by the applicant hereunder, the applicant shall
forthwith either pay the amount of such increase to the
municipality or the municipality shall forthwith refund the amount
of such decrease to the applicant.
B. Omissions. Omissions from the bond of any improvement will in no way
be construed as to relieve the developer from his legal obligation to
conform to the required improvements as provided for in this chapter.
C. Certification. Prior to the final acceptance of any of the required
improvements by the Township, the subdivision owner or owners shall
have submitted satisfactory affidavits certifying that no unpaid bills,
liabilities or liens against such improvements and installations are
outstanding.
§ 185-52 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-52
177:585

ARTICLE VII
Development Review Procedures
§ 185-53. General procedures for site plan and subdivision review.
A. Purpose. Such regulations are deemed necessary to achieve the
following purposes:
(1) Promote orderly development: to protect the character and to
maintain the stability of all areas within the community and to
promote the orderly and beneficial development of such areas.
(2) Promulgate rules and regulations: to provide rules, regulations and
procedures where applicable and to the extent the same have not
been otherwise promulgated by ordinance in the Township of
Rochelle Park which will guide the appropriate development of
lands within the Township in a manner which will promote the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
(3) To protect against hazards and danger: to secure safety from fire,
flood, panic and other natural and man-made disasters.
(4) Design standards: to encourage the design and location of streets
which will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging the
location of such facilities and routes which will result in congestion.
(5) Creative development techniques: to promote a desirable physical
environment through creative development techniques, design and
arrangement.
(6) Open spaces: to promote the conservation of open space and to
protect the natural resources and to prevent overcrowding through
improper land use.
(7) All residential development shall comply with the Residential Site
Improvement Standard of the State of New Jersey.
B. Conditional approval. The applicant shall comply with reasonable
conditions laid down by the approving authority for design, dedication,
improvements and the use of the land to conform to the physical and
economical development of the municipality and to the safety and
general welfare of the future residents/owners in the development and
the community at large. Where County Planning Board review or
approval is required on a subdivision or site plan, the approving
authority shall condition any approval it grants upon either timely
receipt of a favorable report from the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board due to its failure to submit a
report within the required time period. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
C. Exceptions to design and performance standards. The approving
authority, when acting upon applications, shall have the power to grant
§ 185-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-53
177:587
such exceptions from the subdivision and site plan requirements of
this chapter as may be reasonable and within the general purpose
and intent of the provisions for subdivisions, plat, site plan review
and approval if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of
this chapter is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to land in question.
D. Exemptions from subdivision and site plan regulations. The approving
authority may waive required notices and hearings for exempt
subdivisions and exempt site plans except where a variance or
conditional use is part of the application. Divisions of land not
considered a subdivision, as defined in this chapter, shall be exempt
from compliance with the requirements of this chapter only after
affirmative action by the approving authority. Such action shall be taken
following submission of documentation to the approving authority
showing the division of land for agricultural purposes where all
resulting parcels are 10 acres or larger in size, divisions by
testamentary or intestate provisions, divisions of property by court
order and conveyance so as to combine existing lots by deed or other
instrument, as the case may be. Until exempted from the subdivision
regulations by the approving authority, no person can transfer, sell or
agree to transfer or sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part
of a subdivision for which approval is required. Until exempted from the
site plan regulations by the approving authority, no alterations or
improvements shall be made nor permits issued.
E. Simultaneous review or separate applications.
(1) The approving authority shall have the power to act upon
subdivisions, conditional uses or site plans simultaneously without
the developer making further application or the approving
authority being required to hold further hearings. The longest time
period for action by the approving authority, whether it is for
subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply.
Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the
developer in conjunction with a site plan or subdivision, notice of
the hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for
such conditional use.
(2) The Board of Adjustment, when reviewing an application for a "d"
variance, shall have the power to grant site plan and subdivision
approval to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as
the Planning Board. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
(3) Upon submission of an application for development pursuant to this
section, the applicant shall also submit copies of all plans,
applications and other submission to the Bureau of Fire Prevention,
which shall conduct a review of the same and submit a written
report with recommendations to the approving authority. [Added
3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
§ 185-53 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-53
177:588
F. Use variance applications. All use variance applications shall be
accompanied by plans plus other supporting documents as required for
subdivision and site plan approval. (See also § 185-27B.)
G. Residential development. All residential applications for development
or variances on existing residences are subject to the residential site
improvement standards.
H. Submission of concept plan for informal review.
(1) An informal review of a concept plan is optional. At the request of
the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an informal review of
a concept plan for a development for which the developer intends
to prepare and submit an application for development. The purpose
will be to review concepts to assist the applicant in the preparation
of subsequent plans. Other than classification, no decisions will be
made, no hearings held and no formal action taken. Neither the
developer nor the approving authority shall be bound by this
informal review. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
(2) Filing procedure and information for concept review.
(a) The developer shall file with the Secretary, at least 15 days
prior to the meeting of the approving authority, 16 copies of the
concept plan and five copies of the completed application form.
(b) The concept plan is considered a sketch or general plan neither
fully engineered nor surveyed. Information used to prepare the
concept plan can be available from secondary source
information such as the Soil Conservation Survey Map or
United States Geodetic Survey maps, but should be sufficiently
detailed to allow the Planning Board to make suggestions on
general site design and layout for circulation, stormwater
management, location of open space and buffers and building
arrangements and to determine how the land use code affects
the proposal. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
I. Site plan approval required. [Added 2-21-2001 by Ord. No. 821]
(1) Site plan approval, when required.
(a) Site plan review shall not be required for single- and twofamily
dwellings or such accessory uses as private garages,
toolhouse, garden and private greenhouses, swimming pool
and other similar use incidental to a single- or two-family
detached dwelling or for similar improvements as accessory
uses to a principal use.
(b) Site plan approval shall not be required where:
§ 185-53 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-53
177:589
§ 185-54. General provisions.
Preliminary plats are required for all major site plans and major
subdivisions.
[1] Minor repairs and alterations to the interior of the building
do not involve structural change or enlargement of the
building, as determined by the Construction Officer.
[2] Renovations or alterations to the exterior design of a
building or structure which do not involve any
enlargement of the building or major structural change, as
determined by the Construction Official.
(c) Except as provided herein, all construction, reconstruction,
alteration or enlargement of a building or structure or change
in use (whether to a permitted use, the same use or different
permitted use), change in tenancy, change in ownership or lot
shall require site plan approval.
(d) Any determination by the Construction Official that site plan
approval is not required pursuant to this section shall be set
forth in writing by the Construction Officer with copies of said
letter filed with the applicant and the Township Committee.
(e) Upon referral by the Construction Official, and at its discretion,
the approving authority for site plan approval, anything herein
notwithstanding, where in the authority's judgment, the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, change of tenancy,
change of use or change of ownership (whether to a permitted
use, the same use or different permitted use) will not
significantly affect traffic, water supply, sewage disposal,
drainage, landscaping, signs, lighting, off-street parking or
loading, or the lack of any or all of these factors, environmental
factors and other considerations as specified in this chapter,
may waive the submission of formal site plan approval. The
waiver of such formal submission of site plan review may be
subject to appropriate conditions and any such waiver decision
shall be reduced to writing in the same manner as other land
use decisions are rendered. The cost of any such waiver
procedure shall be borne by the applicant in accordance with
the applicable fee schedule.
(2) The fee structure herein shall be the same as that set forth in
§ 185-47, Fees, and fees set forth therein shall not be affected by
the ultimate decision of the Planning Board to waive site plan
approval. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
A. Filing procedure.
§ 185-53 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-54
177:590
(1) The developer shall complete all portions of the application form
and, along with one copy of a plan, file with the administrative
officer no later than 25 days prior to the date set for the hearing.
This initial application will be reviewed for completeness and
returned with notations and/or suggestions for the applicant to
prepare the final application. Within 15 days of the scheduled
meeting the following material must be submitted to the
administrative officer: 16 copies of the application, all plot plans,
maps and other papers required by virtue of any provision of this
chapter, as well as the applicable fee and certification by the Tax
Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
(2) A corporation or partnership applying for permission to subdivide a
parcel of land or for a variance to construct multiple dwellings or
for approval of a site to be used for commercial purposes shall list
the names and addresses of all stockholders or individual partners
owning at least 10% of its stock of any class or at least 10% of the
interest in the partnership, as the case may be. If a corporation or
partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of a corporation or a
ten-percent or greater interest in a partnership, subject to the
above disclosure, that corporation or partnership shall list the
names and addresses of its stockholders holding 10% or more of its
stock or a ten-percent or greater interest in the partnership, as the
case may be, and this requirement shall be followed by every
corporate stockholder or partner in a partnership, until the names
and addresses of the noncorporate stockholders and individual
partners exceeding the ten-percent ownership criterion established
in this subsection have been listed. No Planning Board, Board of
Adjustment or municipal governing body shall approve the
application of any corporation or partnership which does not
comply with this requirement of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1. The penalty
for concealment by a corporation or a partnership shall be as
outlined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
B. Action by approving authority.
(1) The approving authority shall review the submission for its
completeness and take action on accepting or rejecting the
submission as a complete application. If rejected, the applicant
shall be notified, in writing, within 45 days of submission in
accordance with § 185-11.
(2) Public hearing. If accepted as an application, a public hearing date
shall be set by the approving authority and notice given.
(3) Upon submission of a plat, the administrative officer shall submit
one copy of the plat and supporting data to the Municipal Engineer,
Environmental Commission, Board of Health and any other agency
or person as directed by the approving authority for review and
action. Each shall have not more than 30 days from receipt of the
§ 185-54 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-54
177:591
plat to report to the approving authority. In the event of
disapproval, such report shall state the reasons therefor. If any
agency or person fails to submit a report within 30 days, the
plat shall be deemed to have been approved by it. Upon mutual
agreement between the County Planning Board and the approving
authority, with approval of the developer, the thirty-day period for
a County Planning Board report may be extended for an additional
30 days, and any extension shall so extend the time within which
the approving authority is required to act. [Amended 6-16-2010
by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
(4) The approving authority shall grant or deny preliminary
subdivision approval within the following time periods unless some
further time has been consented to by the developer. Otherwise,
the approving authority shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval of the subdivision:
(a) A subdivision of 10 or fewer lots: within 45 days of the date of a
complete submission.
(b) A subdivision with more than 10 lots: within 95 days of the date
of a complete submission.
(5) The approving authority shall grant or deny preliminary site plan
approval within the following time periods unless some further
time has been consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the
approving authority shall be deemed to have granted preliminary
approval of the site plan.
(a) A site plan which involves 10 dwelling units or less: within 45
days of the date of a complete submission.
(b) A site plan which involves more than 10 acres or more than 10
dwelling units: within 95 days of the date of a complete
submission.
(6) If the approving authority required any substantial amendment in
the layout of improvements in either a site plan or subdivision and
that plan had been the subject of a hearing, an amended
application shall be submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of
the original application for development. The approving authority
shall, if the proposed development complies with this chapter,
grant preliminary approval.
(7) The approving authority may approve, disapprove or approve with
conditions the application, including action on the environmental
impact report (§§ 185-73 and 185-82). The decision shall be in
writing and shall be sent to the applicant and the newspaper as
required by § 185-35. If the approving authority grants preliminary
approval, its Chairman and Secretary or the Vice Chairman or
Assistant Secretary, in their absence, respectively, and the
Municipal Engineer shall sign each page of the plat indicating the
§ 185-54 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-54
177:592
§ 185-55. Submission of final plat for minor and major
developments.
approval. If the plat is conditionally approved, it shall not be signed
until all conditions are corrected on the plat. If the corrections
are not completed within 90 days of the conditional approval, the
conditional approval shall lapse.
(8) Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval; otherwise the approval shall be void (see § 185-11):
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; offtract
improvements; and any requirements peculiar to site plan
approval, except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the Township from modifying, by ordinance, such
general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate
to public health and safety.
(b) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before
the expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a
section or sections of the preliminary plat.
(c) That the applicant may apply for and the approving authority
may grant extensions on such preliminary approval for
additional periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total
extension of two years.
(9) In the case of a development for an area of 50 acres or more, the
approving authority may grant the rights referred to in Subsection
B(8) above for such period of time longer than three years as shall
be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area permissible under preliminary approval, the potential
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the
section(s) awaiting final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards may govern.
A. Filing procedure.
(1) Prior to the expiration of preliminary plat approval, the developer
shall file with the administrative officer, at least 15 days prior to the
meeting of the approving authority, two translucent tracing cloth or
Mylar copies; nine black-on-white paper prints of the plat; two
completed copies of the application form and final plat checklist;
the performance guaranty approved by the governing body,
including off-tract improvements, if any; any maintenance
§ 185-54 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-55
177:593
guaranties; the applicable fee; certification by the Tax Collector
that all taxes are paid to date; certification by the Soil Conservation
District pursuant to the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act,
Chapter 251 of the Laws of 1975; and if common open space lot
or lots are included in the application, a separate map showing the
individual lot or lots that are to be designated as common open
space, which map shall have shown thereon the data listed on the
Application Checklist in Appendix A.156
(2) Where utility services are to be extended to the development, the
final plat shall be accompanied by letters directed to the Chairman
of the approving authority and signed by a responsible officer of the
water company, sewer authority and utility which provides gas,
telephone and electricity that has jurisdiction in the area. Such
letters shall approve each proposed utility installation design and
state who will construct the facility.
(3) The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the
Municipal Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all
utilities and other improvements (both in the development and offtract
improvements) in exact location and elevation; that he has
examined the street, drainage erosion, stormwater control and
excavation plans and found that the interests of the Township and
of nearby properties are fully protected and identifying those
portions of any improvements already installed; and that the
developer has either:
(a) Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the preliminary plat approval,
with a maintenance guaranty accompanying the final plat (see
§ 185-50); or
(b) Posted a performance guaranty that has been approved by the
governing body.
B. Action by approving authority.
(1) The approving authority shall review the submission for its
completeness and take action on accepting or rejecting the
submission as a complete application. If rejected, the applicant
shall be notified within 45 days of submission. (See § 185-11.) If
accepted as a complete application, the approving authority shall
grant final approval if the detailed drawings, specifications and
estimates conform to the standards established by this chapter, the
conditions of previous reviews, the changes and/or conditions
required on the informal plat in cases where there has been no
preliminary plat, and the standards prescribed by the Map Filing
Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq. In the case of a minor or exempt
subdivision or minor or exempt site plan where there has been no
156. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-55 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-55
177:594
previous submission of an informal or preliminary plat, the
approving authority may waive the required notices and hearing.
In the case of a planned development, the approving authority may
permit minimal deviations from the conditions of preliminary plat
approval necessitated by a change of conditions beyond the control
of the developer since the date of preliminary approval. Minimal
deviations shall not require the developer to submit another
application for preliminary approval.
(2) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the administrative officer
or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. An approved final plat shall be signed by the Chairman
and Secretary of the approving authority or the Vice Chairman or
Assistant Secretary in their absence, respectively. Failure of the
approving authority to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute final approval, and a certificate of the administrative
officer as to the failure of the approving authority to act shall be
issued on request of the applicant. Such certificate shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval herein required and shall be so accepted by the County
Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
(3) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 or 40:27-6.6, the
approving authority shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report from the County Planning
Board or upon its failure to submit a report within the required
time period. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
(4) Final approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the
date of municipal approval unless a plat in conformity with such
approval, including any conditions imposed by the approving
authority and in conformity with the provisions of the Map Filing
Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.) or a deed clearly describing the
approved minor subdivision, is filed by the developer with the
County Recording Officer, the Municipal Engineer and the
Township Tax Assessor. Such plat or deed accepted for such filing
shall have been signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the
approving authority or the Vice Chairman or Assistant Secretary in
their absence, respectively. In reviewing the application for
development for a proposed minor subdivision, the approving
authority may accept a plat not in conformity with the Map Filing
Law, provided that if the developer chooses to file the minor
subdivision by plat rather than deed, such plat shall conform to the
provisions of said law.
(5) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such a period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the County Recording
§ 185-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-55
177:595
Officer. The approving authority may for good cause shown extend
the period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190
days from the date of the signing of the plat. No subdivision plat
shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording Officer until it
has been approved by the approving authority as indicated on the
instrument by the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the
approving authority or the Vice Chairman or Assistant Secretary
in their absence, respectively, or a certificate has been issued as
to the failure of the approving authority to act within the required
time. The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary shall not be
affixed until the developer has posted the required guaranties.
If the County Recording Officer records any plat without such
approval, such recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon
request of the municipality, the plat shall be expunged from the
official records. It shall be the duty of the County Recording Officer
to notify the Planning Board, in writing, within seven days of the
filing of any plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date of
filing and official number. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No.
1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
(6) Provided that the approved final subdivision plat has been filed
with the County Recording Officer, the zoning requirements
applicable to the preliminary approval first granted to a site plan or
a major subdivision and all other rights conferred upon the
developer pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, whether
conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of final approval. If the developer has followed
the standards prescribed for final approval, the approving authority
may extend such period of protection for extensions of one year, but
not to exceed three extensions. Upon granting of final approval, the
rights conferred upon the applicant by the granting of preliminary
approval shall be terminated upon final approval.
(7) Provided that the approved final plat of a minor subdivision has
been filed with the County Recording Officer, the zoning
requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval
was granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the
date of minor subdivision approval.
(8) The developer shall supply sufficient copies of the approved final
plat so the administrative officer can distribute one copy to each of
the following: Township Clerk, Construction Official, Tax Assessor,
County Planning Board, Township Planning Board and any other
agency or person directed by the approving authority and shall
supply one translucent cloth or Mylar copy to the Municipal
Engineer. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
§ 185-55 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-56
177:596
§ 185-56. Plat design standards for subdivisions.
Plat conformity. All applications shall be submitted in plat form and all plats
shall conform to the submission requirements. All plats shall be drawn by a
licensed land surveyor and all drawings of improvements shall be prepared
by a professional engineer and all such drawings shall bear the signature,
embossed seal, license number and address of the preparer. Subdivision
requirements are set forth in the checklist in Appendix A.157
§ 185-57. Plat design standards for site plans.
Plat conformity. All applications shall be submitted in plat form and all plats
shall conform to submission requirements. All plats shall be drawn by a
licensed New Jersey engineer or architect and shall bear the signature,
embossed seal, license number and address of the engineer, except that
plats submitted under the informal discussion provisions and sketch plats of
minor site plans are exempt from this requirement. Site plan requirements
are set forth in the checklist in Appendix A.158
A. As-built site plan required upon project completion. At the conclusion of
construction and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, for any
project which require site plan approval or any project which has
resulted in an alteration of the grade elevations, a plan, prepared by a
licensed New Jersey Engineer, bearing the signature, seal, license
number and address of the engineer, shall be submitted to the Building
Department which shall include the following information: [Added
3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
(1) The original topography extending 10 feet onto adjoining
properties.
(2) The new topography, after completion of construction, extending
10 feet onto adjoining properties.
(3) Foundation location and building elevations from grade.
B. Upon submission of this plan, it shall be reviewed by the Township
Engineer or Construction Official. All fees in connection with said
review shall be the responsibility of the applicant to be paid from
escrows submitted in connection with the application. [Added
3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
157. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
158. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-56 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-57
177:597

ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards for Subdivision
§ 185-58. General statement.
§ 185-59. Existing permits, approvals and variances.
Nothing in this chapter shall require any changes in a building permit, site
plan or zoning variance which was approved before the enactment of this
chapter, provided that construction shall have been started within one year
from the effective date of this chapter and the project shall be continuously
pursued to completion; otherwise said approvals and permits shall be void.
§ 185-60. Nonresidential streets.
All developments shall be served by paved streets. The arrangement of
streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map shall provide for the
appropriate extension of existing streets, conform to the topography, as far
as practical, and allow for continued extension into adjoining undeveloped
tracts with a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet. When a development adjoins
land capable of being developed further, suitable provisions shall be made
for future street access.
A. All developments shall conform to design standards encouraging sound
development patterns within the Township. Where an Official Map or
Master Plan has been adopted, the development shall conform to same.
B. Character of land. Lands identified in the Master Plan as critical areas
or having severe or moderate soil characteristics, particularly as the
lands relate to flooding, improper drainage, shallow depth to water
table, steep slopes, rock formations, utility easements or similar
features, shall not be used as buildable areas unless adequate and
acceptable methods meeting the regulations of this chapter and all
other regulations are incorporated.
C. Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have
furnished performance guaranties for the ultimate installation of the
required items outlined in the developer's agreement.
A. Local streets. Local streets shall be so designed as to discourage
through traffic unless deemed necessary by the approving authority.
B. Pavement width of streets. The pavement width of all streets shall be a
minimum of 30 feet for all local streets and may be greater for collector
and arterial streets.
C. Minimum right-of-way width. The right-of-way width shall be measured
from lot line to lot line and shall not be less than 50 feet in any case,
except when shown at a greater width on the Master Plan or Official
Map of the Township of Rochelle Park or when said street constitutes an
extension of an existing street with a greater width than 50 feet.
§ 185-58 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-60
177:599
D. Substandard street right-of-way and pavement width. In connection
with subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the
street width requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall dedicate
additional right-of-way or pavement width along either one or both
sides of said road. If the subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the
required extra width shall be dedicated.
E. Street grades. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed
6%. Grades on other streets shall not exceed 10%. Maximum grades on
any streets within 100 feet of an intersection shall be 3%. No street
shall have a minimum grade of less than 1/2%. Road cross sections
(crown) shall range between 2% and 3%.
F. Street intersections. Intersecting street center lines shall be as nearly
at right angles as possible and in no case shall they be less than 60º at
the point of intersection. The block corners at intersections shall be
rounded at the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less than 20
feet. Curblines shall be parallel to the center line. Approaches to all
intersections shall follow a straight line for at least 100 feet measured
from the curbline of the intersecting streets to the beginning of the
curve. No more than two street center lines shall meet or intersect at
any one point. Collector and/or arterial streets intersecting another
street from opposite sides shall either be directly opposite each other
without offset or shall have at least 250 feet offset distance between
center lines. Street jogs with center-line offsets on local streets of less
than 125 feet shall be prohibited.
G. Reverse curve tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be
introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
H. Street line deflection. When connecting street lines deflect from each
other at any one point by more than 10º and not more than 45º, they
shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for
minor streets and 300 feet for arterial and collector streets.
I. Change in grade. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical
curves of sufficient degree of curvature to provide a smooth transition
and proper sight distance.
J. Cul-de-sac streets. Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed a length of 600
feet. A turnaround shall be provided at the end of the cul-de-sac with a
right-of-way radius of not less than 50 feet and a curbline radius of not
less than 40 feet. The center point for the radius shall be on the center
line of the associated street or, if offset, to a point where the curbline
radius becomes a tangent to one of the curblines of the associated
street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar
turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future extension
of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining
properties.
§ 185-60 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-60
177:600
K. Streets shall be constructed in accordance with the standard
specifications of the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
Pavement section shall consist of the following:
(1) Arterial and collector streets:
(a) Dense graded aggregate subbase: six inches compacted
thickness.
(b) Bituminous stabilized base course: six inches compacted
thickness.
(c) FABC surface course: two inches compacted thickness.
(2) Local streets:
(a) Dense graded aggregate subbase: six inches compacted
thickness.
(b) Bituminous stabilized base course: four inches compacted
thickness.
(c) FABC surface course: two inches compacted thickness.
(3) Where subbase conditions are wet, springy or of such nature that
surfacing would be inadvisable without first treating the subbase,
these areas shall be excavated to a depth of at least 12 inches
below the proposed subgrade and filled with a suitable subbase
material as determined by the Municipal Engineer. Where required
by the Engineer, a system of porous concrete pipe subsurface
drains shall be constructed beneath the surface of the paving and
connected to a suitable drain. After the subbase material has been
properly placed and compacted, the surfacing material shall be
applied.
L. Street names. No new street shall have a name which will duplicate or
so nearly duplicate in spelling or phonetic sound the names of existing
streets in Paramus, Maywood, Lodi and Saddle Brook. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name. The names of new
streets must be approved by the approving authority.
M. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of a street in all
nonresidential subdivisions, unless waived by the approving authority.
A minimum walkway width of four feet shall be constructed in
accordance with the requirements of the Township Engineer and in
conformance with this chapter of the Code of the Township of Rochelle
Park.
N. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such new line and all setbacks shall be measured
from such new line.
§ 185-60 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-60
177:601
§ 185-61. Residential streets.
O. Where the property to be subdivided is next to or includes a railroad
right-of-way, suitable provisions shall be made for such things as road
crossings, screening or buffers, freight access, warning signals and
signs in recognition of the relationship between the railroad and the
subdivision.
P. Curbing. Curbing shall be required on both sides of all streets within a
subdivision. Belgian (granite) block or concrete curbs shall be used on
all Township streets according to the following standards:
(1) Construction of all curbs shall conform to NJDOT Standards and
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1989, Section 605
and supplements thereto, and shall meet the Township Engineer's
approval. All concrete to be used shall be Class B as specified in
NJDOT Standards and Specifications and supplements thereto.
(2) Granite curbs shall have a ten-inch to twelve-inch vertical length.
(3) Curbs shall be set in a Class B concrete base at least four inches
thick in front and rear of the granite block and at least six inches
thick below the block. The combined block and concrete base shall
have a minimum vertical dimension of 18 inches.
(4) Curbs shall have a six-inch exposed vertical face above the finished
pavement surface.
(5) Joints shall measure 3/8 inches to two inches in width.
(6) The curb height at all driveway openings shall be lowered to a point
two inches above the finished pavement.
(7) The curbing shall be designed to provide barrier-free curb ramps
constructed in accordance with the Design Standards for Curb
Ramps for the Physically Handicapped of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
A. Street hierarchy. Streets shall be classified in a hierarchy with design
tailored to function. The street hierarchy definitions contained within
this section are applicable only to local residential streets and are not to
be considered related to the United States Department of
Transportation Federal Highway Administration's Functional
Classification of Highways.
(1) The street hierarchy system shall be defined by road function and
average daily traffic (ADT), calculated by trip generation rates from
the current edition of Trip Generation by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, as indicated in Table 4.1 in Appendix
B.159 Trip generation rates from other sources may be used if the
159. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-60 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-61
177:602
applicant demonstrates to the appropriate approving authority that
these sources better reflect local conditions. In addition, the
applicant shall investigate the opportunities for and availability of
transit facilities and, if appropriate, consider their impact(s) on
motor vehicle traffic trip generation rates per dwelling unit.
(2) Each residential street shall be classified and designed to meet the
standards for one of the street types defined in Table 4.2 in
Appendix B.160
(3) The municipality and the developer shall determine the highest
order street required to be used in a given residential development,
considering the following:
(a) The size of the development (number and type of units).
(b) The actual or potential development of adjacent sites (whether
there is likely to be traffic passing through from neighboring
developments). A "potential development" means a
development having approvals granted, applications pending
or undergoing preliminary review.
(c) The streets proposed for that area, if any, as contained in the
municipal Master Plan.
B. Cartway width.
(1) Cartway width for each street classification shall be determined by
parking and curbing requirements that are based on intensity of
development.
(2) Intensity of development shall be based on dwelling units per gross
acre as follows:
Intensity Dwelling Units per Gross Acre1
Low Less than or equal to 4
Medium More than 4 and less than or equal
to 15
High More than 15
NOTES:
1 In determining the intensity of development, the gross acreage
shall not include dedicated common open space or other such
areas restricted from future development.
(3) Cartway widths for each street classification are as shown in Table
4.3 in Appendix B.161
160. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
161. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-61 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-61
177:603
(4) Cartway width also shall consider possible limitations imposed by
sight distances, climate, terrain and maintenance needs.
C. Curbs.
(1) Curbs shall be used for drainage purposes, safety and delineation
and protection of pavement edge. Where, based on stormwater
management system design, there is determined to be a problem
with runoff, curbs or curbs and gutters shall be used.
(2) Curb requirements shall vary according to street hierarchy and
intensity of development, in accordance with the requirements set
forth in Table 4.3 in Appendix B162 (N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.2.). Generally,
curbs shall be required on streets with on-street parking.
(3) Where curbing is not required, edge definition and stabilization
shall be furnished for safety reasons and to prevent pavement
unraveling. Curbing may be required for stormwater management,
road stabilization, delineation of parking areas, 10 feet on each side
of drainage inlets, intersections, corners and tight radii.
(4) Curb requirements may be waived by the appropriate municipal
approving agency and shoulders and/or drainage swales used when
it can be shown that soil and/or topography make the use of
shoulders and/or drainage swales preferable; and/or the
community desires to preserve its rural character by using
shoulders and/or drainage swales instead of curbs. In cases of
medium development intensity, the curbing requirement may be
waived where front setbacks exceed 40 feet and it can be
demonstrated that sufficient on-site parking exists.
(5) Curbs shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth
in N.J.A.C. 5.21-4.17, as follows:
(a) Construction specifications for acceptable curb types of
granite block and concrete are shown in Figure 4.1 in
Appendix B.163
(b) The standard concrete curb section used shall be a maximum
of 20 feet in length, with a scored joint every 10 feet. All
concrete used for curbs or combination curbs and gutters shall
be prepared in accordance with the requirements, by class of
concrete, of the New Jersey Department of Transportation,
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
effective at the time of preparation. Where bituminous
concrete pavement is used for the road surface, the curb and/
or gutter shall be constructed first.
162. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
163. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-61 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-61
177:604
(c) Where drainage inlets are constructed but curbs are not
required, curbing must be provided at least 10 feet on each
side of the inlet, set back one foot from the extension of the
pavement edge.
(6) Curbing shall be designed to provide a curb ramp in compliance
with the Americans with Disabilities Act or the Barrier Free
Subcode of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C.
5:23-7) at street intersections, as applicable.
D. Shoulders.
(1) Shoulders and/or drainage swales should be used instead of curbs
when soil and/or topography make the use of shoulders and/or
drainage swales preferable; and/or to preserve community
character.
(2) Shoulders shall be provided in accordance with the requirements in
Table 4.3 in Appendix B.164
(3) Shoulders shall be four feet wide, except for minor collector streets
of high intensity with off-street parking; and major collector streets
of medium and high intensity shall be six feet and eight feet wide
respectively on each side for all streets and located within the
right-of-way as shown in the street illustrations in Appendix B.165
(4) Shoulders shall be constructed of materials such as stabilized
earth, gravel, crushed stone, bituminous treatment or other forms
of pavement which provide for vehicle load support.
E. Sidewalks and graded areas.
(1) Sidewalks and/or graded areas shall be required, depending on the
road classification and intensity of development, in accordance
with the requirements set forth in Table 4.3 in Appendix B.166
(2) Sidewalks shall be provided where graded areas are specified in
Table 4.3 when the net density of the development project exceeds
one dwelling unit per acre; and the development or project is
located within 2,500 feet of a train station, public or school bus
route; the development or project is located within 2,500 feet of an
existing recreational, business or retail use or a site where such
use is permitted by existing zoning; or where the proposed streets
connect to or extend existing streets which have sidewalks on both
sides; or the net density of the development exceeds 0.5 dwelling
unit per acre and the development is located within two miles of a
school.
164. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
165. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
166. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-61 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-61
177:605
(3) Notwithstanding Subsection E(2) above, sidewalks shall only be
required on one side of rural streets or rural lanes and shall not be
required in alleys.
(4) Sidewalks shall be placed parallel to the street, unless an exception
has been permitted to preserve topographical or natural features
or if required to provide visual interest or unless the applicant
shows that an alternative pedestrian system provides safe and
convenient circulation.
(5) Pedestrianway easements at least 10 feet wide may be required by
the municipal approving authority through the center of blocks
more than 600 feet long. In providing circulation or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping, adjoining residential areas or
other community facilities, the municipality shall consider and may
require pedestrianway easements.
(6) Sidewalk width shall be four feet; wider widths may be necessary
near pedestrian generators and employment centers. Where
sidewalks abut the curb and cars overhang the sidewalk, widths
shall be six feet. In high-density residential areas when sidewalks
abut the curb, a sidewalk/graded area of at least six feet in width
shall be required.
(7) Sidewalks and graded areas shall be constructed according to the
specifications set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.18, as follows:
(a) Sidewalks of concrete shall be four inches thick except at
points of vehicular crossing, where they shall be at least six
inches thick. At vehicular crossings, concrete sidewalks shall
be reinforced with welded wire fabric mesh or an equivalent.
(b) Concrete air-entrained sidewalks shall be Class C concrete,
having a 28-day verification strength of 4,000 p.s.i. Other
materials may be permitted, depending on the design of the
development.
(c) Graded areas shall be planted with grass or treated with other
suitable ground cover and their width and cross slope shall
correspond to that of sidewalks.
F. Street grades, intersections and pavement.
(1) The following apply to street grade:
(a) Minimum street grade permitted for all streets shall be 0.5%.
(b) Maximum street grade shall vary by road hierarchy with flatter
grades required for roads with higher ADT's, in accordance
with the requirements shown in Table 4.6 in Appendix B.167
Where terrain makes it necessary, the allowable maximum
167. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-61 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-61
177:606
grade may be increased by up to 2%, but shall not exceed a
maximum grade of 16%.
(2) The following apply to intersections:
(a) Street intersections shall be as nearly to right angles as
possible and in no case shall be less than 75º.
(b) New intersections along one side of an existing street shall, if
possible, coincide with any existing intersections on the
opposite side of the street. Use of T intersections in
subdivisions shall be encouraged. Offsets shall be at least 150
feet between right-of-way center lines.
(c) Intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with the street
having the highest radius requirement, as shown in Table 4.6
in Appendix B,168 determining the standard for curblines.
(d) Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical.
(e) The minimum center-line radius, minimum tangent length
between reverse curves and curb radii shall be as shown in
Table 4.6 in Appendix B.169
(f) Sight triangles shall be in accordance with 1990 AASHTO's
Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets standards
and based on the speed limits established by the government
agency having jurisdiction. Sight triangle easements shall be
required and shall include the area on each street corner that
is bounded by the line which connects the sight or connecting
points located on each of the right-of-way lines of the
intersecting street. The planting of trees or other plantings or
the location of structures exceeding 30 inches in height that
would obstruct the clear sight across the area of the easements
shall be prohibited; and a public right-of-entry shall be
reserved for the purpose of removing any object, material or
otherwise, that obstructs the clear sight.
(3) Pavement design for residential access, neighborhood, rural,
parking loop, minor collector and major collector shall follow the
specifications shown in Figures 4.2 and 4.3 in Appendix B.170
Subgrade categories are shown in Table 4.7 in Appendix B.
(4) Alternative pavement design shall be allowed provided it conforms
with one of the following: AASHTO Method of Flexible Pavement
Design, Caltrans Method of Flexible Pavement Design, Asphalt
Institute Method, AASHTO Method of Rigid Pavement Design,
168. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
169. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
170. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-61 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-61
177:607
§ 185-62. Bikeways.
§ 185-63. Street signs and traffic signs.
Fatigue Strength Method Design, Multilayer Elastic Analysis or the
National Crushed Stone Association Design, incorporated herein by
reference.
G. Curves.
(1) Vertical and horizontal curves shall be designed in accordance with
1990 AASHTO's Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and
Streets standards, incorporated herein by reference.
(2) Sight easements on vertical and horizontal curves shall be required
and determined based on the sight distance requirements
contained in the 1990 AASHTO's Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets standards, taking into consideration the
speed limits established by the government agency having
jurisdiction. Residential access, residential neighborhood and rural
street design should be based on a speed limit of 25 miles per hour.
Minor and major collector street design should be based on a speed
limit of 30 miles per hour.
A. Separate bicycle paths and lanes shall be required only if such paths
and lanes have been specified as part of a municipality's adopted
Master Plan and/or Official Map.
B. Bicycle lanes, where provided, shall be placed in the outside lane of a
roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is
permitted, the bicycle lane shall be between the parking lane and the
outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes shall be delineated with markings,
preferably striping. Raised reflectors or curbs shall not be used.
C. The construction of bikeways shall comply with the specifications set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.18. as follows:
(1) The paved width of the bicycle path shall be established by the
municipal Master Plan. Choice of surface materials, including
bituminous mixed, concrete, compacted gravel, soil cement,
stabilized earth and wood planking, shall depend on use and users
of the path. Gradients of bike paths should generally not exceed
5%.
(2) Bicycle-safe drainage grates shall be used in the construction of all
residential streets.
A. Design and placement of traffic signs included in the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways shall follow
the requirements specified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways, published by the United States
§ 185-61 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-63
177:608
§ 185-64. Block patterns.
§ 185-65. Streetlighting.
A lighting plan prepared by a qualified individual shall be provided with
major subdivision applications. Streetlighting standards of a type and
number approved by the approving authority and Municipal Engineer shall
be installed at street intersections and elsewhere as deemed necessary by
the approving authority, with intersections involving collector and arterial
streets receiving priority consideration for streetlights. The developer shall
provide for the installation of underground service.
§ 185-66. Lots.
Department of Transportation and adopted by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
B. There shall be at least two street signs furnished at each four-way
intersection and one street sign at each T-intersection. All signs shall be
installed free of visual obstruction and shall show the name of both
intersecting streets. The design of street name signs should be
consistent, of a style appropriate to the community, of a uniform size
and color and erected in accordance with local standards.
C. At signalized intersections, street signs shall be located on the
overhead arm supporting the traffic signal or otherwise suitably
suspended over the intersection. Roadway clearance shall be a
minimum of 15 feet from the bottom of the sign or supporting
equipment to the top of the paved surface.
A. Block length and width or acreage within adjacent roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by this chapter
and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of
street traffic.
B. In blocks of 1,000 or more feet in length, pedestrian crosswalks may be
required in locations deemed necessary by the approving authority.
Such walkway shall be at least 10 feet wide in right-of-way with a fivefoot-
wide improved pavement surface. Said walkway may also include
other improvements, including streetlighting.
C. Block sizes shall be sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses and to
permit reasonable access, circulation and fire-fighting and emergency
services.
A. Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than the requirements of this
chapter.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
§ 185-63 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-66
177:609
§ 185-67. Easements; natural features; utilities.
§ 185-68. Water mains, culverts, storm and sanitary sewers.
§ 185-69. Public utilities.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved and improved street with a rightof-
way width of at least 50 feet in width, except as provided herein.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use, due to such factors as rock formations, drainage
conditions, watercourses, historic sites, flood conditions or similar
circumstances, the approving agency may, after adequate investigation,
withhold approval of such lots.
A. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourses. The size of such easements or rights-of-way shall be
approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
A. Nonresidential development. All installations of water mains, culverts
and storm and sanitary sewers shall be connected with an approved
system and shall be adequate to handle all present and probable future
development.
B. Residential development. All installations regarding water supply,
sanitary sewers and stormwater management shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:21-5, 5:21-6 and 5:21-7, respectively.
A. For all major subdivisions, the applicant shall arrange with the serving
utility for the underground installation of all utility distribution supply
lines and service connections in accordance with the provisions of the
applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as part of its
tariffs, as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey Board
of Public Utility Commissioners, and shall submit to the approving
authority, prior to the granting of final approval, a written instrument
from each serving utility, which shall evidence full compliance with the
provisions of this subsection; provided, however, that lots in such
subdivisions which abut existing streets where overhead electric or
telephone distribution supply lines have theretofore been installed on
any portion of the street involved may be supplied with electric and
telephone service from such overhead lines, but the service connections
§ 185-66 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-69
177:610
§ 185-70. Soil erosion and sediment control.
§ 185-71. Monuments.
Monuments shall be the size and shape required by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.12
(the Map Filing Law, as amended), shall be placed in accordance with said
statute and shall be indicated on the final plat.
§ 185-72. Shade trees, planting strips and landscaping.
from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground.
However, the applicant shall not be required to install electric
distribution supply lines underground if the Board of Public Works of
the Township of Rochelle Park requires such lines to utilize a voltage
of 26 kilovolts or greater and the Board of Public Works passes a
resolution declaring that such distribution lines would present
exceptional operation and/or safety problems if installed underground.
The location of access facilities for servicing the utility in the proposed
subdivision shall be developed in conjunction with and as part of the
complete subdivision plan.
B. Whenever the utility is not installed in the public right-of-way, an
appropriate utility easement not less than 20 feet in width shall be
provided.
C. The approving agencies of the Township of Rochelle Park may, in their
discretion, waive the installation of the underground utilities where
such installation will result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the applicant by
reason of exceptional topographic conditions or by reason of other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of the lands in such
subdivision.
D. Utility areas shall be planted with grass, ground cover or treated with
other suitable cover material.
A. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil
moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to
provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision and
shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
B. All applications for subdivision shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements of the Bergen County Soil Conservation District.
A. Shade trees shall be provided in all major residential subdivisions and
in minor subdivisions where deemed appropriate by the Planning
Board. Trees shall be planted within the subdivision along each side of
the street at proper intervals and in types, sizes and locations
conducive to healthy growth with graded and seeded or sodded
planting strips within street rights-of-way and according to any
standards adopted by the governing body or Township Shade Tree
§ 185-69 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-72
177:611
Commission so as not to interfere with street paving, sidewalks or
utilities. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by
Ord. No. 1038-11]
B. All trees shall have a minimum diameter of 2 1/2 inches measured three
feet above the ground and shall be of a species approved by the
approving authority. Trees shall be planted 40 to 60 feet apart and
parallel to, but no more than 20 feet from, the curbline and shall be
balled and burlapped, nursery grown, free from insects and disease and
true species and variety.
C. Stripping trees from a lot or filling around trees on a lot shall not be
permitted unless it can be shown that grading requirements necessitate
removal of trees, in which case those lots shall be replanted with trees
to reestablish the character of the area and to conform to adjacent lots.
Dead or dying trees shall be replaced by the developer during the next
recommended planting season.
D. A landscape plan prepared by a certified landscape architect, certified
by the New Jersey Board of Landscape Architects, or other qualified
individual shall be submitted with each major subdivision application.
Landscaping shall be provided to promote a desirable visual
environment, screen parking and loading areas, provide windbreaks for
winter winds and summer cooling for buildings, streets and parking and
to mitigate adverse visual impacts. The landscape plan shall provide the
following information:
(1) Existing wooded areas, rock outcroppings and existing and
proposed water bodies;
(2) Existing and proposed topography and location of all landscaped
berms;
(3) Location, species and sizes of all proposed shade trees, ornamental
trees, evergreen trees and areas for lawns or any other ground
cover;
(4) A plant schedule indicating botanical name, common name, size at
time of planting, quantity and any special remarks for all plant
material proposed;
(5) Planting and construction details and specifications.
E. All applicants for development which are required to appear before the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board of the Township shall be
required to submit a copy of the application and all other submissions to
the Shade Tree Commission of the Township of Rochelle Park, which
shall review the same and make recommendations, if appropriate, to
either the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board. The applicant
shall be required to make this submission to the Shade Tree
Commission at least 10 days prior to the initial date of the hearing
before the appropriate Board. [Added 3-17-2004 by Ord. No.
§ 185-72 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-72
177:612
§ 185-73. Environmental impact report.
904-04; amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by
Ord. No. 1038-11]
A. At the Board's discretion, an environmental impact report may be
required to accompany preliminary subdivisions.
B. The environmental impact report shall comply with the following
unless, as a result of data submitted prior to the preliminary plat, the
approving authority shall have waived or modified certain portions of
these requirements.
(1) A description of the development specifying what is to be done
during construction and operation, how it is to be done and
practical alternate plans to achieve the objective(s), all with the
intent of minimizing environmental impacts.
(2) An inventory of the following on-site environmental conditions and
an assessment of the probable impact of the development upon
them: water supply; water quality; air quality; geology; soils; rock
and properties thereof, including erosion capabilities and
limitations; floodplain protection; sewage disposal; topography,
including slopes in excess of 15%; vegetation protection; wetlands;
noise characteristics and levels; land use; site aesthetics; and
historic landmarks. Air and water quality shall be described with
reference to standards of the Department of Environmental
Protection of the State of New Jersey and soils shall be described
with reference to Soil Conservation Service categories and
characteristics as they relate to such things as erosion, sewage
capability, floodplains and seasonal high water table.
(3) A list and the status of the approvals needed from federal, state or
county agencies, including comments of these governmental
agencies.
(4) An evaluation of any adverse environmental impacts which cannot
be avoided, including air and water pollution, noise, sedimentation
and siltation, increase in Township services or capital needs and
consequences to the Township tax structure.
(5) A description of steps to be taken to avoid or minimize adverse
environmental impacts during construction and operation,
including shipping, receiving, storage and the methods of handling
the identified quantities of chemical, corrosive, toxic and hazardous
materials anticipated in all aspects of the operation, as well as
attaching appropriate maps, schedules and other explanatory data.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the approving authority may waive all
or part of an environmental impact report if sufficient evidence is
submitted to support a conclusion that the development will have a
slight or negligible environmental impact or that the complete report
§ 185-72 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-73
177:613
need not be prepared to evaluate the environmental impact of the
development.
§ 185-73 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-73
177:614
ARTICLE IX
Design Standards for Site Plans
§ 185-74. General statement.
§ 185-75. Existing permits, approvals and variances.
Nothing in this chapter shall require any changes in a building permit, site
plan or zoning variance which was approved before the enactment of this
chapter, provided that construction shall have been started within one year
from the effective date of this chapter and the project shall be continuously
pursued to completion; otherwise, said approvals and permits shall be void.
§ 185-76. Off-street parking requirements.
A. All developments shall conform to design standards encouraging sound
development patterns within the Township. Where an Official Map or
Master Plan has been adopted, the development shall conform to same.
B. Character of land. Lands identified in the Master Plan as critical areas
or having severe or moderate soil characteristics, particularly as the
lands relate to flooding, improper drainage, shallow depth to water
table, steep slopes, rock formations, utility easements or similar
features, shall not be used as buildable areas unless adequate and
acceptable methods meeting the regulations of this chapter and all
other regulations are incorporated.
A. Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be as set forth in Table 1. If determination of the
number of required parking spaces results in a fractional space, a
fraction of 0.5 or higher shall require one additional parking space.
B. Location of parking spaces. The approving authority shall approve the
location of all proposed parking spaces on the site and shall take into
consideration the size and topography of the site, visibility from the site
to the adjoining street as well as within the parking area, conditions of
safety relating to the movement of people and vehicles and the
elimination of nuisance factors, including glare, noise, dust and other
similar considerations. Off-street parking shall not be located closer
than 10 feet from any front yard lot line, nor closer than five feet from
any side or rear lot line. These conditions shall apply to all surface and
above-grade parking facilities. All parking facilities shall not be located
closer than 25 feet from any two intersecting streets or within the sight
triangle of any driveway and the street right-of-way. Parking spaces
located to serve residential uses shall be within 150 feet of the entrance
of the building and within 300 feet of commercial/industrial uses
subject to site plan approval.
TABLE 1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
§ 185-74 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-76
177:615
Land Uses
Required Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Auto service stations 3 per bay or 1 per gas pump and 1
per bay, whichever is greater
Banks and savings institutions 1 per 300 square feet of GFA
Child-care centers 1 per 6 children
Restaurants, bars, cafes,
diners, luncheonettes
1 space for every 2 occupants,
including employees
Flexible office/warehouse Utilize component standards
Funeral home 1 per 150 square feet of GFA
Hand wash system [Added
12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 811]
The number of parking space shall
be one space per car wash lane, and
the approving authority may require
additional off-street parking,
dependent upon the design. The
number of employee-designated
parking spaces shall be determined
by the approving authority. No offsite
stacking of vehicles is permitted.
Hotel and motel 1 space per unit, plus 1 space per
employee
House of worship 1 per 3 seats. For benches, 1 seat per
3 feet of linear space
Industrial 1 per 400 square feet of GFA
Manufacturing and assembly
operations
1 per 400 square feet of GFA
Medical or dental offices 1 per 150 square feet of GFA
Office:
Under 49,999 square feet of
GFA
1 per 225 square feet of GFA
50,000 and over square feet
of GFA
1 per 250 square feet of GFA
Residential (per N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14):
Single-family detached:
3-bedroom 2.0, including 1 garage space
4-bedroom 2.5**, including 2 garage spaces
5-bedroom 3.0, including 2 garage spaces
Garden apartment (also, mid-rise):
1-bedroom 1.8
2-bedroom 2.0**
3-bedroom 2.1
§ 185-76 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-76
177:616
Land Uses
Required Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Townhouse:
2-bedroom 2.3**, including 1 garage space
3-bedroom 2.4, including 2 garage spaces
Retirement community: Values shall be commensurate with
the most appropriate housing unit
type and size noted above that the
retirement community resembles
(See Notes 8 and 9)
Retail store and personal
service establishments
1 per 200 square feet of GFA
Schools
Elementary (K through 8) 2 per classroom, but not less than 1.5
per teacher and staff
Storage areas (primary use) 1 per 5,000 square feet of GFA of
storage area and 1 per 250 square
feet of GFA of related offices
Warehouse 1 per 1,000 square feet of GFA
Other uses not provided herein shall be determined by the approving
authority
Notes relating to parking requirements:
GFA = Gross floor area
** = If applicant does not specify the number of bedrooms per unit,
this off-street parking requirement shall apply.
1. Whenever there is more than one use conducted on any one
premises, parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the combined requirements of each use as shown in the above
schedule or as approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment or as otherwise indicated in this chapter.
[Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by
Ord. No. 1038-11]
2. Drive-through lanes and windows for banks and other uses, where
permitted, shall be provided with room for queuing of 10
automobiles for each drive-through lane and/or window.
3. The inclusion of any use in this table is not meant to imply it is a
permitted use in the Township. See the applicable sections of this
chapter for the enumeration of permitted uses.
§ 185-76 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-76
177:617
4. Alternative residential parking standards shall be accepted if
the applicant demonstrates these standards better reflect local
conditions. Factors affecting minimum number of parking spaces
include household characteristics, availability of mass transit,
urban versus suburban location and available off-site parking
resources. (N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14c)
5. A one-car garage and driveway combination shall count as 2.0
off-street parking spaces, provided the driveway measures a
minimum of 18 feet in length between the face of the garage door
and the right-of-way. A two-car garage and driveway combination
shall count as 3.5 off-street parking spaces, provided a minimum
parking area width of 20 feet is provided for a minimum length
of 18 feet as specified for a one-car garage and driveway
combination. (N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14d)
6. When housing is included in mixed-use development, a shared
parking approach to the provision of parking shall be permitted.
(N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14e)
7. For residential uses only: When, in the judgment of the local
approving authority, on-street parking is available, then only that
proportion of the parking requirement which is not available
on the street shall be provided in off-street parking facilities.
A length of 23 feet per on-street parking space shall be used
in calculating the number of available on-street parking spaces.
(N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14f)
8. The Township recommends the following parking requirements
for nursing home/congregate care facilities. These uses are not
specifically identified in the State Residential Site Improvement
Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.): 0.5 space for each nursing bed;
0.75 space for each independent living and assisted living unit.
9. The Township recommends the following standards for senior
citizen housing. This use is not specifically identified in the State
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.):
0.75 spaces for each 1-bedroom unit and 1.25 spaces for each
two-bedroom unit.
10. In cases where a hotel or motel has an accessory restaurant,
there shall be provided one parking space for every two
occupants of the restaurant, in addition to the parking
requirements of the hotel or motel.
C. Parking spaces for the disabled.
(1) In any nonresidential parking lot, designated parking spaces for
disabled persons shall be required as follows (these spaces shall be
considered part of the total number of required spaces):
TABLE 2
Required Parking for the Disabled
§ 185-76 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-76
177:618
Total Parking Spaces in Lot Required Number of Parking
Spaces for the Disabled
Up to 25 1
26 to 100 2
Over 100 2% of total spaces in lot
(2) Parking spaces for the disabled shall be located in one area and
designated as parking for the handicapped. They shall be located
so that access does not require wheeling or walking behind parked
cars. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be at least eight feet
wide with a five-foot access area located adjacent to the driver's
side.
D. Parking area design standards.
(1) Aisle width. Provisions shall be made for the safe and adequate
circulation of vehicles and pedestrians within and adjoining the
subject property. Aisle widths providing direct access to individual
parking stalls shall be in accordance with the standards in Table 3.
Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles of less than 24 feet
in width.
TABLE 3
Minimum Aisle Width
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
0º (parallel parking) 12
30º 12
45º 13
60º 18
90º (perpendicular parking) 24
(2) Parking stalls shall be nine feet by 18 feet in dimension, provided
that parking stalls serving lots which contain retail uses utilizing
shopping carts shall be 10 feet by 20 feet.
(3) Circulation within parking area.
(a) All parking spaces shall be designed free and clear of any
obstruction to individual parking stalls.
(b) Parking spaces shall be located in such a fashion as to permit
all vehicles to exit in a safe and orderly manner. Under no
condition shall vehicles be permitted to back out of a parking
lot driveway or otherwise block the free movement of traffic
within the parking area or specific points of safety control,
§ 185-76 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-76
177:619
such as fire hydrants, doorways, elevators or other similar
locations.
(c) Pedestrian circulation within a parking area shall be, to as
great an extent as possible, separated from vehicular traffic.
Safety zones, crossing points and sidewalk areas, where
warranted, shall be provided.
(4) Driveway design criteria.
(a) Location of driveways. All entrance and exit driveways to a
public or private street shall be located so as to afford
maximum safety to said roadway, to provide for safe and
convenient ingress and egress and to minimize conflict with
the free flow of traffic. In no case shall unrestricted access
along the length of the street or streets upon which the parking
area abuts be permitted.
(b) Sight distances.
[1] The minimum sight distances established in Table 4 shall
be adhered to between a driveway and the adjoining street
in accordance with the site triangle definition. Said
driveway shall be designed in profile and grading shall be
reviewed by the Township Engineer.
[2] For the purpose of this chapter, sight distance
measurement shall be measured from the driver's seat of a
standing vehicle, located on that portion of the exit
driveway that is immediately contiguous to the traveled
way, with the front of the vehicle 10 feet behind the rightof-
way line of the road, with the height of the eye 3.75 feet
to the top of the object 4.5 feet above the pavement.
TABLE 4
Minimum Sight Distance From a
Driveway and Adjoining Street
Maximum Allowable
Speed on Roadway
(mph)
Minimum Sight Distance
(feet)
25 175
30 250
35 325
40 400
45 450
50 or more 500
§ 185-76 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-76
177:620
(c) Where a site is located at the intersection of two streets, no
driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50 feet of the
point where the curb return of the street intersection and the
curbline meet.
(d) No part of any driveway shall be located closer than 20 feet
from any other driveway on the adjoining parcel nor shall more
than one driveway be located closer than 40 feet to another
driveway on the same site, as measured from the closest edge
of any two driveways along the same right-of-way line.
(e) No entrance or exit driveway shall be located on a traffic circle
or on a ramp of an interchange or within 50 feet of the
beginning of any ramp or other portion of an interchange.
(f) Geometric design. The geometric design of a driveway
connection to a public or private street shall be governed by
sound traffic engineering principles. The following guidelines
are utilized in preparing a geometric design, but some
deviation may be necessitated from time to time due to the
many variables encountered in the course of preparing a
design. The applicant should be aware, therefore, that
although the driveway layout may conform to these guidelines,
conditions may dictate deviation from them and that the
requirements of the Township Engineer shall be final.
[1] Two-way operation. Driveways used for two-way operation
will intersect a public or private street at an angle to as
near 90º as site conditions will permit and in no case will
be less than 60º.
[2] One-way operation. Driveways used for vehicles in one
direction of travel (right turn only) shall not form an angle
smaller than 45º with a public street.
[3] The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to
adequately accommodate the volume and character of
vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto the land
development for which a site plan is prepared. The
required maximum and minimum dimensions for
driveways connecting to a public or private street at 90º
are indicated in Table 5. Driveways serving large volumes
of daily traffic or traffic over 25% of which is truck traffic,
shall be required to utilize high to maximum dimensions.
Driveways serving low daily traffic volumes or traffic of
which less than 25% is truck traffic shall be permitted to
use low to minimum dimensions.
TABLE 5
Driveway Widths, Depressed Curbs and Curb
Return Radius Standards
§ 185-76 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-76
177:621
One-Way
Operation
Two-Way
Operation
Use
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet)
Curb
Return
Radius
(feet)
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Width
(feet)
Curb
Return
Radius
(feet)
3- to
10-family
residence
12 to
15
22 to
25
20
min./30
max.
24 to
30
44 to 50 20
min./30
max.
Over
10-
family
residence
18 to
20
35 to
38
20
min./30
max.
24 to
30
46 to 52 25
min./35
max.
Commercial
and
industrial
18 to
30
35 to
50
35
min./45
max.
30 to
50
50 to 70 35
min./45
max.
Service
stations
20 to
30
35 to
50
20
min./35
max.
40 to
50
50 to 60 20
min./35
max.
One- and Two-Family Residences [Added 3-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 904-04]
Maximum driveway width: 18 feet
Curb cuts for single driveway: 15 feet
Maximum curb cuts for double driveway
[4] Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be flat enough to
prevent the dragging of any vehicle undercarriage.
[5] Should the sidewalk be so close to the curb or a depressed
curb driveway as to cause the ramp to be too steep and be
likely to cause undercarriage drag, the sidewalk shall be
appropriately lowered to provide a suitable ramp gradient.
[6] The surface of any driveway shall be constructed with a
permanent pavement of a type specified by standards set
by the Township Engineer. Such pavement shall extend to
the paved portion of the public or private sidewalk.
(g) Guiderail breakaway cable terminals (BCT), wheel stops and
parking lot striping.
[1] Guiderail breakaway cable terminals (BCT) shall be
provided in appropriate locations where required for
safety purposes
§ 185-76 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-76
177:622
[2] Wheel stops, permanently anchored to the ground, may be
required in appropriate locations. Parked vehicles shall
not overhang or extend over sidewalk area, unless an
additional sidewalk width of 2 1/2 feet is provided to
accommodate such overhang
[3] Parking stalls, driveways and aisles shall be clearly
marked and delineated. The approving authority may
require that certain areas be maintained for firefighting
purposes or other emergency purposes. These areas, as
well as other pavement signage, shall be appropriately
designated.
(h) Minimum and maximum grades in parking area. The minimum
and maximum parking grades shall be in accordance with the
following requirements:
TABLE 6
Minimum and Maximum Grades of Parking Areas
Use
Maximum
Grade
(percent)
Minimum
Grade
(percent)
Parking stalls and service
aisles
6 1/2
Main approach walkways
to buildings
4 1/2
Swales 10 2
Principal circulation
aisles
8 1/2
Driveways: entrances and
exits
6* 1/2*
Note:
* For a distance of 100 feet from the street right-of-way line
(i) Maintenance of off-street parking and loading area. Every
parcel of land used as a public or private off-street parking or
loading area shall be maintained in good condition, free of
hazards and deterioration. All pavement areas, sidewalks,
curbs, drainage facilities, lighting, bumpers, guardrails,
markings, signs, landscaping and other improvements shall be
maintained in workable, safe and good condition.
(j) Other off-street parking requirements:
[1] Limitation as to use. All off-street parking areas shall be
used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles and
§ 185-76 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-76
177:623
no commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be
conducted within the parking lot.
[2] Nonavailability. At any time that the required off-street
parking facilities cease to be available as required, the
certificate of occupancy for the building or buildings built
in conjunction with such parking areas shall be canceled
and become null and void.
[3] Charges. There shall be no charge made for the use of offstreet
parking facilities and no cars other than selfpropelled
passenger vehicles shall be permitted to use any
of the off-street parking facilities herein required and no
service of any kind shall be extended to the vehicle
occupying such off-street parking facilities except for
emergency purposes.
(5) Off-street parking construction.
(a) All off-street parking areas shall be graded and drained so as to
dispose of all surface water in a manner so as not to
unreasonably impair the surroundings.
(b) All off-street parking areas, aisles and driveways shall be
surfaced with asphalt, bituminous or cement binder pavement
according to specifications established for this purpose by the
Township Engineer.
(c) All parking areas and access drives shall be edged by a
concrete or Belgian block not exceeding six inches above the
paved surface or ground level.
E. Landscaping in parking and loading areas shall be provided as follows:
(1) Loading areas shall be screened with landscaping, fencing, berms,
walls or any combination thereof and shall not be less than six feet
in height. The screening shall be sufficient to obscure the view of
parked vehicles, loading platforms and loading activities.
(2) Parking areas with 20 or greater parking spaces shall be screened
from the street with landscaping, fencing or a wall and interior
parking lot landscaping shall be required. Landscaped areas should
be located in protected areas such as along walkways, in center
islands or at the end of parking bays and shall be distributed
throughout the parking area to mitigate the view of the parked
vehicles without interfering with adequate sight distance for
vehicles or pedestrians. The landscaping shall consist of hardy, low
maintenance varieties of trees and shrub plantings no higher than
three feet.
§ 185-76 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-76
177:624
§ 185-77. Off-street loading.
(3) Parking areas with fewer than 20 spaces shall be screened from the
street with landscaping, fencing or a wall but no interior parking
lot landscaping is required.
(4) One shade tree, with a minimum diameter of 2 1/2 inches measured
three feet above the ground, shall be provided for every 10 parking
spaces. Trees shall be staggered and/or spaced so as not to
interfere with driver vision and shall have branches no lower than
six feet.
(5) Any plantings which do not live shall be replaced within one year or
one season of their initial planting.
(6) Landscaping shall not cast excessive shade on adjacent properties,
interfere with existing vegetation, interfere with light fixtures or
interfere with adequate sight distance for vehicles or pedestrians.
F. In the event that an application is submitted to the Building Department
or other approving authority to convert an attached garage to a
bedroom or living area, the application must provide for the
replacement of off-street parking spaces lost as a result of the
conversion in order to comply with the parking requirement set forth
herein. [Added 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
G. Residential parking must be provided within the side yard, as defined
herein, where available, running a single width extending parallel with
the lot’s longest dimension. If there is no sufficient area available within
the side yard, parking shall be permitted within the front yard, subject,
however, to usage of 40% of the available frontage or 18 feet, whichever
is less. [Added 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
H. Residential driveways shall be placed in front of any garage at all times.
[Added 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
I. Driveways in single-family residential homes must be contained in a
continuous width and, therefore, cannot be separated. [Added
3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
J. Circular driveways are prohibited. [Added 3-17-2004 by Ord. No.
904-04]
A. Loading spaces shall be required for all buildings occupied by
nonresidential use and for any residential development containing 30 or
more dwelling units and for large-scale public and quasi-public uses, in
accordance with the requirements of Table 7.
B. Each such loading space shall not be less than 12 feet in width and 35
feet or more in length, depending upon the functions to be performed.
The overall floor to ceiling height or clear height distance shall not be
less than 14 feet, which may be increased where required.
§ 185-76 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-77
177:625
TABLE 7
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Land Use**
Floor Area at
Which First Berth
is Required
(square feet)
Floor Area at Which
Second Berth is
Required
(square feet)
Industrial,
manufacturing
5,000 40,000
Laboratory, research
or commercial
5,000 40,000
Retail 5,000 20,000
Service establishments 5,000 100,000
Commercial recreation 2,000 25,000
Restaurant 5,000 100,000
Office buildings 5,000 100,000
Funeral home 10,000 100,000
Residential apartment
building, including
senior housing
complexes
10,000 100,000
Institutional, public
schools
10,000 100,000
Hospitals, nursing
homes, congregate
care facilities
10,000 100,000
Auditoriums, arenas 10,000 100,000
Notes:
* An additional berth shall be required for each additional amount of
square feet as indicated and as required between the need for oneberth
and two-berth intervals.
** In the case of a multiple-use building, the amount of off-street
loading required shall be equal to the sum of the parts, unless the
same can be demonstrated to be in excess, and shall be subject to
determination by the approving authority.
C. Except for required buffer areas, each such loading space may occupy
any required side or rear yard but shall not be located in any required
front yard. When adjoining a residential use, institutional use or place
of general assembly, a suitably screened or landscaped buffer shall be
provided.
§ 185-77 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-77
177:626
§ 185-78. Curbs.
D. Off-street loading spaces shall not be located within any fire prevention
zone, within 25 feet of any fire hydrant or within 10 feet of any stairway,
doorway, elevator or other general means of entry to and from a
building for the general public, nor shall it block or in any way interfere
with the free flow of pedestrians from any means of ingress or egress
nor shall it interfere with the free flow of pedestrians or vehicles. All
such loading spaces shall be appropriately indicated by a sign or other
visual communication as to said location.
E. All loading and unloading shall be conducted entirely within the
boundaries of the lot concerned and no vehicle or conveyance shall, in
any manner, use public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way for loading or
unloading operations other than ingress or egress to the lot.
A. Curbs for nonresidential and mixed use developments. Unless waived
by the approving authority, concrete or granite (Belgian) block curb
shall be installed along all streets according to the following standards:
(1) Construction of all curbs shall conform to NJDOT Standards and
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1989, Section 605
and supplements thereto, and shall meet the Township Engineer's
approval. All concrete to be used shall be Class B as specified in
NJDOT Standards and Specifications and supplements thereto.
(2) Granite curbs shall have a ten-inch to twelve-inch vertical length.
(3) Curbs shall be set in a Class B concrete base at least four inches
thick in front and rear of the granite block and at least six inches
thick below the block. The combined block and concrete base shall
have a minimum vertical dimension of 18 inches.
(4) Curbs shall have a six-inch exposed vertical face above the finished
pavement surface.
(5) Joints shall measure 3/8 inches to two inches in width.
(6) The curb height at all driveway openings shall be lowered to a point
two inches above the finished pavement.
(7) The curbing shall be designed to provide barrier-free curb ramps
constructed in accordance with the Design Standards for Curb
Ramps for the Physically Handicapped of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
B. Curbs for residential developments.
(1) Curb requirements shall vary according to street hierarchy and
intensity of development, in accordance with the requirements set
§ 185-77 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-78
177:627
§ 185-79. Shoulders.
§ 185-80. Sidewalks.
forth in Appendix B171 (N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.2.). Generally, curbs shall be
required on streets with on-street parking.
(2) Where curbing is not required, edge definition and stabilization
shall be furnished for safety reasons and to prevent pavement
unraveling. Curbing may be required for stormwater management,
road stabilization, delineation of parking areas, 10 feet on each side
of drainage inlets, intersections, corners and tight radii.
(3) Curb requirements may be waived by the appropriate municipal
approving agency and shoulders and/or drainage swales used when
it can be shown that soil and/or topography make the use of
shoulders and/or drainage swales preferable; and/or the
community desires to preserve its rural character by using
shoulders and/or drainage swales instead of curbs. In cases of
medium development intensity, the curbing requirement may be
waived where front setbacks exceed 40 feet and it can be
demonstrated that sufficient on-site parking exists.
(4) Curbs shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth
in N.J.A.C. 5.21-4.17.
(5) Curbing shall be designed to provide a curb ramp in compliance
with the Americans with Disabilities Act or the Barrier Free
Subcode of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C.
5:23-7) at street intersections, as applicable.
A. Shoulders and/or drainage swales should be used instead of curbs in
residential developments when soil and/or topography make the use of
shoulders and/or drainage swales preferable and/or to preserve
community character.
B. Shoulders shall be provided in accordance with the requirements in
Table 4.3 in Appendix B.172
C. Shoulders shall be four feet wide, except for minor collector streets of
high intensity with off-street parking; and major collector streets of
medium and high intensity shall be six feet and eight feet wide
respectively on each side for all streets and located within the right-ofway
as shown in the street illustrations in Appendix B.173
D. Shoulders shall be constructed of materials such as stabilized earth,
gravel, crushed stone, bituminous treatment or other forms of
pavement which provide for vehicle load support.
171. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
172. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
173. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-78 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-80
177:628
A. Nonresidential development. Sidewalks shall be installed in locations
determined by the approving authority to be in the interest of public
safety considering the probable volume of pedestrian traffic, the
adjoining street classification, school bus stops, the development's
location in relation to other populated areas and the general type of
improvement intended. Where required, sidewalks should be at least
four feet wide and located as approved by the approving authority.
Sidewalks shall be placed upon a compacted subgrade overlaid with at
least four inches of porous material such as sand or gravel. Concrete
sidewalks shall be at least four inches thick, except at points of
vehicular crossing where they shall be at least six inches thick, of Class
B concrete having a twenty-eight-day compressive strength of 4,000
pounds per square inch and shall be air-entrained. Blacktop or
sidewalks of other approved materials shall be constructed as approved
by the approving authority upon the advice of the Township Engineer.
Where sidewalks cross curbs, curb ramps shall be provided as outlined
in § 185-78, Curbs. Preformed expansion joint material shall be placed
at twenty-foot maximum intervals where sidewalks abut curbing or a
structure.
B. Residential development.
(1) Sidewalks and/or graded areas shall be required, depending on the
road classification and intensity of development, in accordance
with the requirements set forth in Table 4.3 in Appendix B.174
(2) Sidewalks shall be provided where graded areas are specified in
Table 4.3 when the following conditions exist: the net density of the
development project exceeds one dwelling unit per acre; and the
development or project is located within 2,500 feet of a train
station, public or school bus route; the development or project is
located within 2,500 feet of an existing recreational, business or
retail use or a site where such use is permitted by existing zoning;
or where the proposed streets connect to or extend existing street
which have sidewalks on both sides; or the net density of the
development exceeds 0.5 dwelling units per acre and the
development is located within two miles of a school.
(3) Notwithstanding Subsection B(2) above, sidewalks shall only be
required on one side of rural streets or rural lanes and shall not be
required in alleys.
(4) Sidewalks shall be placed parallel to the street, as shown in the
street profile figures, unless an exception has been permitted to
preserve topographical or natural features or if required to provide
visual interest or unless the applicant shows that an alternative
pedestrian system provides safe and convenient circulation (e.g., in
planned developments).
174. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-80 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-80
177:629
§ 185-81. Easements.
§ 185-82. Environmental impact report.
(5) Pedestrianway easements at least 10 feet wide may be required by
the municipal approving authority through the center of blocks
more than 600 feet long. In providing circulation or access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping, adjoining residential areas or
other community facilities, the municipality shall consider and may
require pedestrianway easements.
(6) Sidewalk width shall be four feet; wider widths may be necessary
near pedestrian generators and employment centers. Where
sidewalks abut the curb and cars overhang the sidewalk, widths
shall be six feet. In high-density residential areas when sidewalks
abut the curb, a sidewalk/graded area of at least six feet in width
shall be required.
(7) Sidewalks and graded areas shall be constructed according to the
specifications set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.18, as follows:
(a) Sidewalks of concrete shall be four inches thick except at
points of vehicular crossing, where they shall be at least six
inches thick. At vehicular crossings, concrete sidewalks shall
be reinforced with welded wire fabric mesh or an equivalent.
(b) Concrete air-entrained sidewalks shall be Class C concrete,
having a twenty-eight-day verification strength of 4000 p.s.i.
Other materials may be permitted, depending on the design of
the development.
(c) Graded areas shall be planted with grass or treated with other
suitable ground cover and their width and cross slope shall
correspond to that of sidewalks.
A. Easements shall be along side and/or rear property lines where possible
and shall not be less than 15 feet wide.
B. All easements shall be dimensioned on the plat and shall be identified
as follows: "(insert purpose of easement) easement granted to the
Township of Rochelle Park as provided for in the Rochelle Park Land
Use and Development Regulations Ordinance."
A. At the Board's discretion, an environmental impact report may be
required to accompany preliminary site plans.
B. The environmental impact report shall comply with the following
unless, as a result of data submitted prior to the preliminary plat, the
approving authority shall have waived or modified certain portions of
these requirements.
§ 185-80 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-82
177:630
§ 185-83. Fire protection.
(1) A description of the development specifying what is to be done
during construction and operation, how it is to be done and
practical alternate plans to achieve the objective(s), all with the
intent of minimizing environmental impacts.
(2) An inventory of the following on-site environmental conditions and
an assessment of the probable impact of the development upon
them: water supply; water quality; air quality; geology; soils; rock
and properties thereof, including erosion capabilities and
limitations; floodplain protection; sewage disposal; topography,
including slopes in excess of 15%; vegetation protection; wetlands;
noise characteristics and levels; land use; site aesthetics; and
historic landmarks. Air and water quality shall be described with
reference to standards of the Department of Environmental
Protection of the State of New Jersey and soils shall be described
with reference to Soil Conservation Service categories and
characteristics as they relate to such things as erosion, sewage
capability, floodplains and seasonal high water table.
(3) A list and the status of the approvals needed from federal, state or
county agencies, including comments of these governmental
agencies.
(4) An evaluation of any adverse environmental impacts which cannot
be avoided, including air and water pollution, noise, sedimentation
and siltation, increase in Township services or capital needs and
consequences to the Township tax structure.
(5) A description of steps to be taken to avoid or minimize adverse
environmental impacts during construction and operation,
including shipping, receiving, storage and the methods of handling
the identified quantities of chemical, corrosive, toxic and hazardous
materials anticipated in all aspects of the operation, as well as
attaching appropriate maps, schedules and other explanatory data.
C. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the approving authority may waive all
or part of an environmental impact report if sufficient evidence is
submitted to support a conclusion that the development will have a
slight or negligible environmental impact or that the complete report
need not be prepared to evaluate the environmental impact of the
development.
A. Wherever a central water supply system exists, provision shall be made
for fire hydrants along streets and/or on the walls of nonresidential
buildings as approved by the servicing Fire Department or Municipal
Engineer and in accordance with the Insurance Services Offices of New
Jersey. The midpoint of all lots served by a central water supply shall be
within 500 feet of a functioning fire hydrant. Hydrants shall have fire
hose threads conforming to the fire company equipment with no less
§ 185-82 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-83
177:631
§ 185-84. Floodplain regulations.
than two two-and-five-tenths-inch pumper nozzle. Hydrants shall be
set plumb with nozzles 18 inches above grade. The system shall be
pressure-tested to assure its capability of sustaining the required
pressure at each hydrant.
B. Where streams or ponds exist on the site or are proposed and there is
no central water supply, easements and facilities shall be provided to
draft water for fire-fighting purposes, including access suitable for firefighting
equipment, designed and constructed in accordance with the
Insurance Services Office of New Jersey.
C. For all residential structures containing five or more dwelling units,
public or private fire lanes for the efficient and effective operation of
fire apparatus shall be provided on all sides of every structure. These
fire lanes shall have a minimum width of 18 feet. [Added 7-16-2008 by
Ord. No. 987-08]
(1) Nothing in this Subsection C shall be construed as limiting the
authority or discretion of the Fire Official to impose additional
requirements pertaining to firesafety, maintenance and operation
of fire lanes or other requirements deemed to be necessary, within
the discretion of the Fire Official, to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Township.
(2) The provision of this Subsection C shall be enforced pursuant to
§ 102-10 of the Code of the Township of Rochelle Park and these
minimum requirements shall be incorporated into all approved
plans for development within the Township and shall be a condition
for the issuance of any certificates of occupancy.
A. Floodplains shall be preserved and not be built upon. Where a property
containing a floodplain is proposed for development or other
improvements, no proposed structures shall be located within the onehundred-
year-floodplain. The uses permitted in the one-hundred-yearfloodplain
shall be limited to general farming, overflow parking or areas
serving the peak parking and loading demands, lawns and yard space,
gardens, detention basins, ponds and open space/recreation areas not
requiring structures. No septic systems shall be located in the onehundred-
year floodplain. The one-hundred-year floodplain shall be at
least as designated on the streams identified on the Floodway Maps
prepared by the National Flood Insurance Program or such broader
areas on those streams as might result from an on-site evaluation. On
streams not identified by the National Flood Insurance Program, the
one-hundred-year floodplain shall be as delineated by a developer's
engineer and approved by the Township Engineer.
B. The purposes shall be to prevent the encroachment of development into
flood hazard areas in order to protect human life and health; implement
the rules and regulations of the New Jersey Department of
§ 185-83 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-84
177:632
§ 185-85. Lighting.
Environmental Protection; guide construction, regrading and other
encroachments that might otherwise occur in flood hazard areas to
other locations outside flood hazard areas through cluster zoning,
transfer of development credits and other planned developments;
prevent pollution during low or high water periods by eliminating
unsanitary or dangerous substances in flood hazard areas; minimize
public expenditures for flood control projects, repairs to public facilities
and utility services and rescue and relief efforts; and minimize
disruption in homes, businesses and places of employment.
A. A lighting plan prepared by a qualified individual shall be provided with
site plan applications. The intensity, shielding, direction and reflecting
of lighting shall be subject to site plan approval by the approving
authority.
B. All parking areas, walkways, building entrances, loading areas and
driveways required for nonresidential or multifamily uses shall be
adequately illuminated during the hours of operation which occur after
sunset. Any adjacent residential zone or use shall be shielded from the
glare of illumination from site lighting and automobile headlights.
C. The light intensity at ground level shall average 0.5 footcandles;
however, variations are permitted depending upon the intensity of the
use. The light intensity shall not exceed 0.3 footcandles along any
property line and shall be so arranged and shielded to reflect the light
away from adjoining streets or properties.
D. The lighting plan shall indicate the proposed light intensity (including
existing fixtures to remain) at ground level where 0.5 footcandles occur.
Manufacturer's lighting detail and specifications including footcandle
distributions shall be provided. All lights shall be concealed source
nonglare lighting and shall be focused downward so that the direct
source of light is not visible from adjoining streets or properties. The
minimum footcandle in the areas used by the public shall be 0.5; the
maximum footcandle is 1.0.
E. The mounting height of lighting fixtures shall be not more than 20 feet
or the height of the building, whichever is less, measured from the
ground level to the center line of the light source.
F. Shade trees shall be planted a minimum of 10 feet from any
freestanding light fixture.
G. No lighting source shall be visible from windows, streets and
driveways, nor shall lighting shine directly into or reflect into windows
or onto streets and driveways to interfere with driver vision.
H. No lighting shall be of a rotating, pulsating or other intermittent
frequency.
§ 185-84 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-86
177:633
§ 185-86. Natural features.
Natural features, such as trees, brooks, swamps, hilltops and views, shall
be preserved whenever possible. On individual lots, care shall be taken
to preserve selected trees to enhance soil stability and the landscape
treatment of the area.
§ 185-87. Off-site and off-tract improvements.
Before final approval the approving authority may require the payment
of the developer's pro rata share of the following off-site and off-tract
improvements: street improvements, water system, sewerage, drainage
facilities and easements therefor.
A. Essential off-site and off-tract improvements may be required to be
installed or a performance guaranty furnished in lieu thereof, with the
total cost borne by the developer.
(1) Where a development has no direct access to an improved street or
public or private central water supply or central sanitary sewer and
does not qualify for individual sewage disposal systems, the
approving authority may nevertheless grant final approval if the
developer shall acquire and improve such street between the
development and an existing improved street and, in the case of
water/sewer system(s), if the developer shall acquire and improve
such water and sanitary sewer connections between the
development and existing facilities as approved by the approving
authority, governing body and serving utility company.
(2) Where drainage waters are diverted from the development into
other drainage systems or onto other lands or streets and they are
not adequate to accommodate the additional waters, the approving
authority may grant final approval if the developer shall acquire,
improve and dedicate to the Township such enlarged, additional or
new drainage facilities as approved by the approving authority and
governing body.
(3) Such off-site and off-tract improvements shall be subject to the
design standards of this chapter. In lieu of the developer's
performing such off-site and off-tract work, the developer may
request and the governing body may enter into an agreement for
such work to be performed by the Township or its contractors at
the cost of the developer.
(4) Where the approving authority determines that off-site and off-tract
improvements are essential to the development and the developer
does not consent to the improvements, the application shall be
denied, without prejudice, to a future application at such time as
the conditions no longer apply.
B. Advisable off-site and off-tract improvements. Where the approving
authority determines that off-site and off-tract improvements would be
§ 185-86 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-87
177:634
advisable, although not essential and the improvements would promote
the objectives of this chapter and can be most appropriately
accomplished in connection with the development and particularly
where the off-site and off-tract improvements would be required to be
made as a local improvement by the Township with the costs thereof to
be assessed against all properties specially benefited thereby, including
the property of the developer, the following provisions shall apply.
(1) During the processing of the application, the approving authority
shall refer its recommendations for off-site and off-tract
improvements to the governing body.
(2) If the governing body concurs, the Municipal Engineer or other
authority retained by the Township shall determine the nature of
the off-site and off-tract improvements, including:
(a) The needs created by the applicant's proposed development.
(b) The then-existing needs in the area, notwithstanding any work
of the applicant.
(3) The Municipal Engineer or other authority shall estimate and
report the costs of such work, including all costs to be in any local
improvement ordinance and those to be assessed to the developer
and including costs for construction, engineering, any easement or
right-of-way acquisition, legal work, advertising, contingencies,
bonding and assessments.
(4) Based upon the above report and the recommendations of the
approving authority, the governing body shall determine whether
to undertake such off-site and off-tract improvements as a local
improvement.
(5) If the governing body will not adopt such ordinance, the final
development shall be designed accordingly and the approving
authority shall proceed on that basis.
(6) If the determination shall be to adopt such local improvements
ordinance, the governing body shall proceed in the following
manner:
(a) If sufficient funds are available for the initial appropriation, the
governing body may appropriate such funds and adopt such
ordinance. All subsequent proceedings for the making and
assessment of the cost of the off-site and off-tract
improvements shall be in accordance with such ordinance.
(b) If sufficient funds are not available for the initial appropriation,
the governing body may determine the anticipated amount that
the lands of the applicant would be expected to be assessed.
[1] The amount determined by the governing body shall then
be deposited by the applicant with the Township Treasurer
§ 185-87 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-87
177:635
prior to final approval and prior introduction of such local
improvement ordinance.
[2] Such deposit shall be made concurrent with an agreement
between the applicant and the Township concerning the
uses of the deposit, which shall include the following
stipulations: that said funds shall be used by the Township
solely for the construction of such off-site and off-tract
improvements as specified in said agreement and for the
other expenses incidental thereto and the acquisition of
any easements or rights-of-way in connection therewith;
that such deposit may be appropriated by the Township,
with other funds of the Township, toward the
accomplishment of such purposes and may be commingled
with other appropriated funds and expended by the
Township within a specified time agreed upon by the
applicant, said funds shall be returned to the applicant;
that, upon completion of the work by the Township or its
contractors, the properties specially benefited by such
improvements shall be assessed as provided by law,
including the property of applicant; and that the
applicant's deposit shall be credited against the
assessment made upon the applicant's property, whether
or not the applicant is then the owner thereof and if such
deposit was less than the amount ultimately assessed
against such property, then the owner(s) of said property
shall pay the difference between the deposit, the amount
assessed and the excess shall be refunded to the applicant,
without interest.
[3] Where said off-site and off-tract improvements are found
by the approving authority to be advisable and important
to the sound development of the site, although the off-site
and off-tract improvements may not be found to be the
type of essential off-site and off-tract improvements as
defined above, but the developer is unwilling to make such
deposit as specified above, then there shall be no final
approval until funds become available for the initial
appropriation required to adopt the local improvement
ordinance.
(7) The determination of the governing body whether or not to proceed
toward the adoption of a local improvement ordinance shall be
made within 30 days after the referral by the approving authority
unless such time shall be extended with the consent of the
applicant. If the determination is not made within the designated
period, the approving authority may proceed as if the governing
body had determined that it would not adopt such local
improvement ordinance.
§ 185-87 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-88
177:636
§ 185-88. Public utilities.
All public services shall be connected to approved public utilities systems
where they exist. Utilities shall be located within the right-of-way on both
sides of and parallel to the cartway or within utility easements outside the
right-of-way.
§ 185-89. Shade trees, planting strips and landscaping.
A. The distribution supply lines and service connections shall be installed
underground, except that lots which abut streets with existing
overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service
connections may be supplied with electric and telephone service from
those overhead lines, but the service connections shall be installed
underground. In the case of existing overhead utilities, should a road
widening or an extension of service or other such condition occur as a
result of the development and necessitate the replacement, relocation
or extension of such utilities, such replacement, relocation or extension
shall be underground.
B. The developer shall submit to the approving authority, prior to final
approval, a written instrument from each serving utility indicating full
compliance or intended full compliance with the provisions of this
section.
C. Utility areas shall be planted with grass, ground cover or treated with
other suitable cover material. Where natural foliage is not sufficient to
provide year round screening of any utility apparatus appearing above
the surface of the ground, other than utility poles, the applicant shall
provide sufficient live screening to conceal such apparatus year round.
D. On any lot where soil conditions, rock formations, woods or other
special conditions exist and the developer deems it a hardship to
comply with the provisions of this section, the developer may apply to
the approving authority for an exception from the terms of this section.
Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the alignments
and pole locations shall be routed to avoid locations along horizons,
avoid the clearing of swaths through treed areas by selective cutting
and a staggered alignment, by planting trees in open areas at key
locations to minimize the views of the poles and alignments, by
following rear lot lines and other interior locations and similar design
and location considerations to lessen the visual impact of overhead.
A. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved surfaces
shall be landscaped utilizing combinations such as landscaped fencing,
shrubbery, lawn area, ground cover, rock formations, contours, existing
foliage and the planting of coniferous and/or deciduous trees native to
the area in order to maintain or reestablish the vegetation in the area
and lessen the visual impact of the structures and paved areas. The
established grades and landscaping on any site shall be planned for
aesthetic, drainage and erosion control purposes. The grading plan,
§ 185-88 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-89
177:637
§ 185-90. Sight triangles.
Sight triangles shall be required at each quadrant of an intersection of
streets and streets and driveways. The area within sight triangles shall be
drainage facilities and landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent
erosion and siltation as outlined under the soil erosion and sediment
control regulations (§ 185-91) and the floodplain regulations (§ 185-84),
as well as assuring that the capacity of any natural or man-made
drainage system is sufficient to handle the water from the site and
contributing upstream areas.
B. Shade trees shall be provided in all site plans where deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board. All shade trees shall have a
minimum diameter of 2.5 inches measured three feet above the ground
and shall be of a species approved by the approving authority. Trees
shall be planted 40 to 60 feet apart and parallel to, but no more than 20
feet from, the curbline and shall be balled and burlapped, nursery
grown, free from insects and disease and true species and variety.
Stripping trees from a lot or filling around trees on a lot shall not be
permitted unless it can be shown that grading requirements necessitate
removal of trees, in which case those lots shall be replanted with trees
to reestablish the character of the area and to conform to adjacent lots.
Dead or dying trees shall be replaced by the developer during the next
recommended planting season. Parking lots shall be planted as
required in § 185-76E, Off-street parking requirements. [Amended
6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
C. A landscape plan prepared by a certified landscape architect, certified
by the New Jersey Board of Landscape Architects or other qualified
individual, shall be submitted with each site plan application.
Landscaping shall be provided to promote a desirable visual
environment, screen parking and loading areas, provide windbreaks for
winter winds and summer cooling for buildings, streets and parking and
to mitigate adverse visual impacts. The landscape plan shall provide the
following information:
(1) Existing wooded areas, rock outcroppings and existing and
proposed water bodies;
(2) Existing and proposed topography and location of all landscaped
berms;
(3) Location, species and sizes of all proposed shade trees, ornamental
trees, evergreen trees and areas for lawns or any other ground
cover;
(4) A plant schedule indicating botanical name, common name, size at
time of planting, quantity and any special remarks for all plant
material proposed;
(5) Planting and construction details and specifications.
§ 185-89 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-90
177:638
either dedicated as part of the street right-of-way or maintained as part of
a lot adjoining the street and set aside on any subdivision or site plan as
a sight triangle easement. Within a sight triangle, no grading, planting or
structure shall be erected or maintained more than 36 inches above the
center-line grade of either intersecting street or driveway or lower than
eight feet above their center lines, excluding street name signs and official
traffic regulation signs. Where any street or driveway intersection involves
earth banks or vegetation, including trees, the developer shall trim and
grade to provide the sight triangle. The sight triangle is that area outside
the right-of-way bounded by the intersecting street lines and a straight line
which connects sight points located on each of the two intersecting street
center lines: arterial streets at 300 feet, collector streets at 200 feet and
local streets at 90 feet. Where the intersecting streets are both arterial
and one collector, two overlapping sight triangles shall be required, formed
by connecting the sight points noted above with a sight point 90 feet on
the intersecting street. Any development requiring site plan approval shall
provide sight triangles at each driveway, with the driveway classified as
a local street for purposes of establishing distances. The classifications of
existing and proposed streets shall be those shown on the adopted Master
Plan or as designated by the approving authority where a new street is not
included on the Master Plan. A sight triangle easement shall be expressed
on the plat as follows: "Sight triangle easement subject to grading, planting
and construction restrictions as provided for in the Rochelle Park Land Use
and Development Regulations Ordinance." Portions of a lot set aside for the
sight triangle may be calculated in determining the lot area and minimum
setbacks required by the zoning provisions.
§ 185-91. Soil erosion and sediment control.
§ 185-92. Stormwater runoff.
A. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil
moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to
provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision and
shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
B. All applications for site plan approval shall be designed in accordance
with the requirements of the Bergen County Soil Conservation District.
A. Nonresidential developments.
(1) All developments shall incorporate on-site stormwater facilities
that will encourage the recharging of underground aquifers and/or
the slowing down of the rate stormwater leaves the site.
(2) Where the amount of runoff determined by the Municipal Engineer
is sufficient to justify detention of peak flow, one or more detention
basins shall be required. Each detention basin shall have a capacity
to accept all surface water directed to it from a twenty-five-year
storm with volume of the basin computed utilizing the Modified
Rational Method. However, in areas of the Township deemed to be
§ 185-90 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-92
177:639
§ 185-93. Topsoil redistribution.
Topsoil available at the site and moved during the course of construction
shall be redistributed to all areas uncovered in the course of construction.
Whenever sufficient topsoil is not available at the site, additional topsoil
shall be obtained and distributed in such a manner as to provide a cover of
at least six inches of topsoil or other approved cover to prevent soil erosion
on the areas uncovered during the course of construction or excavation. No
topsoil shall be removed from the site of the development or used as spoil.
§ 185-94. Water supply.
sensitive drainage areas, the municipality shall have the right to
require detention facilities with sufficient capacity to provide zeroinch
increase in runoff for up to and including one-hundred-year
designed storms.
(3) Developments may incorporate other on-site stormwater detention
or impoundment facilities in the following manner:
(a) Swales to retard water runoff. Water velocity shall not exceed
three feet per second. The water may be directed to impactstill
basins to evaporate and percolate. The swales shall be
seeded and maintained in lawn area as appropriate.
(b) Impoundment/detention basins along streams that maintain
steady flows of water may be constructed, provided that they
meet the standards and have the approval of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
(c) Detention of stormwater on roof surfaces may be designed.
(d) Detention-retention facilities may be located underground if
deemed acceptable to the Township Engineer.
(4) Where storm drains are installed outside streets, easements or
rights-of-way shall be required in accordance with § 185-81,
Easements. Stormwater management plans shall be designed and
prepared in accordance with the latest NJDEP guidelines for
stormwater management.
B. Residential. All installations regarding stormwater management shall
be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.
A. Nonresidential.
(1) Where water is accessible from a servicing utility, the developer
shall arrange for the construction of water mains in such a manner
as to make adequate water service available to each lot, dwelling
unit or use. The system shall be designed with adequate capacity
and sustained pressure for present and probable future
development.
§ 185-92 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-94
177:640
§ 185-95. Recycling.
(2) Where public water is not available, potable water supply shall be
provided to each lot or dwelling unit by wells from groundwater
supply. Such wells shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements and standards of the Township and/or state agency
having jurisdiction.
(3) Where water distribution systems are installed outside streets,
easements or rights-of-way shall be required in accordance with
§ 185-81, Easements.
(4) Where no municipal consent for a public utility franchise for water
has been granted, upon completion of the water plant and
distribution system, these public facilities shall, at the option of the
Township, be transferred to the Township.
B. Residential. All installations regarding water supply shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:21-5.
A. There shall be included in any new multifamily housing development
that requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor
recycling area for the collection and storage of residentially generated
recyclable materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be
sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or containers which are of
adequate size and number and which are consistent with anticipated
usage and with current methods of collection in the area in which the
project is located. The dimensions of the recycling area and the bins or
containers shall be determined in consultation with the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator and shall be consistent with the District
Recycling Plan adopted pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 102
(N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13), and any applicable requirements of the
Municipal Master Plan, adopted pursuant to Section 26 of P.L. 1987, c.
102.
B. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the residential
disposition of source-separated recyclable materials, preferably near,
but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
C. The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily
accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall
be able to access the recycling area without interference from parked
cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect
the recycling area and the bins or containers placed therein, against
theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers.
D. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be
designed so as to provide protection against adverse environmental
conditions which might render the collected materials unmarketable.
Any bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable
paper or cardboard and which are located in an outdoor recycling area
§ 185-94 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-95
177:641
shall be equipped with a lid or otherwise covered, so as to keep the
paper or cardboard dry.
E. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted
therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the recycling
area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with signs
indicating the materials to be placed therein.
F. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor
recycling area and shall be developed in an aesthetically pleasing
manner.
§ 185-95 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-95
177:642
ARTICLE X
Definitions
§ 185-96. Word usage.
In the construction of this chapter, the present tense shall include the
future, the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the
singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is
permissive. The words "zone" and "district" are synonymous. The word
"used" shall include the words "arranged," "designed" or "intended to be
used." Any word or term not interpreted or defined by this article is to be
given its standard or common meaning. Whenever a term is used in this
chapter which is defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., such term shall have
the meaning in the state statute.
§ 185-97. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following phrases and words shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING — A use or structure subordinate to
the principal use or structure on the same lot and serving a purpose
customarily incidental to the principal use or the principal structure. Where
an accessory building is attached to a principal building by a roof, wall or
the like, such accessory building shall be considered part of the principal
building.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer, construction code
official or other designee appointed by the Township Committee to be
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
ADVERSE EFFECT — Development designs or existing features on a
developer's property or nearby property, creating, imposing, aggravating or
leading to impractical, unsafe, unsatisfactory or noncomplying conditions,
such as a layout inconsistent with the zoning regulations; insufficient street
location; inconvenient street system; inadequate utilities, such as water,
drainage, shade trees and sewerage; unsuitable size, shape and location
of any area reserved for public use or land for open space in a planned
development; infringement upon land designated as subject to flooding; and
the creation of conditions leading to soil erosion by wind or water from
excavation or grading; all as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 and measured
against the design and performance standards of this chapter.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL — Any changes in the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders or in the
dimensions or configuration of the roof or exterior walls.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a building having three or more dwelling
units.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building used solely for dwelling purposes by
three or more families occupying separate rooms or suites of rooms.
§ 185-96 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-97
177:643
APPROVAL — Acceptance of a plat by the approving authority and meeting
the preliminary or final plat requirements as applicable.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment,
unless a different agency is designated in this chapter pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law.[Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
ATTIC — The open, uninhabitable space between the ceiling beams of the
top habitable story and the roof rafters in any building. 175
AUTOMOBILE SALES — The use of any building, land area or other
premises for the display and sale of new or used automobiles generally,
but may include light trucks or vans, trailers or recreational vehicles and
including any vehicle preparation or repair work conducted as an accessory
use. The term "light truck" means two-axle, four-tire trucks of 10,000
pounds gross vehicle weight rating or less; "van" means a twenty-foot-long
or shorter vehicle, designed to carry from five to 13 passengers or haul
cargo, with seating entry directly through side or rear doors rather than
from a central aisle; "trailer" means a structure standing on wheels, towed
or hauled by another vehicle and used for short-term human occupancy,
carrying materials, goods or objects; "recreational vehicle" means a
vehicular-type portable structure without permanent foundation that can
be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as a temporary living
accommodation for recreational, camping and travel use.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION or GASOLINE STATION — A building
or place of business where gasoline, fuel, oil and grease and/or batteries,
tires and automobile accessories are supplied and dispensed directly to the
motor vehicle trade and where mechanical repair but not body repair may
be rendered as an accessory activity, provided that all mechanical repair
takes place within the confines of a building.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR SERVICES AND GARAGES — Establishments
primarily engaged in furnishing automotive repair to the general public.
BASEMENT — An interior space or a portion of an interior space having a
floor level below the average outside elevation of ground at the foundation
wall of the structure in which it is contained.
BILLBOARD — An off-site lettered or pictorial advertising sign.
BUFFER AREA — A strip of land consisting of natural materials, woodlands,
earth mounds, screening fences or walls and/or other planted vegetation for
the purposes of making a physical or visual barrier.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy by any person, animal or
thing and having a roof.
175. Editor's Note: The definition of "automatic car wash," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 811. See now the definition of "hand wash
system" infra.
§ 185-97 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-97
177:644
BUILDING COVERAGE — The horizontal area measured from the exterior
walls of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot. For a residential
property, building coverage shall specifically include any attached or
detached garage as well as any other principal and accessory
building.[Amended 11-10-2004 by Ord. No. 916-04]
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade, six feet from every side of the structure, to
the highest point of a flat roof;, to the deckline of a mansard roof and to the
midpoint below the highest peak on a gable sloped or hip roof.[Amended
6-19-2002 by Ord. No. 855-02]
BUSINESS — Any mercantile or service activity, pursuit, occupation or
employment conducted for compensation, either wholesale or retail.
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in rendering
services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as
advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment services;
management and consulting services; protective services; equipment rental
and leasing; commercial research; development and testing; photo
finishing; and personal supply services.
CELLAR — An interior space or a portion of an interior space having a floor
level below the average outside elevation of ground at the foundation wall
of the structure in which it is contained.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document signed by the construction
code official which is required by this chapter as a condition to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building and, in the
event of any transfer of title, to existing premises and which acknowledges
that such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of this
chapter or a variance duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-57 of the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291 of the Laws
of 1975.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — An institution offering the provision of
supplemental parental care and supervision for nonrelated children on a
regular basis during part or all of the day, under license by the New
Jersey Department of Human Services. The term "child-care center," as used
herein, includes the terms "infant-care center," "day nursery," "day-care
center," "nursery school" or similar.
CLASSIFICATION — The determination by the approving authority that a
plat is either a minor or major development.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A planned development technique based on
a density of dwelling unit(s) per acre. The permitted number of dwelling
units is then clustered onto one or more portions of the overall tract on
reduced lot sizes so that individual segments of the tract have higher
densities, provided that other portions of the tract are left in open space or
common property so that the gross density limitation of the entire tract is
not exceeded.
§ 185-97 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-97
177:645
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES AND NONPASSENGER VEHICLES — A truck,
bus, van, trailer, camper or similar wheeled conveyance, motorized or not,
other than a pleasure or passenger automobile, regardless of its form
of license registration. This definition shall include any vehicle bearing
advertisements or printed commercially related matter thereon. Any vehicle
designed or converted and used for commercial purposes notwithstanding
the type of registration shall be deemed to be commercial.
COMMON PROPERTY — A parcel(s) of land, together with the
improvements thereon, the ownership, use and enjoyment of which are
shared by owners and occupants of one or more of the individual building
sites in the development.
COMMUNITY FACILITY — A building or structure owned and operated by a
governmental agency to provide a governmental service to the public.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448,
providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under such supervision as
required, to not more than 15 developmentally disabled or mentally ill
persons, who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order to
live in the community, and shall include but not be limited to group homes,
halfway houses, intermediate care facilities, supervised apartment living
arrangements and hostels.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — The submission of an application form and
checklist completed by the applicant, together with all accompanying
documents required by this chapter, for review by the approving authority.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
contained in the zoning provisions of this chapter and upon the issuance of
an authorization thereof by the Planning Board.[Amended 6-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — An organization that
provides housing, services and health care (including long-term care), to
persons of retirement age. The community must provide increasing levels
of care that meet the needs of individual residents, beginning with
independent living and providing a variety of health and nursing care
services. It offers a contract based on an entry fee that guarantees shelter
and access to various health care services, whether these are prefunded or
on a fee-for-service basis.
CONVENIENCE STORE — Any retail establishment offering for sale
prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and magazines
and sandwiches and other freshly prepared foods, such as salads, for off-site
consumption.
CORNER LOT — A lot bounded on two or more consecutive sides by street
lines.
§ 185-97 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-97
177:646
COURT — An open area, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, that is
bounded on two or more sides by the walls of a building that is on the same
lot.
COURT, INNER — An open area, unobstructed from the ground to the sky,
that is bounded on three or more sides by the exterior walls of one or more
buildings.
COURT, OUTER — An open area, unobstructed from the ground to the sky,
that is bounded on not more than three sides by the exterior walls of one or
more buildings.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land
developed.
DENSITY, NET — The number of dwellings per unit of land, excluding
streets, easements, water areas and lands with environmental constraints.
DETENTION BASIN — Those areas which exist or are created for the
temporary storage of stormwater and controlled discharge of this water to
a receiving drainage system.
DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE — Subdivision and/or Site Plan Committee(s)
of at least three members of the approving authority (three members on
each Committee if separate Subdivision and Site Plan Committees are
appointed), appointed by the Chairman for the purpose of reviewing and
making recommendations to the approving authority on a development
application. In the event that no Development Committee(s) has been
created, the function delegated to it shall be performed by the approving
authority.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage swales or required along a natural
watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of water
therein to safeguard the public against the hazard of flooding in accordance
with Chapter I of Title 58 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A business or establishment engaged in the
sale of food, soft drinks, ice cream and similar confections which are so
prepared, packaged in paper or other types of disposable wrappers or
containers and served to persons in motor vehicles, so as to be intended for
immediate consumption either outside of the building or in motor vehicles
while parked on the premises.
DWELLING — Any permanent building or portion thereof designed or used
exclusively as the residence of one or more persons.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A building which is completely
surrounded by permanent open space occupied or intended for
occupancy exclusively by one family, with cooking, sleeping and
sanitary facilities for the use of the occupants of the dwelling unit; also
referred to as a "single-family dwelling."
A.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters for no more than two families,
B.
§ 185-97 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-97
177:647
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms occupied or intended for
occupancy as separate living quarters by one family or household, provided
that access is directly from the outside or through a common hall and that
separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities are provided within the
dwelling for the exclusive use of the occupants.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any restaurant,
coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich
stand, drugstore and soda fountain serving food, pizza parlor and all other
eating and drinking establishments.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other government agency
of electrical, gas, water transmission or distribution systems or collection,
communication, water supply or sewage treatment and collection systems,
including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, light stanchions, telephone
lines, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by
such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies for the
public health, safety or general welfare, but not including buildings.
FAMILY — Any number of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption
or living together as a single housekeeping unit.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A private residence in which child-care
services for a fee are regularly provided to no fewer than three and no more
than five children for no less than 15 hours per week.
FARM — An area of land which is organized as a management unit actively
devoted to agricultural or horticultural use, including but not limited to
cropland, pasture, idle or fallow land, woodland, wetlands, farm ponds,
farm roads and land under farm buildings and other enclosures related to
agricultural pursuits, which occupies a minimum of five acres, exclusive of
with separate access, cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the
exclusive use of the occupants of each unit, which units are separated
from each other by vertical walls to the underside of the roof or by
horizontal floors; also referred to as a "duplex dwelling."
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A structure or building occupied or
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for more than two
families, with separate cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the
exclusive use of the occupants of each unit.
C.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of units in
which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit
is located over another units and each unit is separated from any other
unit by one or more common fire-resistant walls.
D.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT — One or more multiple-family
buildings with dwelling units located one above the other, and/or sideby-
side units, containing off-street parking, outdoor recreation
facilities, landscaped areas and other appurtenant facilities.
E.
§ 185-97 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-97
177:648
the land upon which the farmhouse is located and such additional land as
may actually be used in connection with the farmhouse as provided in the
Farmland Assessment Act of 1964 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.).
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — An establishment whose principal business
is the sale of prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer
in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant
building, in cars on the premises or off the premises. (See also "drive-in
restaurant.")
FLAG LOT — A lot whose area, exclusive of its access drive, meets the
area requirement of the zoning provisions of this chapter, but whose
configuration is one of reduced frontage on an approved street (generally
a width sufficient for use as a driveway or future street), with the enlarged
buildable portion of the lot located at the rear of the lot at the end of the
access drive.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The rivers or other watercourses and adjacent
land areas subject to inundation as defined by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection in the event of the design flood. These areas
include, but are not necessarily limited to, the floodway and flood-fringe
areas as delineated on the Flood Insurance Study for the Township of
Rochelle Park with accompanying Flood Insurance Rates Maps and Flood
Boundary Maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOODPLAIN — The flood hazard areas of delineated steams and areas
inundated by the one-hundred-year flood in nondelineated areas.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a natural stream and portions of the flood
hazard area adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls
or from the center line of a wall separating two buildings.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total of all floor areas of a building, excluding
stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, rest rooms, and all floors
below the first or ground floor, except when used or intended to be used for
human habitation or service to the public.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The gross floor area of all floors of building(s)
compared to the total area of the site.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached accessory building or portion of a main
building intended to be used for the storage of a passenger vehicle or
vehicles and not more than one commercial vehicle of a rated capacity
not exceeding 1 1/2 tons. A carport or any similar structure not completely
enclosed shall not be considered to be a "garage."
GARAGE, REPAIR — Any building, structure, premises and land in which
a business or service involving the maintenance, servicing or repair of
vehicles, but not body repair of vehicles, is conducted or rendered.
§ 185-97 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-97
177:649
HAND WASH SYSTEM — A structure containing facilities for the cleaning of
automobiles by hand. The cleaning process shall be manual. No mechanical
devices, such as used for the application of cleaner, brushes or waxing, shall
be used. The only mechanical devices to be used would be mechanisms
for vacuuming and drying within the facility, with consideration for noise
levels.[Added 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 811]
HEALTH CLUB — An establishment that provides facilities for aerobic
exercises, running and jogging, exercise equipment, game courts,
swimming facilities and saunas, showers, massage rooms and lockers.
HELIPORT — An area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure,
licensed by the federal government or an appropriate state agency and
approved for the loading, landing and takeoff of helicopters and including
auxiliary facilities such as parking, waiting room, fueling and maintenance
equipment.
HELISTOP — A heliport but without auxiliary facilities, such as parking,
waiting room, fueling and maintenance equipment.
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity which is incidental to the use of a
dwelling for residential purposes and which is conducted as an accessory
use in the resident's dwelling unit.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the
general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants,
meeting rooms, entertainment and recreational facilities.
IMPROVED COVERAGE — The part of the site that is covered by building,
parking areas, driveways, pools, walkways, paved ancillary surfaces such
as patios and tennis court, as well as decks and any area covered by
gravel. All areas with the exception of landscaped areas shall be considered
"improved" within this definition.[Amended 3-17-2004 by Ord. No.
904-04]
JUNKYARD — Any area of land, with or without buildings, devoted to the
storage, keeping or abandonment of junk debris, whether or not it is in
connection with the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use or
disposition thereof of any material whatsoever.
KENNEL — Any residence or commercial establishment in which dogs or
domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold,
all for a fee or compensation.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth used for the loading or
unloading of cargo, products or materials from vehicles.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land located at the junction of and abutting
two intersecting streets or at the bend of the same street, where the
angle of intersection does not exceed 135º.
A.
§ 185-97 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-97
177:650
LOT DEPTH — A horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured perpendicular or radial to the front lot line at the midpoint of the
lot frontage to the furthest distance thereof or taken as the average of three
measurements, one taken at each corner and one taken at the midpoint, for
irregularly shaped parcels.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured along the front lot line.
LOT LINE — Any line, including the street line, forming a portion of the
exterior boundary of a lot.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured
parallel to the front lot line at the required front yard setback line.
LOUNGE — [Added 10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 971-07]
LOT, THROUGH — A parcel of land which extends through from one
street to another.
B.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line which separates the publicly owned or
controlled street right-of-way from the private property which abuts
upon the street, as distinct from a sidewalk line, curbline or edge-ofpavement
line. On a street or highway shown on the adopted Master
Plan of the Township, the front lot line shall be considered to be the
proposed right-of-way line for the street.
A.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
B.
C. LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
A public room intended for relaxing. A room or portion of a business in
which people may relax while waiting within a public building such as
a hotel without the service of food or alcoholic beverages.
A.
A lounge may be an accessory use to a restaurant only when all of the
following conditions are met:
Where the area permanently devoted to the lounge is less than
20% of the gross floor area of the public portions of the restaurant,
not including hallways, bars and required aisles, coat check areas,
smoking areas, waiter stations and rest rooms.
(1)
Where the lounge occupancy is limited to the number of persons
for whom there are tables and chairs.
(2)
Where the restaurant continues unrestricted food service including
all advertised specials and all items on the printed menu until
closing.
(3)
Where the restaurant maintains no less than 75% of the total
available seating within the establishment for restaurant patrons
ordering or consuming meals.
(4)
B.
§ 185-97 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-97
177:651
MANUFACTURE — The conversion of raw, semifinished or finished
materials into products of another character, form use or finish.
MOBILE HOME — Any manufactured, transportable, year-round singlefamily
dwelling built on one or more chassis and containing a flush toilet,
bath or shower and a kitchen sink, designed to be connected to a piped
water supply, sewerage facilities and electrical service.
MOTEL — An establishment providing sleeping accommodations with a
majority of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the
necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A building containing three or
more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by persons living
independently of each other or a group of such buildings.
NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT — A business area providing goods
and services, including beauty parlors, barbershops, cleaning
establishments, candy stores, drugstores, bakeries and shoe repair shops.
It is the intent of this amendment to maintain the same types of retail
establishments presently existing at said location, which allow for only low
traffic retail uses. This district shall not include luncheonettes, taverns,
sandwich stands, pizza stores or other takeout facilities.
NIGHTCLUB or CLUB — An entertainment venue which does its primary
business after dark, at night, after normal restaurant operating hours.
A nightclub is distinguished from other forms of eating, drinking and
entertainment establishments by the inclusion of music and/or a permanent
or temporary dance floor or area. This includes places of entertainment
open late at night, offering live music and/or dancing, and drinks and
sometimes serving food. Venues or establishments offering live
entertainment of any kind, with or without food service, with or without
the service of alcohol or otherwise not covered by other Zoning definitions
will be considered nightclubs or clubs. One element of a nightclub or club
which will further distinguish the same from a restaurant is that the patrons
of such an establishment will be engaged in drinking alcohol and other
beverages with less emphasis on food consumption and service.[Added
10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 971-07]
NOISE — Any undesirable audible sound.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
When entertainment is provided, it shall be limited to acoustical
nonamplified entertainment.
(5)
Any use which is accessory to a restaurant use which does not satisfy
all of the conditions described above shall cause the entire use to be
defined as a "nightclub" as defined herein.
C.
§ 185-97 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-97
177:652
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the area, dimensions or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of this chapter but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter but which fails to conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSING HOME — An institution or a distinct part of an institution that
is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision
for 24 or more consecutive hours for more than two residents who are not
related to the governing authority or its members by marriage, blood or
adoption.
OFF-SITE AND OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS — Improvements to
accommodate conditions generated by a proposed development, including
but not limited to new improvements and extensions and modifications of
existing improvements. "Off-site" means located outside the lot lines of the
lot in question but within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is
the subject of a development application or contiguous portion of a street
or right-of-way. "Off-tract" means not located on the property which is the
subject of a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street
or right-of-way.
PARKING SPACE — A space denoted by painted lines and used for the
parking of a motor vehicle outside of the street right-of-way. The term
"parking space" shall not include any aisle or driveway used for access.
PATIO HOME (ZERO LOT LINE) — A detached dwelling or semidetached
dwelling that shares no common interior wall, located on the side lot line.
The resulting design offers one larger side yard as opposed to two smaller
side yards that result in conventional designs where the building is sited
toward the center of the lot.
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings permitted by this chapter.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Establishments providing
services, as opposed to products, to the general public. Such services
generally pertain to the care of a person or his/her personal goods or
apparel. Examples of personal services are dry cleaning, tailoring and
beauty salons.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of a lot.
PRIVATE SCHOOL — An institution of education whose general course
work is comparable to the public school system and whose curriculum is
approved by the New Jersey Department of Education or the New Jersey
Department of Higher Education.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a dentist, physician, attorney,
clergyman, accountant, engineer, architect, professional planner, insurance
agent, real estate agent or other generally recognized professional.
§ 185-97 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-97
177:653
PUBLIC PURPOSE — The use of land and/or buildings by a municipal,
county, state or federal agency or authority.
RECYCLING AREA — Space allocated for the collection and storage of
source-separated recyclable materials.
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY — Rest home or other home for the
sheltered care of adult person; an establishment which furnishes food and
shelter to adult persons unrelated to the proprietor and which provides any
personal care or services beyond food, shelter or laundry to any one or more
of these people.
RESTAURANT — The commercial establishment where food and drink are
prepared, served and consumed on premises and where full waitress /
waiter table service is provided, and where a customer orders food or
drink from printed menus, and where the main food course is served and
consumed while seated at a single location. The term "restaurant" shall not,
however, include a fast-food restaurant or a snack bar or refreshment stand
at a public or community swimming pool, playground or park operated in
conjunction with and incidental to such recreational facility for the sole
convenience of its patrons.[Amended 10-17-2007 by Ord. No. 971-07]
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of a street, watercourse, utility alignment
or other way and within, under or over which all improvements and rights
of access are confined.
SENIOR ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility which is licensed
by the Department of Health to provide apartment-style housing and
congregate dining to assure that assisted living services are available,
when needed, for four or more adult persons unrelated to the proprietor.
Apartment units offer at a minimum one unfurnished room, a private
bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit entrance. This
facility will be available to individuals 62 years of age or older.
SETBACK LINE — A line parallel to a street line or lot line beyond which
a building does not project. The minimum yard requirements shall be the
minimum required setbacks. All setbacks from public streets shall be
measured from the proposed right-of-way as shown on the adopted Master
Plan.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular area at the quadrants of street
intersections where unobstructed visibility is maintained along the
intersecting street.
SIGN — Any announcement, display or illustration placed so as to be seen
and in view of the general public.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — Any site plan which is limited to the proposed
construction of an accessory building or use, such as a sign or off-street
parking area consisting of fewer than 10 parking spaces, as such accessory
uses are specifically permitted in this chapter, and/or improvement of
existing outside facilities, such as parking and drainage without the
expansion of said facilities or interior renovations of an existing building.
§ 185-97 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-97
177:654
SLOPE — The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal,
expressed in percent or degree. Slope calculations shall be based on
elevation intervals of 10 feet. For example, a deviation of 10 feet in surface
elevation within a horizontal or linear distance of 100 feet equates to a 10%
slope.
STEEP SLOPE — Land areas where the slope exceeds 20%.
STORY — That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor above it or is there is no floor above it, then the space
between the surface of the floor and the ceiling above it.
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the
floor level and in which space the possible floor area with head room of five
feet or less occupies at least 40% of the total floor area of the story directly
beneath.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway or which
is shown upon a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County
Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the
grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes the land
between street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise
pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the street lines.
STREET, ARTERIAL — Any street that collects and distributes traffic to
and from collector streets and whose routes are intended to provide a
high degree of mobility. The principal function of an arterial is vehicular
movement. An arterial is characterized by access control and channelized
intersections.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street that collects traffic from local streets and
connects to arterial streets.
STREET, LOCAL — A street which is designed to provide vehicular access
to abutting properties and to discourage through traffic.
STREET LINE — The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way,
whichever is wider, as shown on an adopted Master Plan or Official Map
or as required by this chapter, forming the dividing line between the street
and the lot. Where title to land extends into or to the center of a street, the
right-of-way line shall nevertheless be deemed to be the street line.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision not classified as a "minor
subdivision."
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land that is for the creation of
less than four lots, including the remainder of the original lot, and provided
that such subdivision does not involve a planned development; any new
street; or extension of any off-tract improvement; provided, however, that
in the event of more than one minor subdivision, then, for the purpose of
administering this chapter, the subsequent subdivision shall be considered
as a major subdivision and processed accordingly. Approval of a minor
§ 185-97 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-97
177:655
subdivision shall be deemed final approval and as such shall be prepared
and submitted in accordance with the final plat requirements.
TRACT — One or more lots. Existing streets shall not be included in
calculating the area of the tract.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building, structure or
facilities is designed, arranged or intended or for which it is or may be
occupied or maintained.
USABLE RECREATION SPACE — An open area of land designed for and
devoted to recreational purposes, e.g., park land, sports fields, playgrounds,
swimming pools, etc.
UTILITY — Services including but not limited to sewage treatment, water
supply, gas, electric, telephone and cable television.
WAREHOUSE — A building use primarily for the storage of goods and
materials.
WETLANDS — Those areas as defined by the Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act, N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
YARD — An open space which lies between the principal or accessory
building or buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as provided by this chapter.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer designated to administer
this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — The area extending across the full width of the lot,
between any building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular
to the building at the closest point to the front lot line.
A.
YARD, REAR — The open space extending across the full width of the
lot between the principal building and the rear lot line and measured
perpendicular to the building and the closest point of the rear lot line.
The rear yard setback shall be parallel to the rear lot line.
B.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard from the principal building and the side lot line and measured
perpendicular from the side lot line closest to the principal building.
C.
§ 185-97 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-97
177:656
ARTICLE XI
Zoning Provisions
§ 185-98. Zoning districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Township of Rochelle Park is hereby
divided into twelve zone districts as follows:
Residential District
Business A District
Business B District
Business C District
Business Overlay BA 1
Industrial A District
Industrial B District
Garden Apartment District
AH Affordable Housing District
SCA Senior Citizen Accommodation District
SCH Senior Citizen Housing District
NB Neighborhood Business District
§ 185-99. Zoning Map.
§ 185-100. Interpretation of district boundaries.
A. The location and boundaries of said districts are hereby established on
the Zoning Map of the Township of Rochelle Park revised by Burgis
Associates, Inc., in December 1999, as amended or supplemented,
which hereby is made a part of this chapter.
B. Said map or maps and all notations, reference and designations shown
thereon shall be, as such, a part of this chapter as if the same were fully
described and set forth herein.
A. Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines, railroad
rights-of-way, streams and street center lines unless otherwise
indicated by dimensions on the Zoning Map. Any disputed zoning
district line shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment.
[Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No.
1038-11]
§ 185-98 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-100
177:657
§ 185-101. Schedule of Regulations.
The area and bulk regulations which control development in each district
are set forth in the attached Schedule A, which is supplemented by other
sections of this chapter.176
§ 185-102. Application of regulations.
§ 185-103. General provisions.
B. Where a street or public way serves as the zoning district line and it is
lawfully vacated, the former center line shall be the zoning district line,
unless the zone line is specifically changed by ordinance.
A. No building shall be erected, moved, altered, constructed,
reconstructed or enlarged except as specified in this chapter, nor shall
any land or building be used for any purpose or in any manner, except in
conformity with all the regulations, requirements and/or restrictions
specified in this chapter for the district in which such building or land is
located.
B. In interpreting and applying this chapter, the requirements contained
herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the protection
and promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
A. Prohibited uses. All uses not expressly permitted in each zone district
are prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited within all
districts of the Township:
(1) A pool parlor or a billiard parlor.
(2) A dance hall. The term "dance hall," as used herein, shall be
deemed to include any dance hall, room or facility to which the
general public is invited for the purpose of dancing or for which a
general admission charge is made or a charge for dancing is made
by the owner or operator or a nightclub or other place of
entertainment, including discotheques and disc jockeys, which has
a primary purpose of dancing and entertainment; provided,
however, that this section shall not be deemed to prohibit a dance
floor facility incidental to a restaurant business, for use by the
patrons of such restaurant; nor shall this section be deemed to
prohibit the renting of facilities, including a dance facility, for use
by a bona fide social, civic, eleemosynary, religious or political
group for use by the members of such group or their guests.
(3) Drive-in restaurants or refreshment stands, commonly called
"snack bars, hamburger stands or hot dog stands," where
customers are served food, soft drinks, ice cream and/or similar
confections for their immediate consumption at counters, stools or
176. Editor's Note: Said Schedule A, Area and Bulk Regulations, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 185-100 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-103
177:658
bars outside the confines of the building or structure in which the
business is conducted or for consumption in automobiles parked
upon the premises, whether brought to said automobiles by the
customers or patrons or by waiters or waitresses employed by
the operator. The above shall not be construed to prohibit the
operation of refreshment stands at parks, beach clubs, swimming
clubs, athletic fields or other similar recreation areas or the
temporary operation of refreshment stands at properly licensed
circuses, bazaars and other social functions.
(4) Trailer camps, tourist house or tourist lodge or hotels; dog or
animal kennel.
(5) The slaughtering of animals or fowl or the manufacture, processing
or conversion of any commodity of which the principal ingredient is
refuse animal matter.
(6) The manufacturing, processing, fabricating or mixing of acids,
chemicals, perfumes, ammonia, caustic soda; cellulose, celluloid;
cement, sand, gravel, stone, concrete, talc, limestone; chlorine;
cleaning;, bleaching and washing compounds; coal tar distillates,
coke, cottonseed products, creosote or creosoted products;
fertilizer; fireworks; acetylene gas; glue; gunpowder or other
explosives; glucose; insecticides; lime; linoleum; matches; oilcloth;
oil or petroleum products, paint, paper pulp; potash, sulfur
products; varnish; vinegar; wall plaster; wood distillates or yeast;
abrasives; shoeblack; soap, starch and stove polish or similar items.
(7) Foundries and smeltering plants.
(8) The incineration, reduction, storage or dumping of animal matter,
garbage, offal, junk or other waste matter except by the Township
of Rochelle Park.
(9) Any industry, trade or use that is obnoxious, offensive or dangerous
by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, gas or noise.
(10) Heliports and helistops.
(11) Mobile homes.
(12) Car washes, other than hand wash. [Added 3-17-2004 by Ord.
No. 904-04]
(13) Movie theaters. [Added 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
(14) Monopole cell towers. [Added 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
(15) Nightclub or club as defined in § 185-97. [Added 10-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 971-07]
B. Existing uses. Except as otherwise specified for nonconforming uses,
structures, sites or lots, any use, building or structure existing at the
§ 185-103 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-103
177:659
time of the enactment of this chapter may be continued, even though
such use, building or structure may not conform to the provisions of this
chapter for the district in which it is located.
C. Height exceptions. Chimneys and antennas extending from a roof line
may exceed the height limitations of this chapter by no more than 10
feet.
D. Required area. The area or dimension of any lot, yard or other space
shall not be reduced to less than the minimum required by this chapter,
and if already existing at less than the minimum required by this
chapter, said area or dimension may be continued and shall not be
further reduced.
E. Off-street parking. All off-street parking and loading shall be located on
the lot on which the principal use is located.
F. The following regulations pertain to the parking of commercial
vehicles:
(1) No more than one commercial vehicle shall be permitted on any
residential property in the Township. A commercial vehicle is any
open truck or closed-van-type of vehicle owned and operated by a
resident for commercial purposes (irrespective of license
registration), with a gross vehicle weight of 9,200 pounds, with a
height not exceeding seven feet and/or a length not in excess of 22
feet. The term "van" shall not apply to a van-type vehicle used for
recreation, travel or a passenger vehicle.
(2) A commercial vehicle shall not be permitted to have exposed
construction materials while parked on residential property but,
rather, shall be covered at all times. Construction trailers or trailers
containing construction equipment are specifically prohibited on
any residential property in the Township. [Amended 3-17-2004
by Ord. No. 904-04]
(3) The owner or operator of a commercial vehicle who intends to park
the same on residential property shall register the vehicle with the
Township Police Department.
(4) Commercial vehicles stored on residential properties shall not
exceed capacity of 1 1/2 tons or measure more than seven feet high
or more than 22 feet long or have more than four wheels. This
provision shall not apply to recreational vehicles as defined herein.
A vehicle may be deemed to be a commercial vehicle within this
prohibition regardless of registration. [Added 3-17-2004 by Ord.
No. 904-04]
(5) Commercial vehicles of any kind may not be parked or stored
within the front yard setback of any commercial property from the
hours of 11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. This restriction shall not apply
to automobile dealerships, car rental premises or car rental
§ 185-103 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-103
177:660
businesses as the inventory or purpose of such businesses involves
automobiles and the storage and sale of same. [Added 6-15-2011
by Ord. No. 1032-11]
G. Regulations for parking of boats, trailers and boat trailers.
(1) The following definitions shall apply to this section:
CAMPER — A vehicle such as a small trailer or pop-up vehicle or a
trailer-like room attached to the bed of a car or pickup truck fitted
out for camping with bunks, stoves and other facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single
chassis; has 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; is designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and designed primarily
not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
TRAILER — A vehicle which is used or intended for use as
conveyance upon the public streets or highways with or without
motor power, designed for carrying persons or property and for
being drawn by a motor vehicle and having no foundation other
than wheels, jacks or other mechanism so arranged to be integral
with or portable. It is the intent of the definition to apply to those
vehicles involved in recreational uses.
BOAT — A small, open vessel or watercraft commonly known as a
"motorboat, a sailboat or a rowboat."
(2) No camper, recreational vehicle, boat, trailer or boat trailer,
referred to herein as "vehicles," may be parked or stored within the
Township of Rochelle Park if the total length of the vehicle, which in
the case of a boat includes the trailer upon which it rests, exceeds
28 feet in length and/or 12 feet in height.
(3) No person shall park or store any camper, recreational vehicle,
boat, trailer or boat trailer on any lot or tract of land, whether
occupied or unoccupied, except that the camper, recreational
vehicle, boat or boat trailer may be parked or stored by the owner
or occupant thereof behind their dwelling, in the rear yard of the
premises, provided that the camper, recreational vehicle, boat,
trailer or boat trailer may not be stored in any area of the premises
in front of the rear building line of the dwelling. The storage of any
camper, recreational vehicle, boat, trailer or boat trailer shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter which require a side yard
of five feet and a rear yard of 10 feet. Should such vehicle be visible
from the street, it shall be necessary for the owner or occupant to
provide screening to prevent visual observation of the vehicle from
the street.
(4) Storage or repairs.
§ 185-103 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-103
177:661
(a) A trailer may be temporarily parked or stored in the open in
connection with:
[1] A public health program sponsored by the Township Board
of Health or other public health agency;
[2] A program sponsored by any public board or agency of the
Township or Board of Education;
[3] A public or private construction project;
[4] A carnival or other affair or function authorized by the
Township Committee.
(b) A camper, recreational vehicle, boat, trailer or boat trailer may
be parked in the driveway for a period not to exceed 24 hours
for purposes of loading, unloading, for emergency purposes or
for repairs upon notification of the Police Department. The
owner or occupant shall be allowed two twenty-four-hour
periods for every 30 days.
(5) Screening or enclosures. Campers, recreational vehicles, boats or
trailers shall be either parked in an enclosed garage or, if in the
rear yard or side yard where the vehicle is subject to view from the
street, then screening shall not be less than six feet in height and
shall consist of either a trellis, latticework, decorative block,
basketweave fencing, open artistic block, shrubbery or other
similar material approved by the Zoning Officer. The size of the
screening area shall be limited to the size of the vehicle to be
screened.
(6) Restrictions.
(a) Not more than one camper, recreational vehicle, boat or trailer
may be parked or stored on any premise used for residential
purposes.
(b) No camper, recreational vehicle, boat or trailer parked or
stored upon any premises used for residential purposes shall
be used for any type of commercial or business use.
(c) No camper, recreational vehicle, boat or trailer parked or shall
be occupied or used for human habitation while parked or
stored within the Township.
(d) No camper, recreational vehicle, boat or trailer parked or
stored within the Township shall have fixed connectors to
electricity, water, gas or sanitary sewer system.
(e) No camper, recreational vehicle, boat or trailer will be allowed
to be parked within the Township on any premises unless the
vehicle is owned by the resident owner of the premises or a
lawful tenant in the premises upon which it is parked.
§ 185-103 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-103
177:662
(f) In emergency situations, where a residence becomes
inhabitable, the Township Committee shall have the authority
to waive the requirements of this section for a period of time to
be determined by the governing body.
(g) Should the premises on which the owner or occupant wish to
park a boat, trailer or recreational vehicle be a corner lot, then
the front yard shall be considered the street on which the front
entrance to the premises is located. In such case, the vehicle
must be located in an area not visible to either street or if
visible, it shall be covered with the appropriate screening.
(7) Penalties. Any person violating the terms of this section shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $250 for the first offense and a fine in
the amount of $500 for any subsequent violations. This section will
be enforced by the Township Zoning Officer.
H. No more than one principal building is permitted on a lot, except in the
affordable housing district.
I. Where a nonresidential zone adjoins a residential zone, nonresidential
buildings or structures shall be prohibited from having an exterior wall
with an opening or loading area that is located within 25 feet of the
residential zone, except for emergency doors.
J. No outdoor storage of property or material shall be permitted in any
zone district. All storage of materials and goods to be used or sold in
connection with a business must be inside a building. Temporary
placement of materials and goods for sale on the sidewalk shall be
allowed between sunup and sundown on the sidewalk immediately in
front of the business. There shall be no obstruction of the passage of the
general public across the sidewalk. The temporary display must be
removed daily at sundown.
K. Variances.
(1) In all cases where variances are granted from this chapter for onefamily
dwellings, the successful applicant shall be required to make
application for a building permit in conformity with the terms of the
variance as granted within six months from the effective date of the
grant of the variance. The applicant shall be required to complete
construction of the dwelling within one year following issuance of
the building permit. The approving board may extend the six-month
provision referenced above for good cause shown for additional
periods of one year each, provided that in no event shall said
extensions be renewed beyond a period of three years in the
aggregate.
(2) In cases involving nonresidential uses and multifamily residential
development, the applicant is required to make application for a
building permit in conformity with the terms of the variance as
granted within one year from the effective date of the approving
§ 185-103 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-103
177:663
§ 185-104. Zoning permits and certificates of occupancy.
Prior to the commencement of a use, change of use or change of occupancy
and prior to the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
conversion, relocation or installation of a building or structure, a zoning
permit shall be obtained from the Construction Official. The following
provisions shall apply to the issuance of zoning permits:
authority approval. The applicant shall be required to complete
construction of the building(s) within one year following the
issuance of the building permit. Extensions shall be permitted, as
provided for in the Subsection K(1) above.
L. Rooftop air-conditioning units or equipment must be appropriately
screened from view from street level. [Added 3-17-2004 by Ord. No.
904-04]
M. Garbage or recycling dumpsters and containers shall be appropriately
screened from view from street level. The screening must include
enclosures on all four sides and shall be of such construction that will
shield the dumpster or container from view from all sides. [Added
6-15-2011 by Ord. No. 1034-11]
A. Zoning permits. If no construction permit shall have been issued
previously, no land shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any
purpose whatsoever unless and until a zoning permit shall have been
issued by the Construction Official.
(1) A zoning permit shall be required for the use of any premises which
do not contain a building.
(2) Whenever there shall be a change contemplated in the use of any
premises which does not have a building upon it, a new zoning
permit shall be required.
(3) The Construction Official shall issue or deny a zoning permit within
seven days of the application, unless site plan approval is required,
in which case he shall issue a zoning permit within seven days of
the resolution of site plan approval.
B. Certificates of occupancy. No building or structure hereafter erected or
altered and no building in which the occupancy, use or tenancy shall
have been changed, including a change from one permitted use to
another kind of permitted use in the same district, as well as any
change in tenancy for nonresidential use or in nonresidential districts,
shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose
whatsoever unless and until an application for a zoning permit or
continuing certificate of occupancy has been reviewed and approved by
the Planning Board. The Planning Board may, at its discretion, require a
full site plan review. Such approval shall be a prerequisite to the
issuance of a new certificate of occupancy. In addition, the following
§ 185-103 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-104
177:664
provisions shall apply: [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
(1) Temporary certificates of occupancy shall not be issued by the
Construction Official without first receiving approval from the
Township Engineer, who shall ascertain the adequacy of required
improvements installed to protect the general welfare of the public.
(2) The Construction Official shall issue or deny a certificate of
occupancy within 10 days of the application, unless site plan
approval is required, in which case he shall issue the certificate of
occupancy within 10 days of the date of the resolution of site plan
approval.
C. Prerequisite for issuance of zoning permits and certificates of
occupancy. No zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
by the Construction Official until he has ascertained that all of the
requirements of this chapter and any other applicable Township or
state regulations and ordinances, Board of Adjustment decisions,
necessary resolutions of the Township Committee and a site plan as
approved by the Planning Board have been and are fully complied with.
All improvements shown on any site plan shall have been installed on
the premises in question before any zoning permit or certificate of
occupancy, as the case may be, shall be issued. [Amended 6-16-2010
by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
D. Terms and conditions of zoning permits and certificates of occupancy. A
zoning permit or certificate of occupancy shall specify the use of the
land and/or building(s) and any terms or conditions imposed
thereunder, including but not limited to the number of employees,
required parking spaces and traffic impact. Any change in use,
including a change from one permitted use in the same district as well
as any change in tenancy for other than a single-family detached,
single-family attached or multifamily dwelling shall be treated as a new
use and a new zoning permit or certificate of occupancy, as the case
may be, shall be required. The Planning Board shall review any change
of use in the nonresidential districts prior to the issuance of a zoning
permit or certificate of occupancy. Before any zoning permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any such change in use, all
provisions of this chapter shall be complied with in the same manner as
if the new use were an initial use of the land or a new structure or
building. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by
Ord. No. 1038-11]
E. Records. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official and the Zoning
Officer, respectively, to keep records of all applications for construction
permits, certificates of occupancy or zoning permits and of all such
permits and certificates issued, together with a notation of all special
terms or conditions imposed thereunder. Each shall be responsible for
the filing and safekeeping of all plans and specifications submitted with
any application and the same shall form a part of the records in the
§ 185-104 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-104
177:665
office and shall be available to all officials of the Township of Rochelle
Park. Copies of any permits or certificates shall be furnished upon
request to any person who shall have a right thereto by law.
§ 185-104 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-104
177:666
ARTICLE XII
Supplementary Lot, Yard and Bulk Regulations
§ 185-105. Lot regulations.
§ 185-106. Yard regulations.
A. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with usable frontage
upon a street or streets, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-7, and shall be
improved to meet the Township's standards or accepted by the
Township.
B. The minimum required lot width shall be measured at the required
front yard setback line. However, in cases of irregularly shaped lots
whose sides are not parallel, the lot width may be measured at either
the required front yard setback or front lot line as follows:
(1) In cases of irregularly shaped lots whose sides are not parallel and
the lot width is measured at the required front yard setback, the
street frontage shall not be less than 60% of the minimum lot width
required, provided that the lot width measured at the front yard
setback line shall conform to the minimum width specified in the
zoning schedule177 for the district in which the lot is contained.
(2) In cases of irregularly shaped lots whose sides are not parallel, the
lot width may be measured at the front lot line, provided that the
width of the lot measured at the required front yard setback line
shall not be less than 85% of the required lot width measured at the
front lot line.
C. Within any sight triangle, no grade, vegetation, sign or other object
shall be placed or allowed to exceed a height of 30 inches above the
adjacent roadway or be placed in such manner as to limit or obstruct
the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. Said
triangle shall be formed by the street lines of such lot and a line drawn
between points along such street lines 25 feet distant from their point
of intersection.
D. Where a single lot under individual ownership extends from one street
to another, defined herein as a "through lot," both frontages shall be
subject to the front yard requirements of this chapter. However, in the
case of construction of a single principal building and/or an accessory
building on a through lot, the applicant shall specify which street line is
the front street line. The other frontage shall be deemed the rear line
and shall comply with the rear yard setback of the district .
A. No yard or other open space that is provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building.
177. Editor's Note: See Schedule A, Area and Bulk Regulations, included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 185-105 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-106
177:667
B. The sketch maps in Appendix B178 illustrate the delineation of the yards
for measurement purposes regarding corner lots and other lots.
C. Projections into required yards; general exceptions.
(1) Cornices and eaves may not project more than 18 inches into any
required yard.
(2) Sill, belt courses and similar ornamental or structural features may
project six inches into any required yard. An open fire balcony or
fire escape or fire tower may project into a required yard no more
than four feet.
(3) Ground story bay windows, oriels or balconies having a combined
total width not exceeding 1/2 of the length of the wall to which they
are attached may project not more than three feet into any required
rear yard nor more than three feet into any required side yard
which is more than six feet wide. An open porch or port scorcher
not more than one story high may project into any required side
yard, provided that it does not come closer to the side lot line than
a distance equal to 1/2 of the width of the required side yard.
(4) No porch, oriel, bay window, port cochere or stairway shall project
more than 1/2 of the width of the structure.
(5) An open porch, stairway or entranceway or a bay window not
higher than the first story of a building may not project more than
10 feet into a required front yard. If any open porch extends into a
required front yard, the columns supporting the roof shall present
the minimum obstruction to the circulation of air and the view
sideways through the porch. Any sash placed between the columns
during the winter season shall be glazed with glass.
(6) A chimney, smokestack, flue or elevator shaft may project into any
required yard, provided that the horizontal section of the projection
does not exceed eight square feet in any residential district or nine
square feet in any nonresidential district.
178. Editor's Note: See Figure Nos. 1, 2 and 4 in Appendix B, located at the end of this chapter.
§ 185-106 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-106
177:668
ARTICLE XIII
Zone Districts and Permitted Uses
§ 185-107. Schedule of Permitted, Conditional and Accessory Uses.
The permitted, conditional and accessory uses for each zone district are set
forth in Schedule B.179
179. Editor's Note: Sais Schedule B, Schedule of District Use Regulations, is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 185-107 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-107
177:669

ARTICLE XIV
Supplementary Regulations Governing Certain Uses
§ 185-108. Regulations governing certain principal permitted uses.
A. Community residences. Community residences for the developmentally
disabled and community shelters for victims of domestic violence shall
be a permitted use in all residential districts, subject to the following:
(1) A community residence or shelter shall comply fully with all zoning
and health regulations applicable to single-family residences in the
zone district in which it is located.
(2) A community residence or shelter may not be occupied by more
than 15 residents, excluding resident staff.
B. Child-care facilities. Applications for freestanding child-care centers as
a permitted principal use shall comply with the following:
(1) Area and bulk regulations:
Regulation All Nonresidential
Districts
Minimum lot area (square feet) 7,500
Minimum lot width (feet) 75
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100
Minimum front yard (feet) 15
Minimum side yards (feet) 10
Minimum rear yards (feet) 10
Maximum building coverage
(percent)
50%
Maximum impervious coverage
(percent)
70%
Maximum building height (stories/
feet)
2/30
(2) A minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area per child per
play shift shall be provided. Play areas shall be permitted in the
rear and side yards only and shall be enclosed by a fence at least
four feet in height and landscaped and screened from adjoining
properties.
(3) One off-street parking space shall be provided for every 10 children
which the center is designed to accommodate.
(4) Such facility shall comply with all applicable governmental
requirements and shall be licensed by the New Jersey Department
of Human Services.
§ 185-108 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-108
177:671
(5) A child-care facility may be permitted to occupy an entire building
or a portion of an existing building which is partially occupied by
other uses, irrespective of any other ordinance limitations on the
number of principal permitted uses allowed on a lot.
(6) The floor area occupied by a child-care center in any building for
which the child-care center is an accessory use shall be excluded in
calculating any parking requirement otherwise applicable to that
amount of floor space and shall be excluded from the permitted
floor area ratio allowable for that building.
C. Garden apartments.
(1) Garden apartments shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories in height with
gabled or hipped roof and exterior walls faced with brick or stone.
(2) The units shall not contain any apartment with more than two
bedrooms or at least 80% of the apartments shall contain not more
than one bedroom.
(3) In the construction of any building or in the utilization of any land
for any purpose allowed in this district, the applicant shall
preserve, wherever possible, all natural vegetation, including but
not limited to trees and shrubbery.
(4) No dwelling units shall be permitted in cellars or basements.
D. Fast-food restaurants.
(1) The following area and bulk requirements shall apply:
(a) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(b) Minimum lot frontage: 250 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth: 300 feet.
(d) Minimum front yard: 40 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard: 60 feet.
(f) Minimum buffer width along front lot line: 20 feet.
(g) Minimum buffer along side and rear when adjoining residential
use or district: 15 feet.
(h) Maximum lot coverage: 5%.
(2) In addition to landscaped buffering, the restaurant shall be
screened by a decorative masonry wooden fence of acceptable
design six feet in height. No such wall or fence shall be located so
as to obstruct safe traffic vision.
§ 185-108 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-108
177:672
(3) There shall be at least one major means of access and egress,
divided by a median strip. Entrances and exits shall be located at
least 80 feet from a street intersection.
(4) Minimum off street parking requirements shall be one space per
1.25 seats plus one space for each full-time employee.
(5) Direct access from the roadway right-of-way to the nearest turn or
parking space on the lot on which the fast-food establishment is
located shall be n unobstructed distance of at least 20 feet.
(6) The sign regulations set forth in Article XX shall apply.
(7) All service, storage and trash areas shall be completely screened
from public view. All outside trash receptacles shall be located
within an enclosure constructed of decorative masonry material a
minimum of four feet and a maximum of six feet in height and shall
be provided with opaque gates of the same height.
(8) No fast-food restaurant shall be located within 500 feet of a school,
church, synagogue or other place of worship or another fast-food
restaurant. The distance shall be measured between the two
closest property lines.
(9) The minimum distance between driveways on-site shall be 65 feet.
(10) Drive-in window lanes shall be physically separated from the traffic
circulation system on-site by means of concrete curbed and
landscaped islands which allow for a minimum width of two feet for
landscaping. The drive-in window aisle shall have a minimum width
of 10 feet. The length of the drive-in lane shall permit stacking for
10 vehicles. There must be adequate space for customers who have
picked up orders to bypass vehicles waiting for a special order.
(11) Utilities shall be underground.
§ 185-108 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-108
177:673

ARTICLE XV
Supplementary Regulations Governing Certain Zone Districts
§ 185-109. Business Overlay BA 1.
A. 180As used in this section, the following definitions181 apply to this zone:
ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment from which minors are
excluded, having as a substantial stock-in-trade films, videos, movies
or other viewing materials which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or related to specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as defined herein or an
establishment in which a segment or section of the premises is devoted
to the sale, rental, display or viewing of such material.
BODY PIERCING — The piercing of any portion of the human body for
placement of any type of jewelry or any other ornamation, other than
ear piercing.[Added 9-18-2002 by Ord. No. 866-02]
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — Allows for the sale and distribution of
food either in the interior of the premises or a drive-in window which
shall be physically separated from the traffic circulation system of the
site.
OBSCENE or PORNOGRAPHIC — Refer to P.L. 1995, c. 230 (N.J.S.A.
2C:34-2).
RESTAURANT or CATERING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment
permitting the serving of food or beverages to the public. A restaurant
other than a fast-food restaurant requires the sales, transaction and
delivery of food to be conducted inside the walls of the building.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — Less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola; or human male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; or any act of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy; or fondling or other erotic touching of covered
or uncovered human genitals, public region, buttock or female breast.
TATTOOED or TATTOOING — Any method of placing designs, letters,
scrolls, figures, symbols or any marks under the skin with ink or any
other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid or
needles or any other instruments designed to puncture the skin.[Added
9-18-2002 by Ord. No. 866-02]
B. Prohibited uses are as follows:
180. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 841-01, adopted 10-17-2001 provided for the following:
Definitions are hereby amended to include definitions set forth in N.J.S.A. C.5:5-129
relating to off-track wagering.
181. Editor's Note: See also §§ 185-97, 185-103G(1), 185-129H(2) and 185-131 for other
definitions.
§ 185-109 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-109
177:675
§ 185-109.1. Historic Home Overlay (HH-O). [Added 10-23-2019 by
Ord. No. 1150-19]
(1) Any obscene or pornographic books, videos or entertainment which
depicts or describes in a patently offensive way sexual conduct
specifically defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2.
(2) Any activity which exposes specified anatomical areas or sexual
activity as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2.
C. No business described herein shall allow persons under the age of 18
years old.
D. No person shall operate a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet
of any other sexually oriented business or other structures or uses as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2.
E. No business described herein shall allow any person (female) to appear
with either or both breasts exposed and no person (male or female) may
appear with the lower part of the torso uncovered or so thinly covered
or draped as to appear uncovered.
F. As applied to restaurants, catering or fast-food establishments, there
shall not be permitted within these establishments any dancers,
entertainers, performers or other employees whose specified
anatomical parts are exposed or are less than completely or opaquely
covered.
G. This section is not intended to preempt the Township's regulations for
alcoholic beverages, but is intended to supplement them.
H. Sexually oriented businesses are permitted only in the Business Overlay
BA 1 District and shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) No sexually explicit business shall be conducted within 175 feet of
a residential district or use.
(2) Vehicular access to premises containing a sexually oriented
business shall be limited to Route 17.
(3) Sexually oriented businesses shall not operate prior to 9:00 a.m.
nor after 11:00 p.m.
(4) Any signage permitted for a sexually oriented business shall be
directed toward Route 17.
I. It is the intent of this subsection to include within the Business Overlay
Zone off-track wagering facilities and Off-Track wagering licensees. The
regulations relating to the filing and licensing of said facilities shall be
as set forth in the statue known as "Off-Track and Account Wagering
Act," N.J.S.A. 5:5-127 et seq. [Added 10-17-2001 by Ord. No.
841-01]
§ 185-109 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-109.1
177:676
A. The purpose of the Historic Home Overlay District is to ensure the
preservation of the Tyson House or Italianate mansion dating to the mid
19th century. The Tyson House is a historically significant local site.
B. Any development in the HH-O Zone shall be required to maintain the
historic integrity of the Tyson House. Under no circumstances shall the
demolition of the Tyson House or any significant feature thereof be
permitted. Any modifications to the structure that are necessary to
conduct a permitted use shall be performed in a manner consistent with
the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Properties.
C. Permitted uses in the HH-O Zone are as follows:
(1) Single-family residence.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast: an establishment providing overnight
accommodations and a morning meal in a dwelling unit provided to
transients for compensation. The owner/operator may or may not
reside on the premises.
(3) Professional office.
(4) Business services.
(5) Restaurants, excluding drive-through or drive-in restaurants.
(6) Art studio/gallery.
(7) Banquet/event facility: an establishment that provides a setting for
occasions such as weddings, corporate events, charitable benefits
and similar special events.
D. The bulk standards for the HH-O Zone are as follows:
(1) Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard: five feet (one)/15 feet (both).
(6) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(7) Maximum building coverage: 15%.
(8) Maximum improved coverage: 50%.
(9) Maximum building height: three stories.
E. Parking for all uses in the zone shall adhere to the standards in § 185-76
with the following additions/exceptions:
§ 185-109.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-109.1
177:677
§ 185-110. AH Affordable Housing District.182 [Amended 6-16-2010
by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11; 7-24-2019 by
Ord. No. 1144-19]
(1) Required number of parking spaces.
(a) Bed-and-breakfast: one per room, plus one per employee.
(b) Art studio/gallery: one per 300 square feet of gross floor area.
(c) Banquet/event facility: one per every two occupants, including
employees.
(2) Valet parking shall be a permitted accessory use for restaurants,
banquet and event facilities, and art studios and galleries.
A. Dwelling units.
(1) Residential density. The maximum permitted residential density
shall be 20 units per acre, exclusive of areas designated as flood
hazard areas, wetlands, wetland buffer areas, and steep sloping
lands.
(2) Mandatory set-aside. A 20% affordable set-aside is required for
developments that result in for-sale units. A 15% affordable setaside
is required for developments that result in for-rent units.
(3) Tract location. Affordable housing units shall be situated on the
development tract in locations no less desirable than market-priced
dwelling units within the development and shall be equally
accessible to common open space, community facilities and
shopping facilities.
(4) Additional provisions. See Article XVI for further provisions
regarding the development of affordable housing.
B. Distances between buildings; length of buildings; maximum number of
dwelling units per building. In the Affordable Housing Zone where
dwelling units are not being subdivided into individual lots, the
following shall apply:
(1) The minimum distance between buildings:
(a) Front to front: 75 feet.
(b) Front to side: 50 feet.
(c) Front to rear: 60 feet.
(d) Side to rear: 40 feet.
182. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 832-01, adopted 8-15-2001, changed the dwelling unit
distribution and district designation for certain lots within this district. A full copy of this
ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 185-109.1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-110
177:678
(e) Side to side: 40 feet.
(f) Rear to rear: 60 feet.
(2) Maximum building length (townhouse, duplex, flats or apartments):
200 feet.
(3) Maximum number of dwelling units per townhouse building: eight.
(4) Maximum number of dwelling units per building (duplexes or flats):
24.
C. Street requirements. The right-of-way and pavement widths shall be
adequate in size, loading and design to accommodate the maximum
traffic, parking and loading needs and access for firefighting and police
vehicles.
(1) All private internal residential roads and streets shall contain a
minimum pavement width of 24 feet for two-way streets and 20 feet
for one-way streets. Collector roadways shall minimally contain a
pavement width of 30 feet. All public streets shall minimally meet
the Township of Rochelle Park design standards for streets.
(2) All streets and roads, either dedicated public streets or privately
owned and maintained, or any combination thereof, shall be subject
to the laws of the Township of Rochelle Park as to the construction
of the same. Where an Official Map or Master Plan, or both, have
been adopted, the proposed street system shall conform to the
proposals and conditions shown thereon, except as may be
modified by the Planning Board or governing body, as provided by
law.
D. Utility improvements.
(1) The Affordable Housing Zone shall be served by a centralized water
and sanitary sewerage system, as defined herein.
(2) All utility improvements, including storm drainage systems,
sanitary sewage collection and disposal and water supply systems,
shall be in accordance with standards and procedures as
established by local, county and state regulations. Said
improvements shall be subject to review and approval by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, as well as
appropriate county and state agencies, where applicable. Water
supply facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the
Township Engineer, Fire Department and United Water Resources.
(3) Electric, gas, telephone and cable television service shall be
provided by the developer in concert with the appropriate public
utilities providing such service. Said service shall be provided as
part of an underground system.
§ 185-110 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-110
177:679
(4) If such underground facilities cannot reasonably be provided due to
topographic or geological conditions of the land due to technical
circumstances and if the landowner shall adequately demonstrate
the lack of feasibility of such an undertaking to the satisfaction of
the Board of Public Utilities, a waiver of this requirement may be
granted by the Planning Board.
E. Off-street parking requirements.
(1) Within the Affordable Housing Zone, all parking shall comply with
the Residential Site Improvement Standard of the State of New
Jersey.
(2) Each single-family dwelling, townhouse, duplex, triplex,
quadruplex or patio house or apartment shall minimally provide
one enclosed parking space for each two dwelling units. Said
enclosed parking spaces may include parking spaces within the
apartment, as a part of separate garage space, parking garage
space beneath the building or as a part of a parking deck.
(3) Each parking space shall be provided at a width of nine feet and a
length of 18 feet, except as provided for handicapped persons.
(4) Parking for handicapped persons shall be provided with a minimum
width of 12 feet and a length of 20 feet.
(5) Aisle width for all 90° parking shall be 24 feet wide.
(6) Off-street parking shall be suitably landscaped, screened, lighted
and conveniently located to the housing to be served. Parking will
also be suitably graded and improved and provided with adequate
drainage facilities.
(7) Parking shall be no closer than five feet to a residential building.
F. Emergency facilities and access.
(1) All housing developed in the Affordable Housing Zone shall be
suitably designed for emergency assistance.
(2) No housing unit shall be inaccessible to emergency services.
G. Buffer.
(1) A minimum fifteen-foot buffer shall be maintained along all external
lot lines, except that portion fronting on an existing street. The
buffer shall be maintained in its natural state. Where natural
vegetation is sparse or nonexistent, the landowner shall be
required to provide a year-round visual screen.
(2) No use or structure, including parking or loading, sewer easements
or retention or detention drainage facilities shall be permitted
within the required buffer area.
§ 185-110 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-110
177:680
§ 185-110.1. Affordable Housing Overlay-1 Zone. [Added 7-24-2019
by Ord. No. 1144-19]
(3) Driveway access or subsurface utilities may be permitted through a
mandatory buffer only when they extend perpendicular to the
mandatory buffer.
A. Purpose. The Affordable Housing Overlay-1 Zone (AHO-1) is to
establish an area for capturing the Township's unmet need from its
Third Round Fair Share Affordable Housing obligations, in conformance
with the requirements of the New Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985.
B. Applicability.
(1) The AHO-1 shall be applied to the lands on the Rochelle Park Tax
Map known as:
Block Lot(s)
80.01 1
87 32, 37, 39, 53, 1.01, 1.02, 1.03
88 1, 1.02, 5, 15
89 22, 28
90 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
91.01 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
91.02 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
94 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10
95 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18
109.03 2
(2) The Official Zoning Map of the Township of Rochelle Park is hereby
amended in accordance with the foregoing and is further
incorporated by reference.
C. Dwelling units.
(1) Residential density. The maximum permitted residential density
shall be 20 units per acre, exclusive of areas designated as flood
hazard areas, wetlands, wetland buffer areas, and steep sloping
lands.
(2) Mandatory set-aside. A 20% affordable set-aside is required for
developments that result in for-sale units. A 15% affordable setaside
is required for developments that result in for-rent units.
(3) Tract location. Affordable housing units shall be situated on the
development tract in locations no less desirable than market-priced
dwelling units within the development and shall be equally
§ 185-110 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-110.1
177:681
§ 185-110.2. Affordable Housing Overlay-2 Zone. [Added 7-24-2019
by Ord. No. 1144-19]
accessible to common open space, community facilities and
shopping facilities.
D. Compliance with other regulations and ordinances.
(1) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any use
permitted by the underlying zoning districts. The area and bulk
standards of each underlying zone district shall remain in full force
and effect unless in conflict with this section.
(2) All affordable units constructed within the overlay shall also comply
with Article XVI of the Township Code.
A. Purpose. The Affordable Housing Overlay-2 Zone (AHO-2) seeks to
provide an opportunity to develop affordable housing to meet the
Township's low- and moderate-income housing needs. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit any use permitted by the
underlying zoning districts.
B. Applicability.
(1) The AHO-2 shall be applied to the lands on the Rochelle Park Tax
Map known as:
Block Lot(s)
24.02 34, 39.03, 40.01, 40.02, 41.01
25.01 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.01, 8, 9, 10
(2) The Official Zoning Map of the Township of Rochelle Park is hereby
amended in accordance with the foregoing and is further
incorporated by reference.
C. Dwelling units.
(1) Residential density. The maximum permitted residential density
shall be 20 units per acre, exclusive of areas designated as flood
hazard areas, wetlands, wetland buffer areas. Flood hazard areas
shall be subject to the same standards as all other developments.
(2) Mandatory set-aside. A 20% affordable set-aside is required for
developments that result in for-sale units. A 15% affordable setaside
is required for developments that result in for-rent units.
(3) Tract location. Affordable housing units shall be situated on the
development tract in locations no less desirable than market-priced
dwelling units within the development and shall be equally
accessible to common open space, community facilities and
shopping facilities.
§ 185-110.1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-110.2
177:682
§ 185-111. Senior Citizen Accommodation District.
(4) Additional provisions. See Article XVI for further provisions
regarding the development of affordable housing.
A. All housing in the Senior Citizen Accommodation District shall be
developed in accordance with the following:
(1) The maximum number of dwelling units shall be 90 units. Of these,
a maximum of 25 units will be two-bedroom units.
(2) A minimum of nine low- and moderate-income units (four lowincome
and five moderate-income) must be provided. The
developer shall have the right to transfer via a regional
contribution agreement, at its own expense, as many as six units
(three low-income and three moderate-income) to a receiving
municipality subject to approval of the court.
(3) The construction of low- and moderate-income units shall be the
responsibility of the developer.
(4) Of the low- and moderate-income units, it shall be the developer's
obligation to provide at least 4% of the housing units for occupancy
by handicapped persons.
(5) At least 60% of the development shall be open space. This can
include buffer areas, dedicated parklands and conservation
easements.
(6) Open space shall be owned and maintained by the property owner
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
B. Street requirements; utilities; parking; environment. Street
requirements in the Senior Citizen Accommodation District shall be in
compliance with the following requirements:
(1) The right-of-way and pavement widths of all internal streets, roads
and vehicular traveled ways shall be determined from sound
planning and engineering standards in conformity with the
estimated needs of the full proposed development and the traffic to
be generated thereby. They shall be adequate in size, location and
design to accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading
needs and access for fire-fighting, police vehicles and other
emergency services.
(2) All private internal residential roads and streets shall contain a
minimum pavement width of 24 feet for two-way streets and 20 feet
for one-way streets. Collector roadways shall minimally contain a
pavement width of 30 feet. All public streets shall minimally meet
the Township of Rochelle Park design standards for streets.
(3) All streets and roads, either dedicated public streets or privately
owned and maintained, or any combination thereof, shall be subject
§ 185-110.2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-111
177:683
to the laws of the Township of Rochelle Park as to the construction
of the same.
(4) Where an Official Map or Master Plan, or both, have been adopted,
the proposed street system shall conform to the proposals and
conditions shown thereon, except as may be modified by the
Planning Board or governing body, as provided by law. [Amended
6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No.
1038-11]
C. Utility improvements.
(1) The district shall be served by a centralized water and sanitary
sewerage system, as defined herein.
(2) All utility improvements, including storm drainage systems,
sanitary sewage collection and disposal and water supply systems,
shall be in accordance with standards and procedures as
established by local, county and state regulations. Said
improvements shall be subject to review and approval by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, as well as
appropriate county and state agencies, where applicable. Water
supply facilities shall be subject to review and approval by the
Township Engineer, Fire Department and United Water Resources.
(3) Electric, gas, telephone and cable television service shall be
provided by the developer in concert with the appropriate public
utilities providing such service. Said service shall be provided as
part of an underground system.
(4) If such underground facilities cannot reasonably be provided due to
topographic or geological conditions of the land due to technical
circumstances and if the landowners shall adequately demonstrate
the lack of feasibility of such an undertaking to the satisfaction of
the Board of Public Utilities, a waiver of this requirement may be
granted by the Planning Board. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
D. Off-street parking requirements.
(1) Within the Senior Citizen Accommodation Zone, there shall be a
minimum of one parking space for every two dwelling units. In
addition, there shall be a minimum of 10 spaces for visitor parking.
(2) Parking shall be provided on-site or on a contiguous site, provided
that an access agreement and license for such parking is granted.
The agreement and license shall run in perpetuity for as long as the
facility relies on such parking. The agreement and license shall be
recorded. Access to contiguous sites for vehicular or pedestrian
traffic may be provided via easements, provided that they run in
perpetuity and remain in effect as long as the property is used for
Senior Citizen Accommodation District purposes and further
§ 185-111 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-111
177:684
§ 185-112. SCH Senior Citizen Housing District.183
provided that such documents are in recordable form. Adjacent and
contiguous properties may be used to satisfy parking, access and
roadway requirements, provided that such agreements are in the
form set forth above.
(3) Except where parking is provided within the residential structure,
no general parking area shall be located closer than five feet to a
residential building.
(4) Each parking space shall minimally be provided at a width of nine
feet and a length of 18 feet.
(5) Aisle width for all ninety-degree parking shall minimally be 24 feet
wide.
(6) Said parking will be suitably landscaped, screened, lighted and
conveniently located to the housing to be served. Said parking will
also be suitably graded and improved and provided with adequate
drainage facilities.
E. Emergency facilities and access.
(1) All housing developed within the district shall be suitably designed
for emergency assistance, if necessary.
(2) No housing unit shall be inaccessible to emergency service
facilities, notably police, fire-fighting and ambulance service.
A. Dwelling units; distribution.
(1) The maximum permitted residential density shall be 30 units per
acre, exclusive of areas designated as flood hazard areas, wetlands,
wetland transition areas and steep sloping lands.
(2) Single-family detached dwellings shall meet all of the area, yard
and bulk requirements of the Residential District.
(3) All business uses permitted in the Business A District shall comply
with the area, yard and bulk regulations of that district.
(4) Distribution of dwelling types.
(a) The distribution of bedroom units within each building shall be
governed by the requisite county, state or federal standards.
(b) All senior citizen dwelling units within the SCH Senior Citizen
Housing Zone shall be constructed as rental housing units.
183. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 832, adopted 8-15-2001, changed the dwelling unit
distribution and district designation for certain lots within this district. A full copy of this
ordinance is on file in the Township offices.
§ 185-111 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-112
177:685
B. Distances between buildings; length of buildings. In the Senior Citizen
Housing Zone, where dwelling units are not being subdivided into
individual lots, the following shall apply:
(1) Minimum distance between buildings:
(a) Front to front: 75 feet.
(b) Front to side: 50 feet.
(c) Front to rear: 60 feet.
(d) Side to rear: 50 feet.
(e) Side to side: 40 feet.
(f) Rear to rear: 60 feet.
(2) Maximum building length: 200 feet.
C. Open space. At least 20% of the total land area in a Senior Citizen
Housing Zone shall be designed for and devoted to open space. In
computing such twenty-percent requirement, common recreation areas
accessory to the residential use and required buffer areas shall be
included. Open space, as provided herein, shall be owned and
maintained by the property owner in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
D. Street requirements in the Senior Citizen Housing Zone shall be in
compliance with the following requirements:
(1) The right-of-way and pavement widths of all internal streets, roads
and vehicular traveled ways shall be determined from sound
planning and engineering standards in conformity with the
estimated needs of the full proposed development and the traffic to
be generated thereby. They shall be adequate in size, loading and
design to accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading
needs and access for fire-fighting, police vehicles and other
emergency services.
(2) All private internal residential roads and streets shall contain a
minimum pavement width of 24 feet for two-way streets and 20 feet
for one-way streets. Collector roadways shall minimally contain a
pavement width of 30 feet. All public streets shall minimally meet
the Township of Rochelle Park street standards.
(3) All streets and roads, either dedicated public streets or privately
owned and maintained or any combination thereof, shall be subject
to the laws of the Township of Rochelle Park as to the construction
of the roadway.
(4) Where an Official Map or Master Plan, or both, have been adopted,
the proposed street system shall conform to the proposals and
conditions shown thereon, except as may be modified by the
§ 185-112 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-112
177:686
Planning Board or governing body, as provided by law. [Amended
6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No.
1038-11]
E. Utility improvements.
(1) Senior citizen housing shall be served by a centralized water and
sanitary sewerage system, as defined herein. All utility
improvements, including storm drainage systems, sanitary sewage
collection and disposal and water supply systems, shall be in
accordance with standards and procedures as established by local,
county and state regulations. Said improvements shall be subject to
review and approval by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, as well as appropriate county and state
agencies, where applicable. Water supply facilities shall be subject
to review and approval by the Township Engineer, Fire Department
and United Water Resources.
(2) Electric, gas, telephone and cable television service shall be
provided by the developer in concert with the appropriate public
utilities providing such service. Said service shall be provided as
part of an underground system.
F. Off-street parking requirements in the Senior Citizen Housing Zone.
(1) Within the Senior Citizen Housing Zone, a minimum of one parking
space shall be provided for each senior citizen dwelling unit unless
the Planning Board finds that less than one space per unit is
adequate. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
(2) Each parking space shall be provided at a width of 10 feet and a
length of 18 feet.
(3) Parking for handicapped persons shall comply with ADA
requirements.
(4) Aisle width for all ninety-degree parking shall minimally be 24 feet
wide.
(5) Said parking will be suitably landscaped, screened, lighted and
conveniently located to the housing to be served. Said parking will
also be suitably graded and improved and provided with adequate
drainage facilities.
(6) Except where parking is provided within or beneath the residential
structure or upon a deck facility, no general parking area shall be
located closer than five feet to a residential building.
G. Emergency facilities and access in the Senior Citizen Housing Zone.
§ 185-112 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-112
177:687
(1) All senior citizen housing developed within the Senior Citizen
Housing Zone shall be suitably designed for emergency assistance,
if necessary.
(2) No housing unit shall be inaccessible to emergency service
facilities, notably police, fire-fighting and ambulance service.
H. Environmental standards in the Senior Citizen Housing Zone.
(1) Buffer area.
(a) The applicant shall provide and maintain a buffer zone, which
shall be no less than 25 feet in width, from all external lot lines
of the site, except for that portion which fronts upon an
existing external street or roadway. Such buffer zone shall be
kept in its natural state where wooded. When natural
vegetation is sparse or nonexistent, the landowner shall be
required to provide a year-round visual screen, as determined
by the Planning Board. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No.
1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
(b) No use or structure, including parking or loading areas, sewer
easements or retention or detention drainage facilities shall be
permitted within the required buffer area.
(c) Driveway access or subsurface utilities may be permitted
through a mandatory buffer only where said driveway or
underground utility extends perpendicular to the mandatory
buffer.
(2) Wetland areas. Except as permitted by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, no development or soil disturbance
shall be permitted within any area classified as a wetland area or a
wetland buffer area.
(3) Flood hazard designation.
(a) Except as permitted by New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection regulations, no principal use of any
site, including housing, shall be permitted within the flood
hazard area. The flood hazard area shall be determined by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) map, where
applicable.
(b) Recreation use shall be permitted within the flood hazard area,
subject to Township Engineer and NJDEP approval, where
applicable.
§ 185-112 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-112
177:688
ARTICLE XVI
Low- and Moderate-Income Standards
[Amended 7-24-2019 by Ord. No. 1145-19]
§ 185-113. Monitoring and reporting requirements.
The Township of Rochelle Park shall comply with the following monitoring
and reporting requirements regarding the status of the implementation of
its Court-approved Housing Element and Fair Share Plan:
A. Beginning on February 1, 2020, and on every anniversary of that date
through February 1, 2025, the Township agrees to provide annual
reporting of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity to the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable
Housing, or Local Government Services, or other entity designated by
the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing
Center (FSHC) and posted on the municipal website, using forms
developed for this purpose by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs (NJDCA), Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), or
Local Government Services (NJLGS). The reporting shall include an
accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the
source and amount of funds collected and the amount and purpose for
which any funds have been expended.
B. Beginning on February 1, 2020, and on every anniversary of that date
through February 1, 2025, the Township agrees to provide annual
reporting of the status of all affordable housing activity within the
Township through posting on the municipal website with a copy of such
posting provided to Fair Share Housing Center, using forms previously
developed for this purpose by COAH or any other forms endorsed by the
Court Appointed Special Master and FSHC.
C. By July 1, 2020, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the
Township will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to
FSHC, a status report as to its implementation of its plan and an
analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms
continue to present a realistic opportunity and whether any
mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or supplemented.
Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments to
the Township, with a copy to FSHC, regarding whether any sites no
longer present a realistic opportunity and should be replaced and
whether any mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a hearing
before the Court regarding these issues.
D. By March 1, 2020, and every third year thereafter, as required by
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, the Township will post on its municipal website,
with a copy provided to FSHC, a status report as to its satisfaction of its
very-low-income housing requirements, including its family very-lowincome
requirements. Such posting shall invite any interested party to
submit comments to the Township and FSHC on the issue of whether
§ 185-113 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-113
177:689
§ 185-113.1. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this article shall have the meanings given
in this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Township to
administer affordable units in accordance with this article, N.J.A.C. 5:93,184,
and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Township's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable housing development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a Township's fair share
obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that all the residents of the development wherein the unit
is situated are 62 years of age or older; or at least 80% of the units are
occupied by one person who is 55 years of age or older; or the development
the Township has complied with its very-low-income and family verylow-
income housing obligations.
184. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 185-113 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-113.1
177:690
has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development as "housing for older persons" as defined in Section
807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are
not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and
E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1, et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to, new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
§ 185-113.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-113.1
177:691
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the regional
median household income by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of the
regional median as defined by the DCA's adopted Regional Income Limits,
published annually by the DCA.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
§ 185-113.1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-113.1
177:692
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26, et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 185-113.2. Applicability.
§ 185-113.3. Alternative living arrangements.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Township of Rochelle Park
pursuant to the Township's most recently adopted Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan.
B. Moreover, this article shall apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and moderateincome
housing units.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15), provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court;
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
§ 185-113.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-113.3
177:693
§ 185-113.4. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 185-113.5. New construction.
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the Court.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the administrative agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units:
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very-lowincome
units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
regional median income by household size). The very-low-income
units shall be counted as part of the required number of low-income
units within the development.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be very-low- or low-income
units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
§ 185-113.3 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-113.5
177:694
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements:
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and the following:
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) If all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B(2)(a)
through (d) cannot be satisfied, then an interior accessible
route of travel must be provided between stories within an
individual unit, but if all of the terms of Subsection B(2)(a)
through (d) above have been satisfied, then an interior
accessible route of travel shall not be required between stories
within an individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a, et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that Rochelle Park has collected
funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the
adaptable entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled person who is
purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
§ 185-113.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-113.5
177:695
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Township of Rochelle Park's Affordable
Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible
entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have been
constructed with adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the Township of Rochelle Park for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an affordable
unit accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
Township of Rochelle Park for the conversion of adaptable
to accessible entrances.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of
the Township Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds
are deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
(g) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the Barrier
Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design:
(1) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall be integrated with the market units to the extent possible.
(2) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities
as the market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices:
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the most recently published regional weighted
average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by
HUD.
§ 185-113.5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-113.5
177:696
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very-low-income households, which very-low-income units shall be
part of the low-income requirement.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household; and
§ 185-113.5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-113.5
177:697
§ 185-113.6. Utilities.
§ 185-113.7. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rents of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the permitted percentage increase in
the Housing Consumer Price Index for the Northeast Urban Area.
This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units
constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit regulations
shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low-income
housing tax credits.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by the NJDCA for its Section 8 program.
§ 185-113.5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-113.7
177:698
§ 185-113.8. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this article for a period of at least 30 years, until Rochelle Park takes
action to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such action,
a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this article, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its
restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture
lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this article shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
§ 185-113.7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-113.9
177:699
§ 185-113.9. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowner association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 185-113.10. Buyer income eligibility.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See § 185-113.12.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the administrative agent may, upon
approval by the Township Committee, and may be subject to approval
by the Court-appointed Special Master or the Court, permit a moderateincome
purchaser to buy a low-income unit if and only if the
administrative agent can demonstrate that there is an insufficient
number of eligible low-income purchasers in the housing region to
permit prompt occupancy of the unit and all other reasonable efforts to
attract a low-income purchaser, including pricing and financing
incentives, have failed. Any such low-income unit that is sold to a
moderate-income household shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for a low-income unit.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
§ 185-113.9 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-113.10
177:700
§ 185-113.11. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership
unit; subordination.
§ 185-113.12. Capital improvements to ownership units.
D. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this section, and the administrative agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
B. With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
§ 185-113.10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-113.12
177:701
§ 185-113.13. Control periods for restricted rental units.
§ 185-113.14. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
article for a period of at least 30 years, until Rochelle Park takes action
to release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Bergen. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this article despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
article.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
§ 185-113.12 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-113.14
177:702
§ 185-113.15. Tenant income eligibility.
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this article.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of the regional median
household income by household size.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsections A and B above with the
administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on budgeting.
§ 185-113.14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-113.16
177:703
§ 185-113.16. Municipal Housing Liaison.
§ 185-113.17. Administrative agent.
An administrative agent may be either an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the Township, or the Township itself, through a
designated municipal employee, department, board, agency or committee,
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14(c). The fees of the administrative agent shall
be paid by the owners of the affordable units for which the services of the
administrative agent are required. The administrative agent shall perform
the duties and responsibilities of an administrative agent as set forth in
UHAC, including those set forth in §§ 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which
includes:
A. There is hereby created the position of Municipal Housing Liaison. The
Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Rochelle Park,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out to the administrative agent:
(1) Serving as Rochelle Park's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents
and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Rochelle Park's Fair
Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, submitting and posting all monitoring reports
as required by the Court and by this article;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as needed; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
B. The Township of Rochelle Park shall designate one or more
administrative agent(s) to administer and to affirmatively market the
affordable units constructed in the Township in accordance with UHAC
and this article. An operating manual for each affordable housing
program shall be provided by the administrative agent(s) to be adopted
by resolution of the governing body and may be subject to approval of
the Court-appointed Special Master or the Court. The operating
manual(s) shall be available for public inspection in the office of the
Township Clerk, in the office of the Municipal Housing Liaison, and in
the office(s) of the administrative agent(s). The Municipal Housing
Liaison shall supervise the work of the administrative agent(s).
A. Affirmative marketing:
§ 185-113.16 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-113.17
177:704
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the affirmative marketing plan of
the Township of Rochelle Park and the provisions of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15; and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household certification:
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located;
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Township of Rochelle Park when
referring households for certification to affordable units; and
(7) Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable
housing units in the Township of Rochelle Park: Fair Share Housing
Center, the New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, the Latino
Action Network, the Bergan County NAACP, the Bergen Urban
League, and the Bergen County Housing Coalition.
C. Affordability controls:
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
§ 185-113.17 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-113.17
177:705
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Bergen County Register of Deeds or Bergen County Clerk's office
after the termination of the affordability controls for each
restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
D. Resales and rerentals:
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the administrative agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- (or very-low-) and moderate-income households
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental.
E. Processing requests from unit owners:
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
article;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central air
conditioning systems;
(3) Notifying the Township of an owner's intent to sell a restricted unit;
and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement:
(1) Securing annually from the Township a list of all affordable housing
units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners, and
notifying all such owners that they must either move back to their
unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
§ 185-113.17 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-113.17
177:706
§ 185-113.18. Affirmative marketing requirements.
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
administrative agent;
(3) Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family
homes), a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the administrative
agent, to be approved by the Township Committee and the Court,
setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls.
G. Additional responsibilities:
(1) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
(2) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet the
Court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this article.
(3) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
A. The Township of Rochelle Park shall adopt by resolution an affirmative
marketing plan, subject to approval of the Court, that is compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
affirmative marketing plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. It is a continuing program that directs marketing activities
§ 185-113.17 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-113.18
177:707
§ 185-113.19. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
toward Housing Region 1 and is required to be followed throughout the
period of restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 1, comprised of
Bergen, Hudson, Passaic, and Sussex Counties.
D. The Township has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
affirmative marketing plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The administrative agent designated by the
Township of Rochelle Park shall implement the affirmative marketing
plan to assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building
and/or the County Library for each county within the housing region;
the Township municipal administration building and the municipal
library; and the developer's rental office. Applications shall be mailed to
prospective applicants upon request.
I. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing an
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the Township shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recoupment of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
§ 185-113.18 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-113.19
177:708
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the Township
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The Township may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11
alleging a violation or violations of the regulations governing the
affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or tenant is
adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of the
regulations governing affordable housing units the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment into the Township of Rochelle Park
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent
illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
(2) The Township may file a court action in the Superior Court seeking
a judgment that would result in the termination of the owner's
equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a mortgage
foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if the same
were a judgment of default of the first purchase money mortgage
and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderate-income
unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
Township, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase
money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the Township, including
attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his right to
possession terminated as well as his title conveyed pursuant to
the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
§ 185-113.19 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-113.19
177:709
any, shall be applied to reimburse the Township for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the Township in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the Township in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the Township for the owner and shall be held in
such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the Township
for such. Failure of the owner to claim such balance within
the two-year period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of
such balance to the Township. Any interest accrued or earned
on such balance while being held in escrow shall belong to and
shall be paid to the Township, whether such balance shall be
paid to the owner or forfeited to the Township.
(c) Foreclosure by the Township due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the
restrictions of the regulations governing affordable housing
units as the same apply to the low- and moderate-income unit.
Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale,
subject to the restrictions and provisions of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. The owner determined
to be in violation of the provisions of this plan and from whom
title and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale
shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the Township may acquire title to the lowand
moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the first
purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the Township shall obligate
the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified
purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
Township, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
§ 185-113.19 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-113.19
177:710
§ 185-113.20. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant to
this article shall be filed in writing with the Court.
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit
as permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
§ 185-113.19 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-113.20
177:711

ARTICLE XVII
(Reserved)185
§ 185-114. through § 185-117. (Reserved)
185. Editor's Note: Former Art. XVII, Liens and Enforcement on Sales Units, was repealed
7-24-2019 by Ord. No. 1145-19.
§ 185-114 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-114
177:713

ARTICLE XVIII
Regulations Governing Certain Accessory Structures and Uses
§ 185-118. Accessory structures and uses in residential districts.
No accessory building or structure shall be built on any lot on which there
is not a principal building or structure.
A. Accessory structures or uses shall not be located in the required front
yard or within the front half of the side yard of any residential zone and
may be erected anywhere within the required rear yard, except as
provided herein:
(1) In all residential zones, no accessory structure or use shall be
located within five feet of a side or rear property line, provided that
accessory structures, other than patios and decks, which are
greater than 150 square feet in area shall be set back minimally 10
feet from side and rear property lines. [Amended 3-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 904-04]
(2) Accessory structures shall be set back minimally 10 feet from the
principal building and four feet from another accessory building.
(3) Light posts, mailboxes, fences, signs and retaining walls shall be
permitted within the required front yard of any residential use. Offstreet
parking is also permitted in a front yard, restricted to the
driveway paved area. Mailboxes within the required front yard
setback shall be limited to those intended specifically for
residential mail and which are owned and maintained by the United
States Postal Service. [Amended 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
(4) With respect to a building or portion of a building used exclusively
as a garage or a storage shed, used for storage of personalty of the
owner/occupier of the premises, whether attached or detached, the
minimum required side yard and rear yard abutting such garage or
storage shed shall be three feet, a shed being a small structure
built for storage, not to exceed 13 feet in length, 12 feet in width
and eight feet in height. The three-foot side yard setback shall
include the driveway. [Added 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 811;
amended 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
B. No accessory structure or use in a residential zone shall exceed a
height of 18 feet and one story, except as specifically provided herein.
The first floor height shall be limited to nine feet as measured from the
top of the concrete floor or finished floor to the top of the sill plate.
[Amended 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
C. No accessory structure or use shall occupy an area greater than 10% of
the area of the rear yard.
§ 185-118 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-118
177:715
§ 185-119. Accessory structures and uses in nonresidential
districts.
No accessory building or structure shall be built on any lot on which there
is not a principal building or structure.
§ 185-120. Private garages in residential zones.
D. When an accessory structure or use is attached to the principal
building, it shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this
chapter applicable to the principal building or use.
E. In the case of a through lot, no accessory structure or use shall
encroach upon that fourth of the lot depth nearest each street upon
which the lot has frontage.
F. No accessory structure shall be used for human habitation.
G. Ground-mounted air conditioning units must be installed in the rear
yard or, alternatively, be installed at least 10 feet from the side property
line. In addition, appropriate screening must be installed surrounding
the unit to maintain a sound barrier, Said screening may be by fencing
or landscaping, as approved by the Building Department. [Added
3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
A. Accessory structures or uses shall not be located in the required front
yard of a nonresidential zone, except that off-street parking spaces shall
be permitted, but in no case shall said parking lot or portion thereof be
permitted closer than 15 feet from the street line.
B. Accessory structures or uses shall not be located within five feet of a
side or rear lot line. Accessory structures shall be minimally 15 feet
from the principal building.
C. No off-street loading area or loading facility shall be permitted in a front
yard.
D. No accessory structure or use in a nonresidential zone shall exceed a
height of 20 feet and 1 1/2 stories, except as provided elsewhere in this
chapter.
E. In any nonresidential zone, when an accessory structure or use is
attached to the principal building, it shall comply in all respects with
the requirements of this chapter applicable to the principal building or
use.
F. No accessory structure or use shall occupy an area greater than 15% of
the area of the rear yard.
A. Private garages shall be permitted as accessory uses in all residential
zones, either as detached structures or as part of the main building, for
the storage of no more than three automobiles which shall be owned by
the occupants of the main building.
§ 185-118 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-120
177:716
§ 185-121. Swimming pools and tennis courts. [Amended 4-18-2001
by Ord. No. 829]
Swimming pools and tennis courts shall not be located within six feet of a
property line nor closer to a street line than the rear wall of the dwelling to
which they are accessory uses.
§ 185-122. Fences and walls.
B. Garages are limited in size to 30% of the first floor footprint of the
principal structure unless specifically permitted in another section of
this Code. [Added 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
A. On corner lots, the tennis court shall not be located any closer than 35
feet from either street.
B. The installation of lights for tennis courts is prohibited.
C. Swimming pools and tennis courts shall be suitably fenced in
accordance with the Township requirements as set forth in Subsection
E below186 and the following: The edge of the pool shall be set back a
minimum of six feet from all property lines and no part of the pool shall
be nearer to any street line than the rear wall of the main building
which is located nearest to the street nor closer to the rear or side wall
than the maximum depth of the pool.
(1) Pool setbacks shall be measured from the outermost portion of the
pool structure, decking, walkways, stairs, ladders or other physical
attachments to the pool. [Added 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
A. No fence or wall shall be erected, altered or constructed in any
residential zone which shall exceed six feet in height above ground
level, except that no fence, hedge or wall exceeding three feet in height
shall be permitted in the front yard. The front yard of a corner lot shall
be considered the frontage on each intersecting street. In that case, the
fence, hedge or wall may not exceed three feet in height. [Amended
7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 834]
B. No fence or wall shall be erected, altered or constructed in any
nonresidential zone which shall exceed eight feet in height above
ground level.
C. Notwithstanding the above provisions, if it is demonstrated that a
retaining wall of a height greater than that set forth above is necessary,
said retaining wall shall be terraced to enable suitable plantings to be
installed along the retaining wall.
D. Notwithstanding the above provisions, no fence or wall shall be erected,
altered or constructed in any zone which shall violate the provisions set
forth regarding sight triangles.
186. Editor's Note: See § 185-122E.
§ 185-120 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-122
177:717
§ 185-123. Signs.
Signs shall be regulated in accordance with Article XX, Signs.
§ 185-124. Office of resident professional.
E. Fences surrounding the perimeter of tennis courts shall be exempt from
the above requirements. Said fence shall not exceed 12 feet in height
above ground level and shall not be closer than two feet to any side or
rear property line nor be located in any required front yard.
F. The finished side of a fence shall face the adjoining properties.
G. Barbed wire is permitted only on fences in Industrial Districts. Three
strands of barbed wire are permitted and may extend no higher than 12
inches above the top of the fence on extension arms, sloping 45º to the
owners side. Such an extension is included in the maximum permitted
height of 8 feet for a fence.
H. Electrical devices hazardous to human life are prohibited on all fences.
I. All fences shall be constructed to resist wind pressure of 15 pounds per
square foot of the net exposed surface of the fence.
J. Hedges may be placed in lieu of fences, with the same height
restrictions.
A. An office of a resident professional shall not exceed 30% of one floor of
the building in which it is located.
B. An office of a resident professional shall have a maximum of two
employees and one professional and shall provide a minimum of four
parking spaces in a double-width driveway.
C. Signs. Signage for the office of a resident professional shall be subject
to the following limitations: [Added 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04]
(1) Only one sign shall be permitted which shall be no larger than 18
inches in height and 24 inches in width.
(2) The sign shall be limited to two colors.
(3) The sign shall only contain the following information:
(a) Name of individual.
(b) Type of professional office.
(c) Telephone number.
(4) The location of the sign shall be on the wall nearest to the principal
entrance to the home occupancy and within 10 feet of this
entrance.
§ 185-122 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-124
177:718
§ 185-125. Child-care center facilities.
Application for a child-care center as a permitted accessory use shall
comply with the following:
§ 185-126. Regulations governing certain conditional uses.
(5) The sign shall be located no more than eight feet high as measured
from grade to the bottom of the sign.
A. A child-care center shall be permitted to occupy as an accessory use a
portion of a building which is occupied as a principal permitted use in
all nonresidential zones.
B. This use shall be available to the occupants of the building and may also
be available to others, provided that:
(1) The facility is licensed by the New Jersey Department of Human
Services.
(2) A minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area per shift per
child shall be provided. Play areas shall be permitted in the rear
and side yards only and shall be enclosed by a fence at least four
feet in height and landscaped and screened from adjoining
properties.
(3) The area and bulk requirements applicable to the zone in which the
site is located shall be complied with.
(4) No more than 15% of a building shall be occupied as a day-care
center.
(5) No additional parking shall be required.
A. Places of worship. Churches, temples and other places of worship shall
be governed by the following regulations:
(1) Area, bulk and yard requirements:
Minimum lot area (square feet) 200,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 100
Minimum lot depth (feet) 200
Minimum front yard (feet) 25
Minimum side yards (feet) 15
Minimum rear yard (feet) 20
Maximum building coverage
(percent)
50%
Maximum impervious coverage
(percent)
70%
§ 185-124 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-126
177:719
Maximum building height (stories/
feet)
2.5/35
Minimum buffer width (feet) 10
(2) Where two or more buildings are located on a site, they shall be
separated by a yard area of minimally 40 feet.
B. Public, private or parochial school.
(1) All nonpublic schools, where permitted, shall be subject to the
following:
(a) Said school or instruction shall be a nonprofit organization
within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Act and registered
effectively as such thereunder.
(b) Such school shall have as its prime purpose the general
education of students in the arts and sciences and shall be
licensed by the State Department of Education as required by
law.
(c) Any school permitted under this section shall be permitted on
the principal roadways as identified in the Township Land Use
Plan.
(2) All schools permitted herein shall comply with all applicable
regulations of the State Board of Education and to the following:
Minimum lot area (acres) 25,000
Minimum lot width (feet) 100
Minimum front yard (feet) 30
Minimum side yards (feet) 20
Minimum rear yard (feet) 25
Maximum building coverage (percent) 25%
Maximum impervious coverage (percent) 50%
Maximum building height (stories/feet) 2.5/35
Minimum buffer (feet) 50
Minimum recreation area per pupil (square
feet)
100
C. Essential services.
(1) Enclosed structures. Such public utility services as and including
electric substations, transformers, switches and auxiliary
apparatus serving a distribution area, water well sites and pumping
stations are permitted in all zones and shall be subject to the
following regulations:
§ 185-126 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-126
177:720
(a) The location, design and operation of such facility may not
adversely affect the character of the surrounding residential
area. Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall
be provided. Such facilities shall be adequately landscaped and
screened.
(b) The location of the structures regulated in this section shall
comply with the setback requirements of the zone in which
they are located; provided,however, that telephone cabinets
and electric relay stations may be located at property lines.
Such facilities shall be landscaped and screened in order to
minimize their visual impact.
(2) Open structures and facilities.
(a) Such uses shall be limited to the erection, construction,
alteration or maintenance by public utilities or other municipal
or governmental agencies, of electric, gas, water transmission
or distribution/collection systems, telephone and cable
television lines, communication, water supply or sewage
treatment and collection systems, including poles, wires mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, lines, hydrants and
other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate
services by the public health, safety or general welfare, but not
including buildings.
(b) Adequate landscaping or screening shall be provided where
applicable.
D. Veterans, civic and community clubs. All buildings shall be a minimum
of 25 feet from any property line.
E. Satellite earth station antenna.
(1) For the purposes of this section, a "satellite earth station antenna"
shall mean any apparatus of a concave or reflective dish-like
configuration which is designed for the purpose of receiving
telephone, television, radio, microwave, satellite or similar signals.
(2) Application for the installation of a satellite earth station antenna
shall require a building permit . The following criteria must be met:
(a) No more than one antenna shall be permitted on a lot and such
antenna shall be accessory to the principal permitted use on
the lot.
(b) The satellite antenna shall be designed for use by the
occupants of the main building, provided that in the case of
multifamily districts, the antennas shall be designed for use by
the occupants of the multifamily dwelling units.
§ 185-126 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-126
177:721
(c) The above provision with respect to multifamily residential
districts does not confer any franchise rights upon the
applicant. The applicant shall demonstrate that such use does
not violate any existing cable television or other franchise
agreements.
(d) Ground-mounted antenna shall be located in the rear yard only.
It shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the lot line.
(e) The diameter of a satellite antenna (parabolic dish) shall not be
greater than 6.5 feet. When mounted, the overall height from
the rear ground level to the lowest point of the satellite
antenna shall not exceed two feet.
(f) The antenna shall be screened by plantings or a fence
minimally four feet high.
(3) Tower-mounted satellite dish antennas are prohibited.
F. Commercial antennas. [Amended 6-19-2002 by Ord. No. 855-02]
(1) For the purpose of this section "commercial antenna" shall mean
any form of apparatus which is designated for the purpose of
sending or receiving television, radio, microwave, satellite, cellular
telephone or similar signals and is intended to be used in
connection with the production of income or which is designated to
be used by third parties other than those residing on the property
on which the antenna is located. A commercial antenna is
considered a structure.
(2) Commercial antennas and towers are limited to the following
locations:
(a) Department of Public Works, ambulance and fire house
buildings (Block 63) for ground-mounted towers only;
(b) Municipal complex (Block 83.01) for building-mounted
commercial antennas only;
(c) Telephone building (Block 93, Lot 1) for building-mounted
commercial antennas only;
(d) Bell Atlantic buildings (Block 84.01, Lots 2.01 and 2.02) for
building-mounted commercial antennas only;
(e) Former Toys R Us building (Block 103.02, Lot 4) for buildingmounted
commercial antennas only.
(f) Public Storage property (Block 34, Lot 2) for building-mounted
commercial antennas only. [Amended 3-17-2004 by Ord. No.
904-04]
(3) Site plan approval is required for commercial antennas.
§ 185-126 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-126
177:722
(4) Commercial antennas are subject to the following dimension
restrictions:
(a) The height of the antenna from ground level, inclusive of its
mounting device, commonly known as a "tower," shall be no
greater than 150 feet.
(b) Where said antenna is located on the roof of an existing
structure, no antenna shall rise above the top of the building in
excess of 60 inches.
(5) No more than one tower shall be located on each site. A single
tower shall not have more than two commercial antenna carriers
utilizing the same and not more than 15 antennas shall be installed
on a single tower.
(6) Screening should be provided to minimize the impact on the
character of surrounding lands and the skyline. Screening methods
may include, but are not limited to, painting, landscaping, selection
of antenna materials and design.
(7) Security fencing may be required to be placed around the base of
the antenna and its mounting device.
(8) Where said antenna is located on the roof of an existing structure,
no more than two commercial antenna carriers shall be permitted
on a single structure and no more than 15 antennas shall be
installed on a single structure.
G. Home occupation.
(1) A home occupation shall be incidental to the use of a dwelling unit
for residential purposes. The area set aside for home occupations
shall not exceed 30% of the total floor area of such residence,
provided that in no event shall more than 500 square feet of the
floor area of the dwelling unit be used in connection with a home
occupation or for storage purposes in connection with a home
occupation.
(2) Only members of the immediate family permanently residing on the
premises shall be employed in the home occupation.
(3) A home occupation may be open to the public between 8:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m. but shall not be open on Sundays or legal holidays.
(4) No more than one home occupation shall be permitted within any
single dwelling unit.
(5) A home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal
building. No home occupation nor any storage of goods, materials
or products connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in
accessory buildings or attached or detached garages, driveways,
walkways or yards.
§ 185-126 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-126
177:723
(6) Merchandise shall not be displayed or offered for sale either within
or outside of the residence.
(7) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the dwelling
or premises or any visible evidence of the conduct of a home
occupation. No advertising display signs shall be permitted.
(8) No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes or odor detectable to the
normal senses off the property. No equipment or process shall be
used which creates visual or audible electrical interference in any
radio or television receiver off the premises or causes fluctuations
in line voltage off the premises.
(9) The use shall not generate additional pedestrian or vehicular traffic
beyond that which is attributable to a single-family dwelling as
determined by the Institute of Transportation Engineers Handbook
on Trip Generation, plus not more than two deliveries of products
or materials per week.
(10) The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial
vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises, other
than one vehicle not to exceed 3/4 ton owned by the resident of the
dwelling, which shall be parked in an adequate off-street parking
area.
(11) The use shall not require additional off-street parking spaces for
clients or customers of the home occupation.
H. Automobile service station.
(1) No automobile service station shall be located within 200 feet of a
dwelling, school, place of worship, hospital, funeral home, theater,
library, firehouse, municipal use or any place of public assembly.
(2) Vehicular access to or exit from a service station shall not be closer
to the intersection of any two streets than 50 feet, nor shall any
such drive be located within 30 feet of any boundary line of any
residential district or residential lot.
(3) Fuel pumps shall be permitted within the required front yard but in
no event closer than 15 feet to street lines, property lines and roadwidening
easement lines. Canopies above fuel pump islands may
extend to within 15 feet of a street line. [Amended 12-20-2000 by
Ord. No. 811]
(4) All services or repairs, other than such minor items as the changing
and filling of tires or the sale of gasoline or oil, shall be conducted
within the confines of the building. No outdoor hydraulic or
mechanical lifts shall be permitted.
(5) Automobile service stations shall require a minimum lot area of
15,000 square feet with at least 100 feet of street frontage.
§ 185-126 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-126
177:724
(6) Sales and display of vehicles is prohibited.
(7) There shall not be outdoor display or sales of commodities
unrelated to automobile service and gasoline sales. No other use,
other than an automobile service station, as defined herein, shall be
permitted on a lot developed with an automobile service station.
[Amended 11-12-2015 by Ord. No. 1090-15]
(8) Hours of operation shall be limited to between 6:00 a.m. to 11:00
p.m.
(9) In addition to the regulations contained in Article XX, Signs, the
following sign controls shall be imposed:
(a) One freestanding pylon sign bearing the brand, trade name or
trademark and unit prices of the service station, not exceeding
40 square feet in area on each side, shall be permitted. The
lowest point of the sign shall not be less than 10 feet from the
average grade elevation below the sign, nor shall any part of
the sign be more than 25 feet above ground level.
(b) No sign shall be permitted on a canopy.
(c) There shall be permitted signs to be attached to fuel pumps
indicating the price per gallon of fuel, provided that such signs
do not exceed 1.0 square feet in area per sign per individual
pump dispensing mechanism.
(d) Permitted signage may be illuminated during business hours.
No signage shall be illuminated after the service station is
closed for business.
(e) No illumination, other than security lighting, shall be
permitted after business hours.
(f) Lettering or other insignia which are a structural part of the
gasoline pumps, as manufactured, shall be permitted.
(g) Credit card signs may be placed on or near the gasoline pump
islands, not to exceed a maximum 1.0 square feet per sign per
island.
(h) Not more than two nonpermanent signs located inside the
property line advertising services and product prices shall be
permitted, provided that each sign shall not exceed nine
square feet in area on each side. All nonpermanent signs shall
be removed from public display during nonbusiness hours.
I. Motels in the Business B and Industrial B Districts.
(1) Maximum building height: 3 stories/40 feet (includes elevator
shafts and rooftop appurtenances).
(2) Minimum building height: 3 stories/36 feet.
§ 185-126 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-126
177:725
(3) Minimum lot area: 2 acres.
(4) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(5) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(6) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(7) Minimum front yard: 50 feet, plus 10 feet of planted area.
(8) Minimum side yard: 25 feet, except that where it abuts a residential
zone, an additional twenty-five-foot buffer shall be provided.
(9) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet, except that where it abuts a
residential zone, an additional twenty-five-foot buffer will be
provided.
(10) Minimum buffer: The buffer shall not be used for business or
industrial purposes, nor for parking or ingress and egress of motor
vehicles, and shall include and provide for landscaping which shall
screen the premises from the adjoining residential district.
(11) Exterior treatment: Exterior walls shall be finished with brick and
stone or precast concrete or exposed aggregate panels, including
but not limited to metal and glass window walls and finished on all
four sides.
(12) Minimum planted area: Minimum planted area must consist of 2%
of the site, excluding buffer areas.
(13) Minimum parking: Parking is required at one space per motel unit
plus one space per employee on the maximum shift. If there is more
than one use on premises, the required parking shall be the
combined requirement for each use as set forth in Table 1, Site
Design Criteria.
(14) Maximum number of units: 50, with an inner lobby and interior
corridors.
(15) Access to commercial facilities: From interior of building; direct
public entrance from outside is permitted for restaurants.
(16) Residency limitation: 30 days for guests.
(17) Accessory uses: Offices, swimming pools, cabanas, lounge, meeting
rooms, restaurants.
J. Nursing homes and residential health care facilities in Business and
Industrial A Districts.
(1) Maximum building height: 3/36.
(2) Minimum lot area: 2 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
§ 185-126 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-126
177:726
(4) Minimum lot depth: 200 feet.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 30%.
(6) Minimum front yard: 50 feet, except that if the lot is irregularly
shaped, the developer shall have the right to designate the front
yard.
(7) Minimum side yard: 25 feet, except that where it abuts a residential
zone, an additional twenty-foot buffer will be provided between
adjacent residential properties; a ten-foot buffer is required on
each side of a roadway.
(8) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet, except that if the lot is irregularly
shaped, the developer shall have the right to designate the rear
yard.
(9) Buffer: The buffer shall not be used for business or industrial
purposes, nor for parking or ingress and egress of motor vehicles,
and shall include and provide for landscaping or the erection of
such fences or walls which shall screen the premises from the
adjoining residential district.
(10) Exterior treatment: Exterior walls shall be finished with brick and
stone or precast concrete or exposed aggregate panels, including
but not limited to metal and glass window walls and finished on all
four sides.
(11) Screening: Where a nursing home or residential health care facility
abuts a residential zone or residential use, sufficient screening
shall be provided, as determined by the approving authority.
K. Billboards.187 [Added 12-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1153-19]
(1) Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this subsection is to permit billboards as a
conditional use in certain locations along the east side of Route
17 in the Township's Industrial Zone.
(b) The Township recognizes that billboards are different in scope,
size and purpose from other types of signs. The intent of this
subsection is to allow for the construction of billboards in
locations along Route 17, visible to the motoring public, that
provide a reasonable opportunity for commercial and
noncommercial speech.
(c) The Township further recognizes that lighting, clearing and
trimming of landscaping and aesthetics associated with
billboards can have a detrimental effect on the quiet enjoyment
of residential neighborhoods in the Township reasonable
187. Editor's Note: See § 185-131 for the definition of "billboard."
§ 185-126 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-126
177:727
§ 185-127. Nonconforming uses, structures or lots.
standard reenacted herein to regulate the placement of
billboards.
(2) Conditional use standards.
(a) Billboards shall only be erected on properties with frontage on
Route 17.
(b) When a billboard is constructed on a lot with other buildings or
structures, the billboard shall maintain a minimum distance of
50 feet from any other building or structure.
(c) Billboards shall not be located closer than 2,000 linear feet
from any other billboard on the same side of the highway. This
distance requirement shall apply to any new billboard and any
existing billboard, including any preexisting, nonconforming
billboard.
(d) Billboards shall be a minimum distance of 250 feet from any
property in the R Residential Zone boundary.
(e) Billboards shall demonstrate compliance with the New Jersey
Department of Transportation outdoor advertising regulations
at N.J.A.C. 16:41C.
(f) No trees, branches, shrubs or other landscaping shall be
removed for the installation of any billboards in accordance
with this subsection.
A. Any lawful nonconforming use which existed at the time of the passage
of this chapter may be continued and any existing building or structure
designed, arranged or devoted to a nonconforming use may be
reconstructed or structurally altered, subject to the following: such
building or structure shall in no case be enlarged or expanded unless
the use therein is changed to a conforming use. An exception, however,
shall be permitted whenever a one-family required a variance to permit
its construction or expansion. In such case, the building may thereafter
be enlarged without the need for application to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment for any additional variances to the extent only of adding a
second story dormer(s) to permit the use of said second story to the full
limits of the height of the second story. In the event there is a cessation
of the nonconforming use for a period of 12 consecutive months, the use
shall be presumed to be abandoned. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
B. Maintenance may be made to a nonconforming use, structure or lot,
provided that the maintenance work does not change the use, expand
the building or the functional use of the building, increase the area of a
lot used for a nonconforming purpose or increase the nonconformity in
any manner.
§ 185-126 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-127
177:728
C. Building additions. Any existing structure with a permitted use located
on a conforming or nonconforming lot which violates any yard
requirements may have additions to the principal building, and/or an
accessory building may be constructed without an appeal for a
variance, provided that the total permitted building coverage is not
exceeded and the accessory building and/or the addition does not
violate any other requirements of this chapter.
D. Subdivision of lots. An existing lot whose area and/or dimensions are
sufficient to permit a subdivision, but where a structure exists on the lot
with one or more setback violations, may nevertheless be subdivided
without an appeal for a variance, provided that the subdivision itself
does not create any new zoning violations and does not increase the
severity of the existing setback violation such as moving the lot line
even closer to the existing building.
E. Restoration and repairs.
(1) Any nonconforming building, structure or use existing on the
effective date of this chapter which has been condemned or
damaged by fire, explosion, flood, windstorm or act of God shall be
examined by the following three people: the Township Engineer,
the owner or an architect or engineer selected by the owner and a
third person agreed to by the Township Engineer and the owner. If
the value of repairing the condition is greater than 50% of the value
of replacing the entire structure, it shall be considered completely
destroyed and may be rebuilt to the original specifications only
upon approval of a use variance as provided by state statutes.
(2) Where the value of repairing the condition is determined to be less
than 50% of the value of replacing the entire structure, the
nonconforming structure or use may be rebuilt and used for the
same purpose as before, provided that it does not exceed the
height, area and bulk of the original structure. The reconstruction
shall commence within 12 consecutive months of the date the
building was damaged or condemned with the reconstruction
carried out without interruption; otherwise. the damaged structure
shall not be rebuilt as a nonconforming use or building.
F. Any structure which will, as a result of the adoption of this subsection,
become nonconforming, may continue as a preexisting nonconforming
structure. However, in the event that the owner of said property seeks
to expand, rebuild or otherwise modify the structure in a manner which
will further expand or intensify the nonconforming aspect of the
property, a variance will be required. Any such variance will be
reviewed and acted upon by the Zoning Board of Adjustment within its
sole discretion in a manner which is consistent with law. [Added
6-19-2002 by Ord. No. 855-02; amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No.
1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
§ 185-127 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-127
177:729

ARTICLE XIX
Supplementary Zoning Provisions
§ 185-128. Buffer and planting requirements.
A. A landscape buffer shall be provided within any nonresidential zone and
for any nonresidential use where a development abuts a residential
zone or residentially developed property. The buffer shall provide a
year-round visual screen to minimize adverse impacts from the site on
adjacent properties. The following buffer area and landscaping
requirements shall apply:
Zone Buffer Width
Business A, B, C and NB 20 feet
Industrial A and B, Business
Overlay BA 1
20 feet
B. Buffer areas shall be contiguous with residential property lines and
shall be uniform in width.
C. If the buffer is less than 20 feet wide, the applicant may be required to
erect and landscape a six-foot-high stockade fence within the buffer
area parallel to the lot line of the abutting residential lot.
D. Buffer areas shall be maintained and kept clean of all debris, rubbish,
weeds and tall grass. Any screen planting shall be maintained
permanently and any plant material which does not live shall be
replaced within one year or one growing season.
E. No structure, activity, storage of materials, driveways or parking of
vehicles shall be permitted in the buffer area, except permitted signs as
specified in the district regulations.
F. Requirements for planting in buffer area.
(1) A solid and continuous landscaped screen shall be planted and
maintained to conceal parking and loading areas, eliminate the
glare of vehicle lights throughout the year and enhance the
building from the abutting residential areas. The landscaped
screen shall consist of evergreen trees, such as hemlock, Douglas
fir, Norway spruce, etc. Evergreen trees shall not be less than five
feet high when planted and the lowest branches shall be not more
than one foot above the ground. In the event that the existing
evergreen trees do not cover the required area from the ground,
said landscaping screen shall be supplemented with evergreen
shrubbery.
(2) In addition to the landscaped screen, shade trees shall be planted
by the applicant at a distance of not more than 40 feet from each
other.
§ 185-128 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-128
177:731
§ 185-129. Tree preservation.
(3) If the buffer area includes existing growth of evergreen and
deciduous trees and shrubbery, but not enough to provide a
suitable screen as required above, existing trees and shrubbery
may remain and shall be supplemented by additional evergreen
plantings to provide the required landscaped screen. In the event
that the approving authority finds that further plantings of
evergreens will not grow satisfactorily in said buffer areas,
stockade fence(s) six feet high shall be erected in the buffer area.
(4) The approving authority shall have the power to waive any of the
requirements or details specified above if it determines an
adequate buffer can be provided in less than the required width
while maintaining the purposes of this section. The approving
authority, when considering waiving any of the buffer
requirements, shall review the proposed plat and the standards and
purposes of this chapter and, to these ends, shall consider the
location of buildings, parking areas, outdoor illumination and
topographic features of the area and existing features, such as
trees and streams; the efficiency, adequacy and safety of the
proposed layout of driveways, streets, sidewalks and paths; the
adequacy and location of screening and parking areas, structures
and uses; and such other matters as may be found to have a
material bearing on the above standards and objectives.
G. There shall be no ingress or egress to Lincoln Drive from the lots
between Lincoln Drive and Route 17 South. Said lots are designated as
Block 32, Lots 4, 5, 315 and 316.
A. Permit required for certain acts. No person shall do or cause to be done
any of the following acts affecting trees, shrubbery or ornamental
material planted or growing naturally within the highways or public
places under the jurisdiction of the Township, except with a written
permit obtained from the Construction Official:
(1) Cut, trim, break, disturb the roots of or spray with defoliants any
living tree or shrub; or injure, misuse or remove any structure or
devices placed to support or protect any tree or shrubs.
(2) Place or remove or climb with spikes, any living tree or shrub.
(3) Fasten any rope, wire, electric attachments, sign or other device to
a tree or shrub or to any guard about such tree or shrub.
(4) Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree
or shrub to prohibit the access of air, water or fertilizer to the roots
of such tree or shrub.
(5) Pile any building material or make any mortar or cement within six
feet of a tree or shrub.
§ 185-128 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-129
177:732
(6) Change the grade of the soil within the limits of the lateral spread
of the branches of any such tree.
B. Wire, cable, electric current. Every person having control over any wire
for the transmission of an electric current along a public highway shall,
at all times, guard all trees through which or near which such wire
passes against any injury from the wire or cable or from the electric
current carried by it. The device or means used shall in every case be
subject to approval by the department of Construction Official.
C. Guy wires, braces prohibited. No person shall place any guy wire, brace
or other device on any tree in such a manner as to injure it.
D. Chemical damage. No person shall permit any brine, gas or injurious
chemical or liquid to come in contact with the stump or roots of any tree
of shrub upon a public highway, other than routine salting for
hazardous road conditions as affects the health and safety of the
general public.
E. Interference with Department of Construction Official. No person shall
prevent, delay or interfere with any lawful work undertaken by the
Construction Official or its authorized agent.
F. Dangerous trees and shrubs.
(1) Removal required; notice. In case any tree or shrub or any part
thereof along the public highway shall become dangerous to public
safety, the owner of the property in front of which such tree or
shrub is located shall forthwith remove the same or the required
part thereof, upon receipt of written directive to that effect from
the Department of Construction Official.
(2) Standard established. The owner or tenant of any lands lying within
the Township shall keep all brush, hedges and other plant life,
growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of the
intersection of two roadways, cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2
feet. This shall not require the cutting down of any trees where
there is vision through the trees at a height of between 2 1/2 feet
from the ground and eight feet from the ground.
(3) Removal by Township. If the owner fails to remove the tree or shrub
or portion thereof within two weeks after receipt of written notice
to do so, the work may be performed by the Township under the
supervision of the office of Zoning Official or a designated agent of
the Township, who shall certify the cost thereof to the Council.
(4) Costs charged against lands: lien established. Upon receipt of the
certified costs, the Township shall examine the same and if found
correct shall cause the costs to be charged against the lands or, if
the Council deems the costs to be excessive, shall cause the
reasonable cost thereof to be charged against the lands. The
amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon the lands
§ 185-129 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-129
177:733
and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next
to be assessed and levied upon the lands, the same to bear interest
at the same rate as other taxes and shall be collected and enforced
by the same officer and in the same manner as taxes.
G. Enforcement. If any person shall continue to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, after being duly notified of such violation, or
shall neglect or refuse to comply with any lawful order of the office of
the Zoning Official, the failure to comply with a second or each of
subsequent notifications or orders shall be construed as an additional
violation of this chapter, and each such additional offense shall subject
the offending party, upon conviction, to the same penalty as provided
for the first offense.
H. Destruction and removal of trees from unimproved or vacant land.
(1) Findings. The Township of Rochelle Park finds that the excessive
removal and destruction of trees impairs the character of existing
residential areas and impairs the stability and value of improved
and unimproved real property in such areas, with attendant
deterioration of conditions affecting the health, safety and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the Township and further finds that
regulations for the indiscriminate removal of trees is within the
police power of the Township.
(2) Definitions.188 For the purpose of this section, the following words
shall have the meanings indicated:
PERMITS — A license issued by the Building Inspector to remove
or destroy trees from any unimproved or vacant land as defined in
this section.
TREE — Any living tree having a trunk of a diameter of eight inches
or greater measuring at a height of three feet above natural grade.
UNIMPROVED OR VACANT LAND — Such privately owned land
upon which no home has been completely built and for a period of
two years after the certificate of occupancy is issued.
(3) Application of provisions. The provisions of this section shall apply
to all unimproved or vacant lands within the Township.
(4) Permit required; application procedures.
(a) Permit required. No property owner shall remove or destroy or
cause to be removed or destroyed by any person any tree on
any unimproved or vacant tract of land within the Township
unless a permit is obtained for such removal.
188. Editor's Note: See also §§ 185-97, 185-103G(1), 185-109A, and 185-131 for other
definitions.
§ 185-129 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-129
177:734
(b) Application fee. The permit shall be obtained from the
Construction Official upon an application being made therefore
and a fee of $10 with each application.
(c) Application information where no building permit is requested.
An application for a permit for removal or destruction of any
tree or tract where no building permit is requested or
contemplated shall contain the name of applicant, name of
owner of property with consent of the owner, if different from
applicant, location and species of trees on a sketch of property
and reasons for the removal or destruction.
(d) Application information where building permit is sought. An
applicant/owner shall file, along with an application for a
permit for removal or destruction of trees where a building
permit for construction is being sought, a site plan, a plan
showing the location and species of trees on-site and which
trees on the property are to be removed, together with the
condition of such trees shown on the plan by the architect or
engineer, under the seal of such architect or engineer.
(e) Determination of Planning Board: issuance of permits. The
Planning Board shall determine which trees may be removed
and the permit for such removal shall be issued by the Building
Inspector at the time of the issuance of the building permit.
[Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by
Ord. No. 1038-11]
(f) Referral to other agencies. The Planning Board shall refer all
applications to the Shade Tree and/or Environmental
Committee for their examination and opinion. Their report
shall be submitted to the Planning Board within 20 days of
receipt of the same. The Planning Board shall not be bound by
the recommendations of these committees and failure to
submit a report to the Planning Board within 20 days shall not
be construed as a restriction at any time following the
expiration of the twenty-day period. [Amended 6-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 1015-10; 8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
(g) Appeal. In the event of denial of any permit, the applicant
seeking appeal from the decision of the Construction Official
shall proceed before the Board of Adjustment as provided by
statute. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 1015-10;
8-17-2011 by Ord. No. 1038-11]
(h) Surety bond required when building permit is sought. In all
cases of application where a building permit is applied for,
there shall accompany the application a cash or surety bond in
a minimum sum for building permit with the amount to be
determined by the Construction Official, which bond shall
assure compliance with the preservation of those trees not to
§ 185-129 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-129
177:735
be removed, which bond shall be returned with the certificate
of occupancy less any costs expended by the Township to
replace trees improperly removed or destroyed in violation of
the permit.
(5) Standards for removal. The following shall be the standards to be
applied in determining which tree may be removed:
(a) Hardship in such cases shall be based on an examination of all
the circumstances considering the applicant's hardship. If the
hardship of the owner outweighs the public benefit promoted
by retention of trees, the hardship requiring removal may be
found to exist.
(b) Any area to be occupied by a building, driveway, walkway,
drainage field, septic tank, recreation area (tennis courts,
swimming pools or similar facilities) may have the trees
removed but not more than 15 feet around the perimeter of
such facilities.
(c) The area in the required buffer shall remain undisturbed.
(d) The area that has a cut or fill deemed injurious or dangerous to
trees, may have removal of trees in such area, as determined
by the Construction Official.
(e) The Construction Official shall view the land where the tree or
trees are to be removed, as well as drainage or other physical
conditions existing on subject or adjoining property and may
consider the opinion of any shade tree and/or environmental
commission or committee.
(f) The permit shall be granted if there is a finding that the
removal and destruction will not impair the growth and
development of remaining trees on the property of the
applicant or adjacent properties and would not cause erosion
of soil, impair existing drainage, lessen property values in the
neighborhood or impair the aesthetic values of the area.
(6) Regulations.
(a) Protection of trees. Where grading may be required, trees shall
be walled in with extension tile to the outer crown of the tree.
No structure, equipment or movable machinery which would
injure the tree shall be permitted to operate within six feet of
any trees in order not to disturb the soil and thereby injure the
tree. Prior to construction activity, all trees to be retained shall
be tagged. Said tagging shall be reviewed by the office of the
Construction Official.
§ 185-129 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-129
177:736
§ 185-130. Performance standards.
(b) Exempt lands or activities. The following lands or activities
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section: orchards,
Township, county and state land.
(7) Removal of diseased trees; fees for services of tree experts.
(a) No fee shall be charged or a permit required for the removal of
diseased or damaged trees.
(b) In cases where the service of a tree expert is required and in
cases where a building permit is applied for at the same time,
the cost thereof shall be borne by the applicant and payment of
the same shall be a condition precedent to the release of the
bond filed or the issuance of a permit.
(8) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding the general penalties
established in this code.
A. General application. All nonresidential uses, either existing or
proposed, shall be subject to the following standards.
B. Compliance with performance standards.
(1) Prior to commencement of construction and/or operation. Any
application for a building permit or a certificate of occupancy for a
use which shall be subject to performance standards shall be
accompanied by a sworn statement by the owner of subject
property that said use shall be operated in accordance with the
performance standards set forth herein. The applicant shall submit
a certification from the appropriate professionally qualified person
or firm that the proposed use will comply with the following
standards.
(2) Continued compliance. Continued compliance with performance
standards shall be required and enforcement of continued
compliance with these performance standards shall be enforced by
the Construction Official, Township Engineer, Health Officer and
Fire Prevention Bureau.
C. Determination where performance standards are to be measured. The
location, where determinations are to be made for measurement of
performance standards, shall be made as follows:
(1) At property lines of the use creating such element for vibration,
glare, air pollution, odor, dust, water pollution or noise.
(2) At the point of emission for smoke.
D. Performance standards.
§ 185-129 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-130
177:737
(1) Vibration. No vibration shall be permitted which is detectable
without instruments at points of measurement specified in
Subsection C above.
(2) Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare shall be visible at the points
of measurement specified in Subsection C above.
(3) Smoke.
(a) The emission standard of this chapter or as promulgated by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
whichever is more restrictive, shall apply.
(b) No emission shall be permitted, from any chimney or
otherwise, of visible gray smoke at a shade equal to or darker
than No. 1 on the Power's Micro-Ringelmann Chart, published
by McGraw Hill Publishing Company, Inc., copyright 1954,
being a direct facsimile reduction of a standard Ringelmann
Chart as issued by the United States Bureau of Mines.
(c) The provision of this subsection shall not apply to:
[1] Visible gray smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 of said
chart which may be emitted for not more than four
minutes in any thirty-minute period.
[2] Smoke resulting from any fire ignited solely for the
purpose of training or research in fire prevention or
protection.
[3] Household fireplaces.
(4) Odors. There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other
odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive as measured as
set forth in Subsection C above.
(5) Fly ash and dust. No emission of any fly ash or dust shall be
permitted to be discharged from any stack, chimney or by other
means into the open air in excess of the quantity set forth in
regulations promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(6) Noise.
(a) No person shall cause, allow or permit sound from any
nonresidential use which, when measured at any residential
property line, shall be in excess of the following:
§ 185-130 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-130
177:738
Octave-Band
Center
Frequency
(H3)
Column 1 Octave-
Band Sound
Pressure Level
(dB) From 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Column 2 Octave-
Band Sound
Pressure Level (dB)
From 7:00 p.m. to
7:00 a.m.
20 to 75 75 65
75 to 150 60 50
150 to 300 54 44
300 to 600 48 38
600 to 1,200 45 35
1,200 to 2,400 42 32
2,400 to 4,800 39 29
Above 4,800 36 26
(b) Noise not capable of being measured in the above manner or
not reaching the levels set forth above shall be controlled as
follows: It shall be unlawful for any business or facility or
individual in a residential or nonresidential area to make any
loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which either annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort and repose, health
or safety of others. There shall be exempted from this chapter
sounds created by normal governmental operations, traffic
sounds as regulated by the New Jersey Statutes and/or Division
of Motor Vehicles and sounds by emergency apparatus or
emergency activities.
(7) Radioactivity or electrical disturbance. No activities shall be
permitted which emit dangerous radioactivity. No activities shall be
permitted where electrical disturbances adversely affect the
operation of any equipment. All applicable federal and state
regulations shall be complied with.
(8) Fire and explosion hazard.
(a) All activities involving storage of flammable and explosive
materials shall be carried on in structures which conform to
the standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters of the
Township Building Code or Fire Ordinance, whichever is more
restrictive. All operations shall be carried out and all materials
stored in accordance with the standards of the Board of Fire
Underwriters. Every building shall be equipped with automatic
sprinklers which conform to the standards of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters.
(b) Burning of waste materials in open fires is prohibited.
(9) Liquids or solid waste. There shall be no discharge of any wastes of
any kind into any river, reservoir, pond or lake. The discharge of
§ 185-130 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-130
177:739
untreated wastes into any streams shall also be prohibited. All
methods of sewage and industrial waste treatment and disposal
shall be approved by the Township and the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection.
(10) Glare. There shall be no direct or reflected glare exceeding 0.05
footcandles measurable beyond the property line of the lot
occupied by such use. This regulation shall not apply to lights used
at the entrance or exit of service drives.
§ 185-130 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-130
177:740
ARTICLE XX
Signs
[Amended 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04; 9-15-2004 by Ord. No.
914-04; 8-13-2008 by Ord. No. 990-08]
§ 185-131. Definitions.189
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Township Committee.
AREA OF SIGN — The area included within the frame or edge of a sign,
including the frame. Where the sign has no such frame or edge, the area
shall be computed as specified by § 185-133 herein.
AWNING — Any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal frame that is
stationary using welded construction or retractable, attached to a building,
projecting over a thoroughfare and requiring no uprights for support.
BANNER — Any temporary sign applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any
kind, which shall be permitted by the Township Committee by permit, above
a public right-of-way.
BILLBOARD — Any sign erected or maintained for the purpose of displaying
outdoor advertising for products or services provided off premises.
CANOPY — Any structure made of cloth with a metal frame, welded
construction and requiring uprights for support.
FACING or SURFACE — The surface of the sign upon, against or through
which the message is displayed or illuminated on the sign.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any sign supported by structures or supports that
are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are independent from any
building or other structure.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part
of the sign proper.
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or
not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported, including
but not limited to signs designed to be transported by means of wheels;
signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; and umbrellas used for advertising.
189. Editor's Note: See also §§ 185-97, 185-103G(1), 185-109A, and 185-129H(2) for other
definitions.
§ 185-131 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-131
177:741
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon
or over the roof of any building, with the principal support on the roof
structure.
SIGN — Includes any device, either freestanding or attached to a building
or structure or erected, painted, represented or reproduced upon or in
(to the extent provided herein) any building or structure, which displays,
reproduces or includes any letter, word, name, number, model, insignia,
emblem, design, device or representation used for one or more of the
following purposes: to identify the premises or occupant or owner of the
premises; to advertise any trade, business, profession, industry, service or
other activity; to advertise any product or item; to advertise the sale or
rental or use of all or part of the premises, including that upon which
it is displayed; to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic, other than state,
county or municipal highway and roadway markers; and shall include any
announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia or
any representation used to advertise or intended to advertise or promote
the interests of any person. In no event shall the word "sign" be construed
to mean any sign in the interior of any structure except as specifically set
forth in this chapter.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign that is not permanently mounted as
specifically permitted by this article.
WALL SIGN — All flat signs of solid-face construction which are placed
against a building or other structure and attached to the exterior front, rear
or sidewall of any building or other structure so that the display surface is
parallel with the plane of the wall. Signs painted on an exterior or a wall
shall be deemed to be "wall signs" subject to this chapter.
WINDOW DISPLAY SIGN — Includes all signs defined herein, which are
situated on or within 12 inches of the window surface.
WINDOW SPACE — Includes the aggregate square footage of all windows
on any given side and any given story of any structure, regardless of the
angle or angles at which they are set. In computing window space, there
shall be included all portions of any door which contains a window.
§ 185-132. Permit required; issuance of permit; fees.
A. Application.
(1) No sign shall be erected, altered, located or relocated within the
municipality except upon application and the issuance of a permit
as hereinafter provided.
(a) Application for a permit for residential signs. Application for a
permit for a sign for premises used for residential purposes
shall be made in writing to the Construction Official and
presented together with the appropriate filing fee. Such
application shall be sufficient to describe the premises and the
location at which the sign is to be affixed, together with a
rendering of the sign, inclusive of its dimensions, design and
§ 185-131 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-132
177:742
color. There shall also be provided a statement as to the means
by which said sign shall be constructed on the premises. The
Construction Official shall act upon such application within 15
days of the receipt thereof.
(b) Application for a permit for nonresidential signs.
[1] Any sign associated with a change in occupancy or
ownership necessitates an application for a sign permit.
[2] Application for a permit for a permitted nonresidential
sign conforming to the regulations set forth herein shall be
made in writing to the Construction Official. Such
application shall be sufficient to describe the premises and
location at which the sign is to be affixed and shall include
at minimum the following items:
[a] The name and address of the applicant.
[b] The name and address of the owner of the premises.
[c] A statement as to whether the owner has consented to
the application, if the applicant is other than the
owner.
[d] A rendering to scale of the sign, reflecting its
composition, colors, dimensions, elevation from grade
level and lighting; the address of the premises;
specification and location of all existing signs; the
sight distances, in the case of freestanding signs, with
relation to accessways to the premises on which such
sign is to be located and adjacent premises; the
information to be stated on the sign and the method by
which said sign shall be secured.
(c) Application for a permit for a sign which does not comply with
the provisions of this article shall be submitted to the
appropriate approving authority, including any sign associated
with a change in occupancy or ownership which does not
comply with the provisions set forth herein. Such application
shall be in writing and, upon notice and a public hearing where
the same is required by law, submitted at least 10 days before
the next meeting preceding the succeeding public meeting
date of the appropriate authority, together with a filing fee as
hereinafter set forth. Such application shall be in triplicate and
accompanied by no fewer than 15 sketch plats, in the case of
an application for a freestanding sign, and 15 building
elevations, where the application is for other than a
freestanding sign, each of which shall be drawn to scale and
reflect the sign location and designation. In addition, on such
drawing or separate sheet, the information set forth in
§ 185-132A(1)(b) shall be provided.
§ 185-132 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-132
177:743
(d) An application for an illuminated sign must include the
installation of a timer designed to maintain the illumination of
the sign to the hour limitations set forth in § 185-137.
B. Issuance of permit.
(1) A permit shall be issued by the Construction Official upon the
favorable action of the approving authority, subject to any other
applicable governmental regulations or as otherwise provided
herein.
(2) A permit for the replacement of an existing sign may be issued by
the Construction Official without the necessity of Board approval
only upon satisfaction of all of the following conditions:
(a) There is no physical alteration or expansion to the existing sign
beyond the limits permitted herein;
(b) The sign conforms in all respects to the article provisions
specified herein; and
(c) No other signage is proposed to be added to the premises
beyond that which is permitted herein.
C. Exceptions. The provisions and regulations of this section concerning
permits and fees shall not apply to the following signs:
(1) Real estate signs not exceeding 12 square feet in area and four feet
in height which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises
upon which said signs are located only. Such sign shall only contain
the words "For Sale," "For Rent" or "Open House" and the name,
address and telephone number of the owner or licensed real estate
agent who has the listing. All such signs shall be set back minimally
15 feet from property lines and shall be removed within two days
after agreement of sale or lease.
(2) Residential nameplates identifying a single-family residence and/or
street address, not to exceed one square foot in area.
(3) Professional nameplates not exceeding two square feet in area for
lawful occupants of the premises under this chapter.
(4) Bulletin boards or signs not over 16 square feet in area for public,
charitable, religious or quasi-public institutions when the same are
located on the premises of said institutions.
(5) A sign identifying the architect, engineer or contractor, when
placed upon a worksite under construction, not to exceed 16
square feet in area, provided that the sign is set back at least 15
feet from the curb and further provided that the same are removed
within 24 hours after final certificate of occupancy is issued.
§ 185-132 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-132
177:744
(6) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze
or other incombustible materials.
(7) Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing
signs, danger signs and such temporary, emergency signs or signs
of any governmental agency deemed necessary to the public
welfare.
(8) Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey or other
governmental or quasi-public agencies.
(9) Holiday decorations and lights on residential premises.
(10) Signs erected to control the movement of traffic on a premises,
provided that these signs shall provide traffic directions only and
shall not be used for any advertising purpose. These signs shall not
exceed four square feet in area and shall have been approved by
the appropriate approving agency.
(11) Election or political signs, subject to the following provisions:
(a) All signs must be placed entirely on private property.
(b) All signs must be set back minimally 15 feet from the property
lines.
(c) Signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area and four feet in
height. The sign itself, exclusive of posts or other methods of
installation or mounting, shall not exceed four feet in height.
(d) No signs shall be erected or installed prior to Labor Day.
(e) All political signs must be removed no later than seven
calendar days after the date of the election.
(f) In accordance with election law requirements, each sign must
provide the name of the campaign fund which paid for the
printing of the sign.
(g) The number of signs on any particular parcel of property (to be
determined based upon tax lot and block designation) shall be
one per candidate or political campaign ticket.
(12) Garage sale signs, subject to the following provisions:
(a) In connection with an impending garage sale, two signs of not
more than four square feet each shall be permitted to be
displayed on the property of the residence where the garage
sale is being conducted.
(b) Two signs of not more than two square feet each are permitted,
provided that the premises upon which the garage sale is
conducted is not a major thoroughfare and written permission
§ 185-132 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-132
177:745
§ 185-133. Computation of sign area and sign height.
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and
height:
to erect said signs is received from the property owner upon
whose property such signs are to be placed.
(c) No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for
more than two days prior to the day such sale is to commence.
(d) Signs must be removed each day at the close of the garage sale
activities or by the end of daylight, whichever occurs first.
(e) These regulations shall apply to other similar casual sales of
tangible personal property (such as attic sales and rummage
sales) which are advertised so the public at large is aware of
the sale.
(f) No such signs shall be placed on telephone poles, street signs,
light poles or trees.
(g) All such signs shall be located at least 15 feet from the
property line.
D. Fees. No permit shall be issued for a sign until the appropriate fee has
been paid in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) For single-sided signs:
Area Fee
1 square foot to less than 25 square feet $75
25 square feet to less than 50 square feet $100
50 square feet to less than 90 square feet $150
(2) For double-faced signs, double the fees.
E. Termination of use. When the owner or lessee of a sign vacates the
premises upon which the sign or signs are located, said sign or signs
must be removed. If the owner or lessee of said sign does not remove
the sign or signs, the Township shall have the same removed and shall
bill the owner for the cost of said removal. Should the structure upon
which said sign is located be vacated or remain unused for a period of
90 days or more, then the frame upon which the sign is located must be
removed.
A. Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face shall be
computed by drawing a square or rectangle that will encompass the
extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display,
together with the sign frame and any material or color forming an
integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate
the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed or by
§ 185-132 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-133
177:746
§ 185-134. Regulations governing nonresidential signs.
delineating the area established by reason of distinctive variation in
background color or by borders, whichever is greater.
B. Computation of area of multifaced signs. The sign area for a sign with
more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all
sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are
placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point
at the same time and when such sign faces are part of the same sign
structure and are not more than 42 inches apart at any point, the sign
area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
C. Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the
distance from the base of the sign at grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign.
A. In all nonresidential districts, a sign erected on the exterior wall shall
be permitted, subject to the following:
(1) All signs shall be erected parallel to the wall face and no part of the
sign shall extend more than two inches from the wall.
(2) The maximum sign area of all signs shall not exceed 1.5 square feet
for each linear foot of that portion of the exterior of the building
occupied by the applicant. The maximum height of the signage
shall not exceed six feet and the width shall not exceed 90% of the
width of the building or storefront.
(3) Each tenant may place signs as provided herein only on the exterior
wall of that portion of the building that he or she leases.
(4) Signs extending more than three inches from the wall face shall
have the bottom of such sign minimally eight feet above the ground
level.
B. In all nonresidential districts, the following regulations apply to wall
signs for office buildings:
(1) Signs for office buildings are limited to a directory listing of tenants
and identification signs with the name or address of the building.
The directory sign shall have letters not exceeding three inches in
height. The directory sign shall list the identity of building
occupants and shall be located on a wall near the building
entrance. A single identification sign consisting of the name or
number of the building is permitted. The sign area shall not exceed
5% of the area of the wall on which it is located or 60 square feet,
whichever is less.
(2) An identification facsimile of this wall sign shall be permitted on a
second wall of an office building, provided that the aggregate of
both signs does not exceed 90 square feet.
§ 185-133 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-134
177:747
C. Window signs are permitted, subject to the following regulations:
(1) No sign, temporary or otherwise, on the inside of a window shall be
greater than one foot in height or cover more than 10% of the
square footage of said window, and no such sign shall be permitted
above the first floor of any building.
(2) No window signs are permitted in office buildings.
(3) Nonelectrical signs used on the exterior or interior of the windows
to give notice of sales or special functions shall be permitted for 15
days, subject to the following restriction: no more than 25% of the
total street frontage of each window shall be covered.
D. In all nonresidential districts, no more than one illuminated temporary
sign shall be permitted advertising the sale or rental of the premises.
Said sign shall not exceed five square feet in area and contain the words
"For Sale" or "For Rent" and the name, address and telephone number
of the owner or the licensed real estate broker who has the listing. All
such signs shall be removed within two days after an agreement for sale
or lease of the premises or the property has been removed from the
market.
E. Freestanding signs shall comply with the following:
(1) No freestanding sign shall exceed an area of 10 square feet.
(2) The maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be seven feet.
(3) Freestanding signs shall have an open area not less than four feet
between the bottom of said sign and the ground level. This open
space shall be supplemented with landscaping.
(4) Freestanding signs shall be set back minimally 25 feet from all
property lines.
F. Entrance and exit signs. One double-faced or single-faced sign worded
"Entrance" or "Exit" shall be permitted at each driveway for the
purpose of directing motorists safely into the parking area. Such
entrance and exit signs shall be uniform in size and content as follows:
(1) The sign shall be rectangular with maximum dimensions of one foot
high by three feet long for a maximum sign area of three square
feet.
(2) Sign height from ground level shall not exceed eight feet.
(3) Colors shall consist of black letters on a white background.
(4) Illumination is permitted as either a reflective surface or interior
illumination of not more than 100 watts of fluorescent lamp power.
(5) The signs shall be located on the far side of the driveway relative to
traffic flow.
§ 185-134 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-134
177:748
G. Wall signs.
(1) Wall-mounted signs shall comply with the following:
(a) Wall signs shall advertise only the permitted use, products or
service on the premises on which they are displayed.
(b) Each business shall be entitled to only one wall-mounted sign
except that, where a building has street frontage on more than
one street, one additional sign may be permitted.
(c) No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening
nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is
attached.
(d) No wall sign shall be permitted to project forward more than
six inches from the building nor be attached to a wall at a
height of less than eight feet above the sidewalk or ground.
(e) No wall sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to
prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire
escape.
(f) Size and design.
[1] Each commercial use in a building in the Business Zones
shall be entitled to a wall sign, but in no event shall the
total square footage of all wall signs exceed 10% of the
square footage of the front facade.
[2] Wall signs shall not exceed two square feet of signage for
every linear foot of the front facade of the portion of the
building occupied by the use being advertised.
[3] The horizontal linear dimensions of wall-mounted signs in
the Industrial Zone shall not exceed 30% of the width of
the building wall to which it is to be affixed. The maximum
height of such sign shall not exceed two feet if the building
wall is 40 feet or less in width; 2 1/2 feet if the building
wall is more than 40 feet but less than 80 feet in width; and
three feet if the building wall is 80 feet or more in width.
(2) In addition to any sign or signs permitted pursuant to this section,
window display signs, as well as affixed window signs limited to
indicate membership in a retail or professional organization or
credit card or credit association, to show manufacturers or
required licenses or advertisements referable to sales within, shall
be permitted to be attached to windows on the interior of the
business use, provided that the aggregate area employed for such
purpose shall not exceed 20% of the total window area on which it
is located.
§ 185-134 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-135
177:749
§ 185-135. Regulations governing residential signs.
Residential signs, including name and address plates, professional
nameplates, signs for places of worship, real estate signs and contractor
signs as provided herein, are permitted in accordance with the size
limitations as set forth in § 185-132C. Signs not otherwise in compliance
with these provisions or as permitted and regulated in this article are
prohibited.
§ 185-136. Temporary signs.
Temporary signs shall comply to the following:
§ 185-137. Illumination.
A. All temporary signage, except as specifically exempted under this
article, shall require a permit. Said permit shall be valid for a period not
to exceed 15 days from the issuance thereof and may be renewed for a
period not to exceed an additional 15 days for a maximum of 30 days
per twelve-month period.
B. No temporary sign shall exceed an area of 12 square feet, provided that
temporary signs, such as banners, which are permitted by permit by the
Township Committee within the public right-of-way may exceed 12
square feet in size.
C. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to permit the erection or
installation of any political signs upon any pole or tree located on public
property or within the public right-of-way within the Township of
Rochelle Park and their erection or installation is hereby specifically
prohibited. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit temporary lawn
signs or street banners as set forth elsewhere in this chapter.
D. Streamers of flags or pennants and banners shall be permitted as
temporary signs in accordance with the permit requirements and time
restrictions set forth in this article and § 185-132.
E. Nonprofit organizations shall be permitted to erect and maintain a
single temporary sign on their property not exceeding five square feet
in area, provided that such sign is maintained for a period of no more
than 10 days and has a maximum four-foot height.
A. No sign shall be an illuminated sign except as provided herein.
B. No sign shall be internally illuminated by neon gas-filled tubes or
lighting designed to create a visual effect similar to neon. Exterior neon
signs are prohibited in all zoning districts.
C. All signs shall be properly shielded to minimize impact on surrounding
properties and public rights-of-way.
§ 185-135 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-137
177:750
§ 185-138. General regulations for signs.
D. Flashing signs, highly reflective glass or fluorescent paint (red or
green) and illuminated tubing outlining roofs, doors, windows or wall
edges of a building are prohibited.
E. All business and industrial signs used in connection with the operation
of any business shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m. or upon the close of
business serviced by said signs, whichever occurs first.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Chief of Police or his
representative, subject to approval by the Township Committee, can
authorize lighting specifically designed for the protection of properties.
Such lighting, when authorized, shall be exempt from these provisions.
F. All illuminated signs shall be either indirectly lighted or of the diffusedlighting
type.
G. Floodlights shall not project above the highest elevation of the front
wall of the building or more than 18 feet above the street level of the
premises, whichever is less.
A. (Reserved)190
B. No sign shall be placed or located or displayed upon any sidewalk or
area between sidewalk and curb, nor shall it project on or over a
sidewalk.
C. No roof sign shall be permitted.
D. No sign shall be erected or painted or composed of fluorescent or
phosphorescent or similar material.
E. No sign shall be, in whole or part, moving, mobile or revolving. This
shall include hand-held signs and signs placed on vehicles unless
permanently painted or affixed to that vehicle.
F. No sign shall have more three colors, inclusive of its background, frame
and decorative parts. For the purposes of this chapter, "black" and
"white" shall be considered colors.
G. Canopies, awnings and marquees with signage embossed upon them
shall be considered to be business signs.
H. No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free
ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape.
I. No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this chapter shall
be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision or at any location where, by reason of the
position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of,
190. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, which prohibited billboards and roof signs, was
repealed 12-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1153-19.
§ 185-137 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-138
177:751
§ 185-139. Nonconforming signs.
§ 185-140. Awnings.
cause an optical illusion or be confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal or device or which makes use of words, phrases, symbols
or characters in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
traffic.
J. Signs which are not expressly and directly related to the business being
conducted on the premises or which do not conform to the applicable
requirements and standards set forth in other sections of this chapter
shall not be permitted.
K. Any sign which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted on
the premises or a product sold on such premises shall be removed by
the permittee, owner or person having the beneficial use of the building
upon which the sign is located, within 10 days after written notification
from the Building Inspector, and, upon failure to comply with such
notice, the owner shall be considered in violation of this chapter and
subject to penalties.
L. If the Building Inspector finds that a sign has been erected in such
manner or has deteriorated to such a degree as to constitute a hazard
to the general public, it shall be removed or repaired to the satisfaction
of the Building Inspector within 24 hours after written notice has been
served to the owner, owner's agent, lessee or occupant. Failure to
comply therewith shall be a violation of this chapter and subject to its
penalties.
M. Signs in residential zones, other than as specifically permitted in this
Code, are prohibited.191
A. Any signs existing at the time of the passage of this chapter and which
violate any provisions thereof shall be deemed a nonconforming use
and may be continued, maintained and repaired upon the present
premises or location; provided, however, that such sign was lawful
under any prior ordinance. Any nonconforming sign which is associated
with a change in occupancy or ownership shall necessitate an
application to the approving authority. Any sign unlawful under any
prior ordinance shall remain unlawful unless it complies with the
provisions of this chapter and there is issued by the Zoning Officer a
sign-erection permit therefor.
B. Any sign which has been damaged to the extent that the cost of repairs
shall exceed 50% of the current value of said sign shall be deemed as
destroyed and the owner thereof shall not be permitted to erect or
restore said sign except in accordance with this chapter.
191. Editor's Note: Former Subsection N, which prohibited certain moving message signs in all
districts, added 7-20-2011 by Ord. No. 1036-11, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 12-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1153-19.
§ 185-138 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-140
177:752
§ 185-140.1. Violations and penalties.192
Upon determination that a violation of the provisions of this article exists,
the Construction Official shall provide written notice of said violation with a
demand that the violation be abated within five days from the date on which
the notice is mailed. If the violation is not abated within that five-day period,
there shall be a fine imposed, upon conviction, of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000 for each offense. Each day that the violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense.
A. No awning of any kind shall be erected or maintained which shall
extend beyond the property line and over any street or sidewalk or
public place or any part thereof, unless a permit therefor shall first have
been obtained from the approving authority.
B. No permit for any such awning shall be issued by the Building
Department if the frame of such awning is less than eight feet off the
ground. Additionally, there shall be seven feet six inches clearance to
any part of the awning.
C. The lettering on said awning:
(1) Shall not display any graphic other than the name of the business,
the logo and the street number.
(2) Shall have a maximum lettering height of 10 inches.
(3) Shall not be made with shiny vinyl fabric,
(4) Shall not have more than 10 items of information, i.e., a word,
syllable, abbreviation, initial, letter, number, symbol, logo or shape.
D. Awnings and canopies attached to the same building must be the same
shape and color.
E. Awnings shall have a maximum projection of four feet and there shall be
no uprights on the public thoroughfare.
192. Editor’s Note: See also Ch. 1, Art. II, General Penalty.
§ 185-140 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-140.1
177:753

ARTICLE XXI
Development Fees
[Added 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 934-05; amended 7-16-2008 by Ord.
No. 988-08; 6-15-2011 by Ord. No. 1033-11; 7-24-2019 by Ord. No.
1146-19]
§ 185-141. Purpose.
§ 185-142. Basic requirements.
§ 185-143. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100%
affordable housing development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act.193
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985,
N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to the
adoption of rules by the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH).
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7), COAH was authorized to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that were
under the jurisdiction of COAH and that are now before a court of
competent jurisdiction and have a Court-approved spending plan may
retain fees collected from nonresidential development.
C. This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees that are consistent, with COAH's
regulations developed in response to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and
32-38 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide Nonresidential
Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7). Fees collected
pursuant to this article shall be used for the sole purpose of providing
low- and moderate-income housing in accordance with a Courtapproved
spending plan.
A. This article shall not be effective until approved by the Court.
B. The Township of Rochelle Park shall not spend development fees until
the Court has approved a plan for spending such fees (spending plan).
§ 185-141 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-143
177:755
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted by N.J.A.C. 5:93.194
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through N.J.S.A. 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 185-144. Residential development fees.
A. Imposition of fees.
(1) Within the Township of Rochelle Park, all residential developers,
except for developers of the types of developments specifically
exempted below and developers of developments that include
affordable housing, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized
assessed value for all new residential development provided no
increased density is permitted. Development fees shall also be
imposed and collected when an additional dwelling unit is added to
an existing residential structure; in such cases, the fee shall be
calculated based on the increase in the equalized assessed value of
the property due to the additional dwelling unit.
(2) When an increase in residential density is permitted pursuant to a
"d" variance granted under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), developers
shall be required to pay a "bonus" development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized, except that this provision shall not be applicable to a
development that will include affordable housing. If the zoning on a
site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the filing
of the variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
developments.
193. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq.
194. Editor's Note: The regulations in N.J.A.C. 5:93 expired October 16, 2016.
§ 185-143 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-144
177:756
§ 185-144.1. Nonresidential development fees.
(1) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Owner-occupied residential structures demolished and replaced as
a result of a fire, flood, or natural disaster shall be exempt from
paying a development fee.
(4) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished
and replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise
exempt from the development fee requirement. The development
fee shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed
value of the improved structure.
(5) Where there is an improvement to, expansion of, reconstruction or
replacement of an existing residential structure requiring a
construction permit, no development fee shall be required to be
paid. The construction or improvement of a permitted accessory
structure on a lot containing an existing residential structure shall
not require the payment of a development fee.
(6) Developers of houses of worship and other uses that are entitled to
exemption from New Jersey real property tax shall be exempt from
the payment of a development fee, provided that such development
does not result in the construction of any additional housing or
residential units, including assisted living and continuing care
retirement communities.
A. Imposition of fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of developments specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value
of the land and improvements, for all new nonresidential
construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of developments specifically exempted
§ 185-144 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-144.1
177:757
below, shall also pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from any additions to existing
structures to be used for nonresidential purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvements and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvements, and such calculation shall be made at the time a
final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation required
under this section results in a negative number, the nonresidential
development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to a 2.5% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The 2.5% development fee shall not apply to an increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from alterations, change in use
within the existing footprint, reconstruction, renovations and
repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to the Statewide Nonresidential
Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), as
specified in Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Nonresidential
Development Certification/Exemption." Any exemption claimed by
a developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to the Statewide
Nonresidential Development Fee Act shall be subject to the fee at
such time as the basis for the exemption no longer applies, and
shall make the payment of the nonresidential development fee, in
that event, within three years after that event or after the issuance
of the final certificate of occupancy for the nonresidential
development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Township of Rochelle Park as a lien against the real property
of the owner.
§ 185-144.1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-144.1
177:758
§ 185-144.2. Collection procedures.
(6) Pursuant to P.L. 2009, c. 90 and P.L. 2011, c. 122, the
nonresidential statewide development fee of 2.5% for
nonresidential development is suspended for all nonresidential
projects that received preliminary or final site plan approval
subsequent to July 17, 2008 until July 1, 2013, provided that a
permit for the construction of the building has been issued prior to
January 1, 2015.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the approving authority or entity shall notify or
direct its staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the
issuance of a construction permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a construction
permit shall notify the Township Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
construction permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of such notification, the Township Tax
Assessor shall prepare an estimate of the equalized assessed value of
the development based on the plans filed.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy shall notify the Township Tax Assessor of any
and all requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on a property
which is subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Township Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
associated with the development; calculate the development fee; and
thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Township of Rochelle Park fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the
amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
§ 185-144.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-144.2
177:759
§ 185-144.3. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
process set forth in Subsection b. of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. Except as provided in § 185-144.1A(3) hereinabove, 50% of the initially
calculated development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
the construction permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the
time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at the
time of issuance of the construction permit and that determined at the
time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by the Township of
Rochelle Park. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be
made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State
Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1, et seq., within 90
days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by the Township of Rochelle Park. Appeals from a determination of
the Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A.
54:48-1, et seq., within 90 days after the date of such
determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Affordable
Housing Trust Fund to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer of
the Township of Rochelle Park for the purpose of depositing
development fees collected from residential and nonresidential
developers and proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished
controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of a fraction of an
affordable unit, where permitted by ordinance or by agreement
with the Township of Rochelle Park;
§ 185-144.2 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-144.3
177:760
§ 185-144.4. Use of funds.
(2) Funds contributed by developers to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached dwelling
unit development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with Rochelle Park's
affordable housing program.
C. In the event of a failure by the Township of Rochelle Park to comply with
trust fund monitoring and reporting requirements or to submit accurate
monitoring reports; or a failure to comply with the conditions of the
judgment of compliance or a revocation of the judgment of compliance;
or a failure to implement the approved spending plan and to expend
funds within the applicable required time period as set forth in In re Tp.
of Monroe, 442 N.J. Super. 565 (Law Div. 2015) (aff'd 442 N.J. Super.
563); or the expenditure of funds on activities not approved by the
Court; or for other good cause demonstrating the unapproved use(s) of
funds, the Court may authorize the State of New Jersey, Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services (LGS), to
direct the manner in which the funds in the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund shall be expended, provided that all such funds shall, to the extent
practicable, be utilized for affordable housing programs within the
Township of Rochelle Park, or, if not practicable, then within the County
or the Housing Region.
(1) Any party may bring a motion before the Superior Court presenting
evidence of such condition(s), and the Court may, after considering
the evidence and providing the municipality a reasonable
opportunity to respond and/or to remedy the noncompliant
condition(s), and upon a finding of continuing and deliberate
noncompliance, determine to authorize LGS to direct the
expenditure of funds in the Trust Fund. The Court may also impose
such other remedies as may be reasonable and appropriate to the
circumstances.
D. Interest accrued in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall only be
used to fund eligible affordable housing activities approved by the
Court.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by the Court. Funds deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund
may be used for any activity approved by the Court to address the
Township of Rochelle Park's fair share obligation and may be set up as a
§ 185-144.3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-144.4
177:761
grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not
limited to preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of
maintaining or implementing affordability controls; housing
rehabilitation; new construction of affordable housing units and related
costs; accessory apartments; a market to affordable program; regional
housing partnership programs; conversion of existing nonresidential
buildings to create new affordable units; green building strategies
designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted national or
state standards; purchase of land for affordable housing; improvement
of land to be used for affordable housing; extensions or improvements
of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites; financial
assistance designed to increase affordability; administration necessary
for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan; and/or
any other activity permitted by the Court and specified in the approved
spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township of Rochelle
Park for past housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned on
such fees shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of the
median income for Housing Region 1, in which Rochelle Park is located.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs. The specific programs to be used for
affordability assistance shall be identified and described within the
spending plan.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income. The specific programs to be used for very-low-income
affordability assistance shall be identified and described within the
spending plan.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable housing units on site, if
permitted by ordinance or by agreement with the Township of
Rochelle Park, and funds from the sale of units with extinguished
controls shall be exempt from the affordability assistance
requirement.
§ 185-144.4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-144.4
177:762
§ 185-144.5. Monitoring.
The Township of Rochelle Park shall provide annual reporting of Affordable
Housing Trust Fund activity to the State of New Jersey, Department of
Community Affairs or Local Government Services or other entity designated
by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing
Center and posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for
this purpose by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs or Local
Government Services. The reporting shall include an accounting of all
Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the sources and amounts
of funds collected and the amounts and purposes for which any funds have
been expended. Such reporting shall include an accounting of development
fees collected from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site (if permitted by ordinance
or by agreement with the Township), funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, barrier free escrow funds, rental income from
Township-owned affordable housing units, repayments from affordable
housing program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with
Rochelle Park's affordable housing programs, as well as an accounting of
the expenditures of revenues and implementation of the spending plan
approved by the Court.
§ 185-144.6. Ongoing collection of fees.
D. The Township of Rochelle Park may contract with a private or public
entity to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, including its programs for affordability assistance.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultants' fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, prepare a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or administer an affirmative
marketing program or a rehabilitation program.
(1) In the case of a rehabilitation program, the administrative costs of
the rehabilitation program shall be included as part of the 20% of
collected development fees that may be expended on
administration.
(2) Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of
households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and
compliance with the Court's monitoring requirements. Legal or
other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or
related to securing or appealing a judgment from the Court are not
eligible uses of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
A. The ability for the Township of Rochelle Park to impose, collect and
expend development fees shall expire with the expiration of the repose
period covered by its judgment of compliance unless the Township of
Rochelle Park has first filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair
§ 185-144.4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-144.6
177:763
Share Plan with the Court or with a designated state administrative
agency, has petitioned for a judgment of compliance from the Court or
for substantive certification or its equivalent from a state administrative
agency authorized to approve and administer municipal affordable
housing compliance and has received approval of its Development Fee
Ordinance from the entity that will be reviewing and approving the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.
B. If the Township of Rochelle Park fails to renew its ability to impose and
collect development fees prior to the expiration of its judgment of
compliance, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining
within its Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Any funds so forfeited shall
be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund"
established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-320).
C. The Township of Rochelle Park shall not impose a residential
development fee on a development that receives preliminary or final
site plan approval after the expiration of its judgment of compliance,
nor shall the Township of Rochelle Park retroactively impose a
development fee on such a development. The Township of Rochelle Park
also shall not expend any of its collected development fees after the
expiration of its judgment of compliance.
§ 185-144.6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-144.6
177:764
ARTICLE XXII
Stormwater Control
[Added 5-17-2006 by Ord. No. 945-06]
§ 185-145. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs (best management
practices). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and control for major
development, as defined in § 185-146 and to reduce the amount of
nonpoint source pollution entering surface and ground water.
Unmitigated stormwaters from areas altered by development may pose
public health and safety threats. This article establishes the
administrative mechanisms necessary for the Township of Rochelle
Park to ensure proper stormwater management. This article is written
to work in conjunction with current state and federal regulations. This
article guides development in a manner that is proactive and minimizes
harmful impacts to natural resources. Specifically, this article shall:
(1) Reduce artificially induced flood damage to public health, life, and
property;
(2) Minimize increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes;
(3) Minimize the deterioration of existing structures that would result
from increased rates of stormwater runoff;
(4) Induce water recharge into the ground wherever suitable
infiltration, soil permeability and favorable geological conditions
exist;
(5) Prevent an increase in nonpoint source pollution;
(6) Maintain the integrity and stability of stream channels and buffers
for their ecological functions, as well as for drainage, the
conveyance of floodwater, and other purposes;
(7) Control and minimize soil erosion and the transport of sediment;
§ 185-145 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-145
177:765
§ 185-146. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Land uses normally associated with
the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not
(8) Minimize public safety hazards at any stormwater detention facility
constructed pursuant to subdivision or site plan approval;
(9) Maintain adequate base flow and natural flow regimes in all
streams and other surface water bodies to protect the aquatic
ecosystem;
(10) Protect all surface water resources from degradation; and
(11) Protect groundwater resources from degradation and diminution.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Rochelle Park.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annual any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 185-145 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-146
177:766
include the development of land for the processing or sale of food and the
manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Structural device, measure,
facility or activity that helps to achieve stormwater management control
objectives at a designated site.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CATEGORY 1 (C1) WATERS — Waters of the state, including unnamed
waterways that appear on Soil Survey and USGS Topographic Quadrangle
within the same HUC 14 watershed, designated in NJAC 7:9B-1.15(c)
through (h) for purposes of implementing the antidegradation policies set
forth at NJAC 7:9B-1.5(d) for protection from measurable changes in water
quality characteristics because of their clarity, color, scenic setting, other
characteristics of aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
or exceptional fisheries resources(s).
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density by subjecting soil to
greater than normal loading.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 185-146 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-146
177:767
enlargement of any building or structure, any mining excavation or landfill,
and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or land
or extension of use of land, by any person, for which permission is required
under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case
of development of agricultural lands, development means: any activity that
requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural
Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC),
and municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DISTURBANCE — Any activity including the clearing, excavating, storing,
grading, filling or transportation of soil or any other activity that causes soil
to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
ESCAPE PROVISIONS — The permanent installation of ladders, steps,
rungs or other features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins.
GROUNDWATER — A body of water below the surface of the land in a zone
of saturation where the spaces between the soil or geological materials are
fully saturated with water.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation to a level below the normal root soil of plant species.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land; disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation; or
development that creates more than 1/4 acre of new impervious coverage.
§ 185-146 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-146
177:768
MITIGATION — An action by an applicant providing compensation or offset
actions for on-site stormwater management requirements where the
applicant has demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict
compliance with the stormwater management requirements set forth in
N.J.A.C. 7:8 in an adopted regional stormwater management plan or in
this local ordinance, and has received a waiver from strict compliance
from the Township of Rochelle Park. Mitigation for the purposes of this
article includes both the mitigation plan detailing how the project's failure
to strictly comply will be compensated, and the implementation of the
approved mitigation plan.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NONSTRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES —
Techniques that control or reduce stormwater runoff in the absence of
stormwater structures (e.g., basins and pipe conveyances), such as
minimizing site disturbance, preserving important site features including,
but not limited to, natural vegetation, reducing and disconnecting
impervious cover, minimizing slopes, utilizing native vegetation, minimizing
turf grass lawns, increasing time of concentration and maintaining and
enhancing natural drainage features and characteristics.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERMEABLE — A surface or land cover capable of transmitting or
percolating a significant amount of precipitation into the underlying soils.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Township of Rochelle Park or political subdivision of this
state subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
PLAN — A document approved at the site design phase that outlines the
measures and practices used to control stormwater runoff at the site.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water to the extent that
§ 185-146 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-146
177:769
the pollutant concentration or level violates either the groundwater quality
standards (N.J.A.C. 7:9-6) or the surface water quality standards (N.J.A.C.
7:9B) of New Jersey.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REVIEW AGENCY (MUNICIPAL) — The municipal body or official that is
responsible for the review of a major development project for compliance
with the stormwater management requirements.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
SOIL AND FLOATABLE MATERIALS — Sediment, debris, trash and other
floating, suspended or settleable solids.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Any material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities, that could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to ground or surface
water. Source materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials,
intermediate products, final products, water materials, by-products,
industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that
are related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are
exposed to stormwater.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
§ 185-146 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-146
177:770
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STREAM BUFFER — A strip of land located immediately adjacent to a
stream channel consisting of natural, undisturbed vegetative cover, which
serves as a transition area between uplands and riparian lands. A stream
buffer may encompass wetlands, may be contained within a floodplain or
floodway or may extend beyond a wetland, floodplain or floodway boundary.
STRUCTURAL STORMWATER TECHNIQUES — A stormwater management
measure that involves control of concentrated stormwater runoff or
filtration such as stormwater basins, piped conveyance systems and
manufactured stormwater devices and can include various types of basins,
filters, surfaces and devices located on individual lots in a residential
development or throughout a commercial, industrial or institutional
development site in areas not typically suited for larger, centralized
structural facilities.
THREATENED AND ENDANGERED SPECIES — Endangered species are
those whose prospects for survival in New Jersey are in immediate danger
because of a loss or change in habitat, overexploitation, predation,
competition, disease, disturbance or contamination. Assistance is needed
to prevent future extinction in New Jersey. Threatened species are those
who may become endangered if conditions surrounding them begin to or
continue to deteriorate. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are
those identified by the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time it takes for stormwater runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the
point of interest within a watershed.
TRANSITION AREA — An area of protected upland adjacent to a freshwater
wetland that minimizes adverse impacts on the wetland or serves as an
integral component of the wetlands ecosystem. Also known as "buffer area."
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas, including but not limited to the following:
§ 185-146 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-146
177:771
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 185-147. General standards.
§ 185-148. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures:
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 185-148. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design along with the predictable
nonstructural strategies.
(2) The standards in this article apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
A. Maintenance plan. The development shall incorporate a maintenance
plan for the stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development in accordance with § 185-154.
§ 185-146 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-148
177:772
B. Threatened and endangered species. Stormwater management
measures shall be implemented in order to avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat(s) for threatened and endangered species
as documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150.
C. Exemptions. The following linear development projects are exempt
from the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material such as, but not limited to, wood
chips, unpacked gravel and porous pavement.
D. Waiver from strict compliance:
(1) A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access,
provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis
that, through the use of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with the requirements of Subsections F and
G to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of Subsections F and G, existing structures
currently in use, such as homes and buildings, would need to
be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(1)(C)
above within the upstream drainage area of the receiving
stream, that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate
§ 185-148 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-148
177:773
the requirements of Subsections F and G that were not
achievable on site.
(2) A waiver from strict compliance from such projects can only be
obtained if the Applicant agrees to undertake a suitable mitigation
measure identified in the mitigation section of the Township of
Rochelle Park's stormwater management plan. In such cases, the
applicant must submit a mitigation plan detailing how the project's
failure to strictly comply will be compensated. In cases where a
waiver is granted, the applicant should provide mitigation within
the same watershed within which the subject project is proposed. If
mitigation within the same watershed is not possible and/or
practical, the applicant shall contribute funding toward a regional
stormwater control project or provide for equivalent treatment at
an alternate location or other equivalent water quality benefit, in
lieu of implementing the required stormwater control measures on
their specific site. Said mitigation must be reviewed and agreed
upon by the Township of Rochelle Park and Borough Engineer prior
to commencement of mitigation work.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies:
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at this Subsection E into the
design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention. In both
cases, the applicant bears the burden of proving any
impracticability.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction.
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
§ 185-148 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-148
177:774
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
§ 185-148 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-148
177:775
Examples of grates subject to this standard include
grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm
sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates
of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin
floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be:
§ 185-148 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-148
177:776
(a) Dedicated to a government agency.
(b) Subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate county clerk's office; or
(c) Subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures that
measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 185-151, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards:
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 185-149, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
§ 185-148 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-148
177:777
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) Using the criteria for calculating stormwater runoff and
groundwater recharge in § 185-149, the design engineer shall
comply with at least one of the following standards:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50, 75 and 80%,
§ 185-148 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-148
177:778
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to
be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 185-146 shall be submitted to
the appropriate soil conservation district for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable soil conservation district guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards:
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.00873 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
§ 185-148 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-148
177:779
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1333 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 185-151, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources
of technical guidance are listed in § 185-151. TSS reduction shall
be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate (whole number) applicable to
the first (upstream) BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate (whole number) applicable to
the second (downstream) BMP
§ 185-148 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-148
177:780
In cases where three or more BMPs are used in series, the
applicant shall calculate the TSS reduction for the two most
upstream BMPs in the series using the above formula, the
substitute the result of that calculation in the formula for "A"
when calculating the combined result with the next BMP in the
series.
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS % Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90
Extended detention basin 40-60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See § 185-149C
Vegetative filter strip 60-80
Wet pond 50-90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address indentified in § 185-151.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
§ 185-148 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-148
177:781
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top-of-bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subparagraph shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act. N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
§ 185-148 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-148
177:782
§ 185-149. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff calculations:
§ 185-148 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-149
177:783
(1) In complying with the design and performance standards in
§ 185-148, the design engineer shall calculate stormwater runoff in
accordance with one of the following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak stormwater runoff rate
calculations and the Modified Rational Method for stormwater
runoff hydrograph calculations. Use of the Rational Method
and Modified Rational Method are limited to drainage areas of
20 acres or less. Neither the Rational Method nor Modified
Rational Method shall be used to calculate runoff volumes for
groundwater recharge or stormwater runoff infiltration
purposes.
(c) Alternative groundwater recharge calculation methods may be
used upon approval by the Borough Engineer.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In calculating preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and/or volumes.
(4) In calculating stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of previous and impervious surfaces separately to
§ 185-149 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-149
177:784
§ 185-150. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site within the drainage area.
(5) Calculation of stormwater runoff from unconnected impervious
surfaces shall be based, as applicable, upon the two-step
methodology as described in the Department's current Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual or the methodology as
described in the NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds.
(6) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge. When selecting or calculating runoff
coefficients, the design engineer may calculate groundwater recharge
in accordance with the New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A
Method for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29
Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609)
984-6587.
A. Structural stormwater management measures:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions which may cause the
measure to fail, have an adverse affect on water quality or quantity,
or cause harm or damage to persons or property, including but not
limited to environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns;
existing or former mines; significant land fillings; and the presence
of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure, as appropriate, and shall have
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the
elevation of the water quality design storm. For elevations higher
than the water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet
structure shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the
diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum
§ 185-149 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-150
177:785
spacing between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between
bars of six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must
comply with the requirements of § 185-152D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement. The
measures are to be sequenced in the site development process so
that erosion control standards are met and so the measure is not
compromised or impaired by construction runoff.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2.5 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 185-152.
(6) Where tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a
stormwater management measure, the design engineer shall
include such effects in the design of said measure.
B. Guidelines for stormwater management measures. Stormwater
management measure guidelines are available in the New Jersey Best
Management Practices Manual and other documents as described in
§ 185-151. Other stormwater management measures may be utilized,
provided the design engineer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
review agency, in consultation with the Borough Engineer, that the
proposed measure and its design will accomplish the required water
quantity, groundwater recharge and water quality design and
performance standards established by § 185-148 of this article.
(1) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of § 185-148 this article, provided the pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
(2) Nonverified manufactured treatment devices may also be used for
purposes other than underground discharge of stormwater, where
such devices provide a clear benefit to stormwater quality or flow
control in a manner that facilitates improved nonstructural
stormwater management controls on the site, or avoids the need
for approval of off-site mitigation. The benefits of proposed
nonverified manufactured treatment devices must be proved to the
satisfaction of the review agency, in consultation with the Borough
Engineer.
(3) Manufactured treatment devices may be used only where the
maintenance plan required by § 185-154 ensures that the
manufactured device will be properly maintained for its functional
§ 185-150 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-150
177:786
§ 185-151. Sources for technical guidance.
lifespan and will be replaced as needed with management
measures that are at least as effective as the original manufactured
treatment device working in accordance with manufacturer's
specifications.
A. Primary technical guidance. Technical guidance for stormwater
management measures can be found in the documents listed at
Subsections A(1) and A(2) below, which are available from Maps and
Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, 428
East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; telephone
(609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, previous paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds. This document is also
available at www.njstormwater.org.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance. Additional technical guidance for
stormwater management measures can be obtained from the following:
(1) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540 or the Bergen County Soil Conservation District,
700 Kinderkamack Road, Suite 106, Oradell, New Jersey 07649;
(201) 261-4407.
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each soil conservation
district may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
(4) The United States Environmental Protection Agency, including the
National Management Measures to Control Non-point Source
§ 185-150 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-151
177:787
§ 185-152. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
Pollution from Urban Areas, available at the Web site:
http://www.epa.gov/owow/nps/urbanmm/index.html
(5) Field guides of the United States Department of Agriculture,
Natural Resources Conservation Environmental Protection, 428
East State Street, PO Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609)
777-1038.
(6) Other similarly authoritative governmental or trade association
sources acceptable to the Township of Rochelle Park.
A. General scope. This section sets forth requirements to protect public
safety through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. This section applies to any new stormwater
management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is intended to protect the opening in the top of a
stormwater management measure outlet structure. It is designed
to prevent obstruction of the overflow structure. If an outlet
structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
§ 185-151 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-152
177:788
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) Stormwater management basins shall include escape provisions as
follows:
(a) If a structural stormwater management measure has an outlet
structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. With the prior approval of the reviewing agency and/
or the Borough Engineer identified in Subsection C, a
freestanding outlet structure may be exempted from this
requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2.5 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1.5 feet above the permanent water surface. See
Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 7:8-6(c)3.
(d) An emergency draw-down method for detention basins is
required where the permanent pool will be more than 2.5 feet
deep. This draw-down method must consider downstream or
off-site stability at the outfall in accordance with the Standards
for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards:
(1) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 185-152 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-152
177:789
§ 185-153. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate through submission requirements
that the project meets the standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit to the reviewing agency, the required
number of copies of materials listed in the checklist for site
development stormwater plans in accordance with Subsection C of
this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Existing site conditions base map, including topography and the
following information:
§ 185-152 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-153
177:790
(a) The reviewing engineer may require upstream tributary
drainage system information as necessary. It is recommended
that the topographic base map of the site be submitted which
extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the
proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or
greater, showing two- contour intervals.
(b) The map as appropriate may indicate the following: existing
surface water drainage; shorelines; steep slopes; soils,
erodible soils; perennial or intermittent streams that drain into
or upstream of the Category One waters; wetlands and
floodplains along with their appropriate buffer strips;
marshlands and other wetlands; previous or vegetative
surfaces; existing man-made structures; roads; bearing and
distances of property lines; and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 185-147
through 185-150 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible. The applicant should refer
to the Township of Rochelle Park Stormwater Management Plan
and the Township of Rochelle Park Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan for additional requirements.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
§ 185-153 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-153
177:791
§ 185-154. Maintenance and repair.
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 185-148 of this article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure. The Township of Rochelle Park shall be
notified of site investigation activities and given the
opportunity to have a witness, either prior to approval or as a
condition of approval, as appropriate for the specific type of
measure. Subsequent to approval of the development,
postconstruction bulk soil density and infiltration testing shall
be required for all infiltration measures that were used as
justification for meeting the recharge standard, to ensure that
they were properly constructed.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 185-154.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The Township of Rochelle
Park official or board reviewing an application under this article
may, in consultation with the Borough Engineer, waive submission
of any of the requirements in Subsections C(1) through C(6) of this
article when it can be demonstrated that the information requested
is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the
applicant to obtain, and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
§ 185-153 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-154
177:792
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 185-145C of this article
shall comply with the requirements of § 185-154B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development. This plan shall be separate from all other
documents and designed for ongoing use by the site owner(s) or
operator(s) in performing and documenting maintenance and
repair, and by the Township of Rochelle Park in ensuring
implementation of the maintenance plan. The final maintenance
plan shall be updated and provided to the Township of Rochelle
Park postconstruction to include an evaluation based on the
specifications of the initial maintenance plan and as-built
conditions.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; safety needs;
identification of methods and disposal sites for materials removed
during maintenance; maintenance requirements for created
wetlands and other ecological systems; safety devices and systems;
warranty and operational standards from the manufacturer of any
manufactured treatment devices; and the name, address, and
telephone number of the person or persons responsible for
preventative and corrective maintenance (including replacement)
using maintenance guidelines for stormwater management
measures from § 185-151, the Township of Rochelle Park Municipal
Stormwater Management Plan, Township of Rochelle Park
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan, any relevant regional
stormwater management plan and the maintenance guidelines for
stormwater management measures as described in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the
maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer (for
example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as having
the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
§ 185-154 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-154
177:793
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsections B(6) and B(7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsections B(3) and B(4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency of
competent jurisdiction.
(10) Authorized representatives of the Township of Rochelle Park,
including but not limited to: the Borough Engineer, Superintendent
of Public Works and Building Department Official may enter the
site as needed in order to conduct on-site inspections as discussed
in Subsection D. The inspections shall be required to review and
confirm that the information filed in the required reports as stated
in Subsection B(6) are correct. Additional inspections and reviews
may be made as deemed appropriate by the Township of Rochelle
Park.
(11) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
§ 185-154 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-154
177:794
§ 185-155. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties:
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to
the responsible person and enforce penalties and/or liens as
determined by the Township of Rochelle Park and described below.
C. Performance and maintenance guarantee. Nothing in this section shall
preclude the municipality in which the major development is located
from requiring the posting of a performance or maintenance guarantee
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
D. Maintenance access. The maintenance plan shall specifically provide a
specific municipal right of access, which may include stormwater
easements or covenants. The maintenance access shall be provided by
the property owner(s) for access regarding facility inspections and
maintenance as required. Easements and covenants shall be recorded
with the Township of Rochelle Park prior to issuance of a permit.
E. Alteration of maintenance plan. Any alteration in maintenance
responsibility or alterations to maintenance plans and agreements must
be reviewed and approved by the Township of Rochelle Park Building
Department official or board that reviewed the application under this
article in consultation with the Borough Engineer, Superintendent of
Public Works and Building Department Official.
F. Recording of information. All maintenance information and alterations
to maintenance agreements shall be recorded with the office of the
Township of Rochelle Park Building Department Official as described in
Subsection B(8). Copies of the maintenance agreements and alterations
to maintenance agreements shall be included in the applicant's
stormwater management plans and documents. Recording of the
maintenance agreements in accordance with this article shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
A. Responsibility for administration. The Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works, Borough Engineer and Building
Department Official shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon
the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, Borough
Engineer or Building Department Official may be delegated in writing
to the person(s) or entities acting in the best interest of or in the
employment of the Township of Rochelle Park.
B. Enforcement of penalties and liens.
§ 185-154 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 185-155
177:795
§ 185-156. Effective date.
This article shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the ordinance by the county
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.
(1) Should the applicant/owner fail to take the corrective actions, the
Township of Rochelle Park shall then have the right to take the
available appropriate remedies it deems necessary to correct the
violations, including fining the owner pursuant to "Penalties for
violations" of the Township of Rochelle Park Land Development
Ordinance and to assert a lien on the subject property in an amount
equal to the costs of remedial actions. The lien shall be enforced in
the manner provided or authorized by law for the enforcement of
common law liens on personal property. The lien shall be recorded
with the Township of Rochelle Park and shall incur legal interest
from the date of recording. The imposition of any penalty shall not
exempt the offender from compliance with the provisions of this
article, including assessment of a lien on the property.
(2) Whenever a structural BMP is not implemented, operated, and/or
maintained in accordance with the stormwater management plan
which has been approved in accordance with this article. Any
penalty invoked shall be in accordance with "Penalties for
violations" of the Township of Rochelle Park Land Development
Ordinance.195
195. Editor's Note: See § 185-46, Violations and penalties.
§ 185-155 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 185-156
177:796
Part III, Board of Health
Chapter 188
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 185-156 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 185-156
188:797

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 520]
§ 188-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of
the Township of Rochelle Park of a general and permanent nature, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General
Code Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 188 through 204, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the
Township of Rochelle Park," hereinafter known and referred to as the
"Code."
§ 188-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 188-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall take effect 30 days after
the date of the first publication.
§ 188-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Secretary
of the Board of Health, to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during, all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 188-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Rochelle
Park" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 188-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 188-6
188:799
§ 188-6. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 188-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
the Secretary, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Secretary's office for the use of the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to
the effective date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 188-8. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 188-9. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 188-10. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 188-11. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
§ 188-6 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 188-11
188:800
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 188-12. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 188-11 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 188-13. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to November
20, 1967.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing salaries and duties
therefor which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which
are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith, or any ordinance
pertaining to the salaries and compensation of Board of Health officers
and employees.
H. An ordinance adopted April 27, 1931, to establish a Sanitary Code, and
any amendments thereto.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance
§ 188-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 188-13
188:801
§ 188-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of a chapter in Part III of the Code of
the Township of Rochelle Park, for which another penalty is not specifically
provided shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less
than $2 nor more than $500 for each violation, and each day upon which a
violation is continued shall be considered to involve a separate and distinct
violation.
(chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code): [Amended 5-5-1986
by Ord. No. 520]
§ 188-13 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 188-14
188:802
Chapter 194
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and licenses — See Ch. 100. Food and food establishments — See Ch. 107.
§ 194-1. Authority.
A code regulating retail food handling establishments, providing for the
inspection of such establishments and fixing penalties for violations, is
hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26.3-69.1 to 26.3-69.6. A copy of
said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of
the text thereof herein.
§ 194-2. Title.
Said code established and adopted by this chapter is in additional to the
New Jersey Sanitary Code, Chapter 12, "Construction, Operation and
Maintenance of Retail Food Establishments" and is referred to in same.
§ 194-3. State code on file.
Three copies of this chapter as well as Said State of New Jersey Sanitary
Code, Chapter 12, have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary
of this local Board of Health upon introduction of this chapter and will
remain on file there until final action is taken on this chapter for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 194-4. License required.
A. Courses prescribed.
(1) No retail food establishment, including restaurants, diners and any
other establishments selling or serving food to the public in the
Township of Rochelle Park shall be granted a retail food
establishment license unless the owner, manager or employee in
charge of other employees serving food on each particular shift has
successfully completed a course prescribed by the Rochelle Park
Board of Health pertaining to health, education, sanitation,
personal hygiene, food-borne illness, dishwashing and sanitizing
procedures, microorganisms, insects and rodents, and other
health-related matters. There are two such courses: an eighteenhour
food manager's certification course and a three-hour food
handlers course. The owner, manager or employee in charge of
other employees serving food on each particular shift must possess
a current certificate of satisfactory completion of the course which
must be available in the establishment at all time.
§ 188-14 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 194-4
194:803
(2) The certificate of satisfactory completion of the eighteen-hour food
handlers course shall be effective for three years from the date of
its issuance and shall be a prerequisite to any license being issued
to a retail food establishment after the appropriate fee has been
paid.
(3) Recertification of all who complete the food managers courses can
be obtained by completing another eighteen-hour food manager's
certification program or a three-hour food handlers course.
(4) The owner, manager and employees in charge of other employees
serving food on a particular shift shall have completed the
minimum of a three-hour food handlers course. The certificate of
satisfactory completion of the three-hour food handlers course
shall be effective for three years from the date of its issuance and
shall be a prerequisite to any license being issued to a retail food
establishment after the appropriate fee has been paid.
B. Food manager's and handlers courses.
(1) Commencing January 1, 2003, or such date as may be fixed by the
Rochelle Park Board of Health, each owner, manager or employee
in charge of other employees serving food on each particular shift
shall complete the first available three-hour food handlers course
prior to the Board of Health issuing an annual license to the retail
food establishment. In addition, before a license shall be issued the
retail food establishment shall pay the appropriate fee in
accordance with this chapter.
(2) Commencing January 1, 2003, or such date as may be fixed by the
Rochelle Park Board of Health, each owner, or key management
personnel actively involved in the daily operation of a retail food
establishment where food is prepared is required to take the first
available eighteen-hour food manager's certification course, and
employees in charge of other employees serving food on each
particular shift shall have completed the first available three-hour
food handlers course.
(3) Commencing January 1, 2003, and each year thereafter, or such
other date as may be fixed by the Rochelle Park Board of Health,
where an owner, manager or employee in charge of other
employees serving food on each particular shift has not completed
the three-hour food handlers course as set forth in Subsection A of
this chapter, the Rochelle Park Board of Health may issue a
temporary retail food license which shall expire on March 31. For
the issuance of such a temporary retail food license, the retail food
establishment shall pay the normal fee charged for the permit,
together with a special surcharge for the temporary retail food
license in the amount of $50. No part of the surcharge shall be
returned. The surcharge shall be used for the sole purpose of
administering this chapter on those retail food establishments
§ 194-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 194-4
194:804
whose owner, manager or employee in charge of other employees
serving food on each particular shift has not successfully completed
the three-hour food handlers course.
C. Additionally commencing January 1, 2003, or such date as may be fixed
by the Rochelle Park Board of Health, each new owner of a retail food
establishment where food is prepared is required to take the first
available eighteen-hour food manager's certification course, and
employees in charge of other employees serving food on a particular
shift must take the three-hour food handlers course. The Rochelle Park
Board of Health shall issue a temporary retail food license which shall
remain in effect for 90 days from the date of its issuance or until the
required eighteen-hour food manager's certification course and threehour
food handlers course has been given and satisfactorily completed.
For the issuance of such a temporary retail food license, the retail food
establishment shall pay the normal fee charged for the permit together
with a special surcharge for the temporary retail food license in the
amount of $50. No part of the surcharge shall be returned.
D. If there is no owner, manager or employee in charge of other employees
serving food to others on each particular shift who has satisfactorily
completed the eighteen-hour food manager's certification course or
three-hour food handlers course in accordance with this chapter, then
the retail food establishment shall be issued a summons to appear
before the Municipal Judge to answer the violation.
E. Ratings; summons.
(1) Any retail food establishment which receives an unsatisfactory
rating from the appropriate official inspecting the premises shall
immediately cease from serving any food or similar products until
the licensee has received a satisfactory rating from the inspector
conducting such inspections.
(2) Any retail food establishment which receives two conditional
satisfactory ratings within any twelve-month period shall have its
owner or manager appear at the regularly scheduled meeting of
the Township Committee to show cause why its license shall not be
suspended for failing to operate its premises in accordance with
Chapter 12 of the New Jersey Sanitary Code. The conditional
satisfactory shall be posted on the premises for such time as the
Board of Health and/or inspector believes it is necessary for the
preservation of the public health and safety. In addition, its owner
or manager must take and satisfactorily complete the next
available eighteen-hour food manager's certification course.
Failure of the establishment to adhere to this rule by licensing time
of the subsequent year will result in a surcharge of $500 on the new
license. (This is intended to be an incentive for the establishments
to take care of their responsibility to renew and to eliminate
secretarial phone calls and inspector trips to remind owners).
§ 194-4 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL § 194-4
194:805
§ 194-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of, of order promulgated under, this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than
$50 nor more than $1,000 for each violation. Each day a particular violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(3) In addition to the remedies stated above, the inspector conducting
the inspection shall cause appropriate summons to be issued for
the violation of Chapter 12 of the New Jersey Sanitary Code, the
Ordinance of the Township of Rochelle Park and applicable statutes
of the State of New Jersey.
F. Fees.
(1) Each licensee shall pay a license fee for the issuance to operate a
retail food establishment or other business in the Township of
Rochelle Park as set forth in § 100-2:
(2) Nonprofit organizations. Senior citizen establishments and
activities in Borough-owned buildings and religious institutions are
exempt from the fees imposed under this chapter.
G. A retail food establishment license issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall expire annually on December 31 of each year, and
application for renewal thereof shall be submitted, together with the
required fee, prior to February 1 of each year. Failure to obtain a license
for the new year by January 31 will result in a surcharge (late fee) of
$500. (This is intended to be an incentive for the establishments to take
care of their responsibility to renew and to eliminate secretarial phone
calls and inspector trips to remind owners).
H. A retail food establishment license issued by another Board of Health is
not transferable as to another license.
I. As concerns nonprofit organizations, whenever food is being prepared
at any of these facilities, a temporary permit, exempt from fees, must be
obtained from the Board of Health two weeks prior to the date of the
function. In order to obtain this permit, the following information must
be provided: date and length of function; type of food being prepared,
location of preparation; and approximate number of people being
served. The Board of Health has the authority to restrict the types of
food prepared and served.
J. Each nonprofit organization which prepares and serves food, in
addition to the matters set forth above in Subsection I, should have
someone from their organization take the three-hour food handlers
course.
K. Nursery schools preparing food or representatives of the nursery
schools preparing food must take the three-hour food handlers course.
§ 194-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 194-5
194:806
Chapter 199
PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 52.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 70.
Littering — See Ch. 127.
Noise — See Ch. 135.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 143.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 150.
§ 199-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
The Board of Health of the Township of Rochelle Park, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 3-69.6, does hereby establish and adopt,
as applicable to the Township of Rochelle Park, that certain code known
as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)," heretofore
approved by the New Jersey State Department of Health.
§ 199-2. Copy of standards on file.
A copy of said code is annexed to this chapter, and three copies thereof have
been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health of
the Township of Rochelle Park upon the introduction of this chapter and will
remain on file in said office for the use and examination of the public, until
final action is taken on this chapter.
§ 199-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any order
promulgated hereunder, or of the code established hereby, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $2 nor more
than $100 for each violation. Each day a particular violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 204
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 80.
Public health nuisances — See Ch. 199.
Land Use and Development
Regulations — See Ch. 185.
§ 204-1. Permits required.
§ 194-5 PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCES § 204-1
199:807
§ 204-2. Fees.
The following fees and charges are hereby established:
Service Fee
For obtaining a copy of this chapter $1.00
For preliminary examination of the
plot plan as to location and its
appearance
$ 5.00
For issuing a plumbing permit $ 20.00
For the issuance of a building permit
[Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
520]
For a private pool $ 40.00
For a public pool $ 250.00
For an in-ground pool $ 150.00
For electrical permit
Aboveground pool $ 30.00
In-ground pool $ 55.00
For the renewal of a permit to
operate a swimming pool
$ 1.00
§ 204-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. No person shall locate, construct, alter or operate a swimming or
wading pool until permits therefor shall have been issued by the
Building Subcode Official and the Board of Health as herein provided.
[Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 520]
B. Permits issued for the operation of a swimming or wading pool shall
expire annually on June 30 of each year, and application for the renewal
thereof shall be submitted with the required fee prior to June 1 of each
year. The fee for any permit issued after June 30 of any year shall be
prorated.
C. Permits required under this chapter may be denied or suspended by the
Board of Health for failure to comply with this chapter or the ordinance
pertaining to same.196 The Board of Health shall afford any person
whose permit is denied or suspended an opportunity to be heard before
the Board at a public hearing and, following said hearing, to be
informed of the Board's decision within 30 days after such hearing.
196. Editor's Note: See Ch. 80, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 204-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 204-3
204:808
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Township of Rochelle
Park.
BUILDING SUBCODE OFFICIAL — The Building Subcode Official of the
Township of Rochelle Park.[Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 520]
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — A swimming pool constructed on the
property owned by any individual and maintained for his private use.
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL — A swimming pool which is operated for profit
and is available to the public generally for a fee.
SEMIPUBLIC SWIMMING POOL — A swimming pool operated by a club,
group of persons or any organization not operated for profit and used only
for members of such group, club or organization and their guests.
SURFACE MANUFACTURED SWIMMING POOL — A portable pool
constructed of a plastic or any similar material, having a capacity of 1,000
gallons or more.
WADING POOL — A shallow pool intended for use by children, having a
depth of not more than 12 inches.
§ 204-4. Application procedure; issuance or denial of permit;
suspension.
A. Approval to locate and construct or alter. Swimming pools shall not be
located and constructed or altered by any person until the Board of
Health and Building Subcode Official have given formal approval
therefor by issuance of a permit. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
520]
B. Permits shall not be issued until the Board of Health has received and
approved a letter of application therefor, together with plans,
specifications and reports prepared by a licensed professional engineer
or registered architect fully describing and setting forth all data as
hereinafter required or as may otherwise be required by the Board of
Health or the Plumbing Subcode Official. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord.
No. 520]
(1) For locating and erecting portable artificial wading and swimming
pools, a letter of application and a simple plan shall be submitted to
the Board of Health for approval.
(2) An applicant shall submit for approval plans, specifications and
reports prepared by a licensed professional engineer or registered
architect which shall include the following data:
(a) Site and detail plans, pool layout, construction and dimensions,
including piping arrangements, pumps, bathhouses, toilet
facilities and all other pool appurtenances, including
recreational facilities.
(b) Pool water treatment units.
§ 204-3 SWIMMING POOLS § 204-4
204:809
(c) Disposal facilities for filter wastewaters, sanitary sewage and
shower wastes if municipal sanitary sewer is not available; well
construction if public water supply is not available.
(d) Proposed operation and maintenance procedure.
(e) Proposed supervisory personnel and safety equipment.
(3) A report that all regulations relative to the State Department of
Health watershed laws and other township ordinances that may be
applicable have been complied with.
(4) Upon compliance with all provisions of this chapter and approval of
the plans, specifications and report, together with the data
contained therein, a permit shall be issued for the location and
construction so requested.
C. Alteration.
(1) A permit to alter a swimming pool shall not be issued until the
Board of Health has received a letter of application therefor,
together with such plans, specifications or reports as may be
requested by the Board of Health to fully describe the proposed
alteration.
(2) Upon compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter and
approval of the requested alteration or proposal, a permit shall be
issued for said alteration.
D. Not conforming to chapter. Proposed design or construction features of
a pool differing from provisions of this chapter may be approved upon
submission of evidence to the satisfaction of the Board of Health that
public health or safety would not be affected by such design or
construction.
E. Existing swimming pools. Sections of this chapter relating to location
and construction shall not apply to swimming pools in existence at the
time of its adoption, except that any alteration of any portion or any unit
or units of such swimming pools shall be made in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter, but all provisions herein contained
relating to operation, maintenance and safety factors shall be
applicable.
F. Approval to operate. Swimming pools shall not be operated by any
person until the Board of Health has given formal approval therefor by
issuance of an appropriate permit. This permit shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place on the premises where it may be readily observed by
all persons. No person shall operate a pool whose permit is suspended.
G. A permit to operate a swimming pool shall not be issued until a properly
executed application containing information as requested on a form
supplied by the Board of Health has been submitted and approved.
§ 204-4 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 204-4
204:810
§ 204-5. General layout and design.
H. Persons denied a permit shall be notified in writing accordingly by the
Board of Health. Such notice shall specify the reason for such action
and the remedial action necessary to obtain approval for issuance of a
permit.
I. Suspension of permit to operate. The permit of any person to operate a
swimming pool may be suspended at any time when, in the opinion of
the Board of Health or its authorized agent, such action is necessary to
abate a present or threatened menace to public health.
J. Suspension notification. The person whose permit has been suspended
or his representative in charge of the pool shall, at the time such permit
is suspended, be informed that the permit to operate the pool is
suspended, the reason for such action and the remedial action to be
taken before the suspension may be lifted. Thereafter and within 24
hours, written notice of suspension containing the same information
given at the time a permit is suspended shall be forwarded by
registered mail to the last known address of the person whose permit
was suspended.
K. Hearings.
(1) Persons whose permits have been suspended shall be afforded a
hearing before the Board of Health within three days after such
suspension, or thereafter at such person's option, to show cause
why the suspension should be lifted. The Board of Health shall,
within seven days after such hearing, render a written decision
confirming or rescinding the suspension and shall notify the person
whose permit has been suspended, in writing, of its action and
reasons therefor.
(2) Persons whose permits have been denied shall be afforded a
hearing before the Board of Health within seven days after such
denial, or thereafter at such person's option, to show cause why a
permit should be granted. The Board of Health shall, within seven
days after such hearing, render a written decision confirming or
rescinding the denial of a permit and shall notify the person whose
permit has been denied, in writing, of its action and reasons
therefor.
A. Location. The site of all proposed swimming pools shall be such that
proper and adequate water supply and waste disposal facilities will be
available and shall not be in conflict with the provisions of P.L. 1954, c.
199,197 and Standards For the Construction of Sewerage Facilities For
Realty Improvements. No pool shall be closer to the side lines than six
197. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:11-23 et seq., Realty Improvements Sewerage and Facilities
Act (1954).
§ 204-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 204-5
204:811
§ 204-6. Diving stands and boards.
feet. There shall be at least 10 feet of distance from any foundation of
any building.
B. Layout. Pool layout shall be such that exits and entrances shall be
located at the shallow end of pool.
C. Materials of construction. All materials used shall be durable,
waterproof and easily cleaned. The bottom and sides of pools shall be
either white or a light color, except that aluminum paint shall not be
used as a finish. Pool sides and bottom shall be smooth and free from
cracks or open joints. Walkways around pools shall be of light color,
easily cleaned and slip-proof.
D. Marking. Critical depths of pools are those at both ends and also at
change-of-slope locations of the pool. Such critical depths shall be
conspicuously marked in a permanent manner on both the horizontal
and vertical surfaces of the pool and shall be visible in and out of the
water. Markings at one-foot-depth intervals are considered desirable.
E. Overflow gutter. Gutters shall extend completely around the pool and
shall be constructed with the lip of the gutter level throughout the
perimeter. Overflow gutters shall be of sufficient size and grade to
receive and carry off all overflow. Overflows shall be designed to permit
cleaning and repair.
F. Gutter drains. Gutter drains shall be provided at intervals not greater
than 15 feet, except that such intervals shall not exceed three feet in
either direction from any corner or irregularity in the scum gutter.
Outlets shall be at least 1 1/2 inches and properly covered.
G. Ladders and stairs. Ladders for entering and leaving a pool shall be
constructed of nonslip tread and shall be located at both sides of the
deep section. If the wall height at the shallow end is more than two feet,
ladders or steps shall be provided. Stairs or ladders shall have a
handrail at either side with the top leading out over the walkway. Step
holes shall not be permitted.
H. Enclosures. Pools shall be surrounded with a fence, wall or other
enclosure not less than four feet high but not more than six feet high,
for the safety and control of patrons, persons using the pool, spectators
and the enforcement of pool regulations. The Board of Health may
require additional safety devices for protection of small children using
private pools.
A. Diving stands, when provided, shall be rigidly constructed and properly
anchored with sufficient bracing to ensure stability under the heaviest
possible load. Slides and drop ropes shall not be permitted.
B. Floats. Fixed platforms and floats shall not be permitted.
§ 204-5 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 204-6
204:812
§ 204-7. Wading pools.
§ 204-8. Water circulation system.
C. Headroom. At least 13 feet of free and unobstructed headroom shall be
provided above diving boards and stands.
D. Height. Diving boards or platforms available for use by the general
public shall not be more than 10 feet above water level.
E. Covering. Springboards and diving platforms shall be covered with
cocoa matting or other nonslip material. The use of canvas for such
purpose is prohibited.
A. Layout. Wading pools, if constructed adjacent to a swimming pool, shall
be separated therefrom by a fence or other partition sufficiently high to
prevent waders from entering the swimming pool area.
B. Depth requirements. Wading pools shall not be designed or used for
swimming or diving. The maximum depth allowed shall be 12 inches.
A. Capacity. All circulation units shall have sufficient capacity to circulate
the entire contents of the pool within eight hours or less, except that if
scum gutter water recirculation is proposed, the units shall be capable
of recirculating the entire contents of the pool in six hours or less.
B. Pumps. Pumps shall have capacities as required in this section.
C. Piping. The piping system shall be designed to:
(1) Fill the pool.
(2) Circulate the pool water through the treatment equipment.
(3) Wash each filter individually.
(4) Filter to waste.
(5) Operate suction cleaner if recirculation pumps are used.
(6) Empty the pool.
(7) Drain the entire system.
D. Installation. The circulation system and pumps shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations by a registered
and bonded master plumber in the Township of Rochelle Park or under
the supervision of mechanics employed by the registered master
plumber, subject to approval by the Plumbing Subcode Official.
[Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 520]
E. Protection of potable water supply. Physical connections between
potable water systems and swimming pool circulation systems shall not
be permitted. Potable water for makeup shall be introduced either into
§ 204-6 SWIMMING POOLS § 204-8
204:813
§ 204-9. Filtration.
Suspended matter in the pool shall be removed by means of adequate
filtration equipment consisting of pressure or gravity filters designed and
operated as provided herein. All filters shall be of a corrosive-resistant
material. All filters shall be installed as recommended by the manufacturer
and have the approval of the Board of Health.
§ 204-10. Disinfection.
§ 204-11. Waste disposal.
a float-controlled surge tank having an air gap of at least six inches
above the overflow rim of the tank or directly into the pool by means of
a discharge pipe located beneath a diving board and turned downward
with an air gap of at least six inches above the pool overflow level.
Where the circulating pump is not adequate to operate such equipment,
auxiliary pumps shall be provided where necessary.
F. Hair catchers. At least one hair catcher shall be installed with duplicate
strainer baskets provided. Hair catchers shall be located on the suction
side of all pumps.
G. Suction cleaners. Suction cleaners, either portable type or as a part of
the permanent piping system, are required. Permanent suction cleaners
are to be installed in accordance with the recommendations of the
manufacturer and be approved by the Plumbing Subcode Official.
[Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 520]
H. Drains. Pools shall be equipped with at least one drain at the deepest
point capable of emptying the pool within four hours.
A. Disinfecting agent. Means shall be provided for continuous and
effective disinfection of swimming pool waters. Chlorine gas, chlorinebearing
compounds or bromine solutions shall be required as
disinfecting agents. The addition of ammonia to chlorine solutions for
the purpose of forming chloramines as the disinfecting agent shall not
be allowed without special permission of the Board of Health or its
authorized agent.
B. Chlorination. Chlorinating devices shall be of the solution feed type.
Gas masks shall be provided where chlorine gas is used. Chlorinating
devices shall be located safely in housing properly vented as may be
approved by the Board of Health. Comparators for measuring residual
chlorine and pH shall also be provided. Solution tanks or crocks, each
having 48 hours' storage capacity, shall be required if hypochlorite
feeders are proposed.
A. Sanitary sewage waste and filter backwash shall be disposed of without
creating nuisance or sources of foulness.
§ 204-8 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 204-11
204:814
§ 204-12. Dressing rooms and bathhouses.
§ 204-13. Emergency equipment.
Rescue equipment shall be in compliance with rules and regulations of
the State Department of Health, P.L. 1946, c. 172, as set forth in N.J.S.A.
26:4A-1, 4A-2 and 4A-3.199
§ 204-14. Bathing water quality.
B. The installation of individual sewage disposal systems or other means of
private sewage disposal shall not be approved if a sanitary sewer is
available within 500 feet.
C. The discharge of filter backwash water into the waters of the state shall
not be permitted unless adequate treatment of such wastewaters shall
first be provided in such a manner as to meet the requirements of the
State Department of Health.
D. Plumbing. The installation, maintenance, repair and control of
plumbing facilities and the installation of pool equipment shall comply
and be in accordance with the current ordinance and regulating
provisions of the Board of Health.198
A. Dressing rooms or bathhouses to be used simultaneously by both sexes
shall be entirely separated by partitions. Line of sight shall be broken at
entrance and exits of dressing rooms.
B. Floors of all dressing and locker rooms shall be constructed of smoothfinished
material impervious to moisture. Wood slats or floors shall not
be permitted. Floors shall have sufficient pitch or otherwise be
constructed as to permit proper drainage after washing down. Walk
areas used by patrons shall be of nonslip construction.
C. Dressing rooms or bathhouses shall be so constructed as to provide
ventilation at floor and ceiling levels.
A. Analysis.
(1) All chemical and bacteriological analysis of swimming pool waters
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the
current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Sewage, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association and the American Water Works Association.
(2) The standard test for the coliform group shall consist of the
presumptive and coliform tests, the latter being required when
presumptive evidence of coliform organism is indicated.
198. Editor's Note: The installation of plumbing facilities is currently regulated under the State
Uniform Construction Code provided for in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
199. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 26:4A-1 et seq. was repealed by L. 1991, c. 135. See now N.J.S.A.
4A:4 et seq.
§ 204-11 SWIMMING POOLS § 204-14
204:815
(3) The standard test for total bacteria shall consist of the standard
agar plate count at 37º C.
B. Procedure.
(1) Swimming pool operators shall have pool water samples analyzed
by a laboratory approved by the Board of Health unless otherwise
directed by the Board of Health or its authorized agent.
(2) Reports of all analyses shall be forwarded to the Board of Health or
its authorized agent within 48 hours after completion.
C. Frequency. Samples shall be collected at least once weekly at both ends
of pool during heavy period of bathing load.
D. Disinfectants. All samples of swimming pool water shall be collected in
bottles containing sodium thiosulfate. In freeing samples of chlorine,
the procedure given in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Sewage shall be followed.
E. Bacterial quality standards. For the purpose of this chapter, the
bacterial quality of swimming pool waters shall be judged on the basis
of plate count and coliform densities as hereinafter prescribed:
(1) Standard portion. A standard portion shall consist of 10 milliliters.
(2) Standard sample. A standard sample of pool water shall consist of
five standard portions.
(3) Standard sampling. For the purpose of this chapter, a standard
sampling shall consist of the 10 standard portions obtained from
two samples taken from the pool in accordance with Subsection C.
(4) Maximum coliform densities. Of all 10 standard portions obtained
from a standard sampling, not more than one portion shall show the
presence of organisms of the coliform group at any time.
(5) Maximum plate counts. The total plate count of a sample taken at
either end of the pool shall not exceed 250 bacteria per milliliter at
any time.
F. Samples not meeting standards. The Board of Health or its agent shall
obtain and have additional samples analyzed if those taken pursuant to
Subsection E(1) do not meet standards established in Subsection E(4).
G. Chemical quality. Free chlorine residuals and pH values shall be
determined not less than four times during any day a pool is in
operation. Free chlorine residuals and pH values shall be maintained
within ranges indicated below:
§ 204-14 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § 204-14
204:816
§ 204-15. Approval of pools; sanitary maintenance.
pH
Free Chlorine Residual
(parts per million)
7.0 - 7.6 0.4 - 0.6
8.0 - 8.4 2.0 - 5.0
H. Physical quality. The water of a pool, when in use, shall be sufficiently
clear to permit a black disk six inches in diameter superimposed upon a
white field placed at the bottom of the deepest end of the pool to be
clearly visible from the pool sidewalk at all distances up to 10 yards
measured in a horizontal distance from the projection of the disk onto
the pool surface.
A. Before commencing the installation of any swimming pool plumbing for
any swimming, bathing, public, semipublic or private swimming pool, a
permit authorizing such work shall be obtained from the Plumbing
Subcode Official. No permit will be issued for a public or semipublic
swimming pool until written approval has been obtained from the State
Department of Health. [Amended 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 520]
(1) The issuance of a permit based upon submitted plans and
specifications shall not prevent the State Department of Health or
the Board of Health from thereafter requiring the correction of
errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing
construction operations being carried on thereunder when in
violation of this chapter or any other pertinent ordinance, or from
revoking any approval when issued in error.
(2) All pools and the bathing houses used in connection therewith shall
at all times be kept in a neat and clean condition to the satisfaction
of the Board of Health.
B. Nuisance. A swimming pool constructed, altered or operated in
violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance
and detrimental to public health.200
200. Editor's Note: See Ch. 199, Public Health Nuisances.
§ 204-14 SWIMMING POOLS § 204-15
204:817
Chapter 209
(RESERVED)
Chapter 211
(RESERVED)
Appendix
Chapter A213
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A213-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance,201 the terms defined above202 shall have
the meanings there indicated, and the following additional terms shall have
the following meanings:
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey.
COMMITMENTS — The commitments, terms and undertakings on the part
of TCI set forth in § A213-9 below.
COMPANY — The grantee of the rights under this ordinance and known as
"Cablevision of Oakland, Inc."
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47 U.S.C. § 521
et seq., or as the statute may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television service, 47 CFR 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
not limited to those described in 47 CFR 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
MUNICIPALITY — The municipality of Rochelle Park, County of Bergen, in
the State of New Jersey.
STATE ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey relating to cable
television, known as the "Cable Television Act," N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., or
as that statute may be amended.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Regulatory Commission relating to cable television, N.J.A.C.
14:17-1.1 et seq. and 14:18-1.1 et seq., or as such regulations may be
amended.
201. Editor's Note: This ordinance (783-98) also supersedes former Ch. A213, Cable Television
Franchise, adopted 7-3-1978 by Ord. No. 411.
202. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
§ 204-15 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § A213-2
209:818
§ A213-2. Findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to the company
was held after proper public notice pursuant to law. Said hearing having
been fully opened to the public, and the municipality having received at said
hearing all comments regarding the qualifications of the company to receive
this consent, the municipality hereby finds that the company possesses the
necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications, and
that the company's operating the construction arrangements are adequate
and feasible.
§ A213-3. Purpose.
The municipality hereby consents to a renewal of the franchise, subject to
the terms and conditions of this ordinance and upon the condition that the
company accept the provisions of this ordinance and confirm, in writing,
that it shall comply with all of the commitments.
§ A213-4. Consent to renewal.
At the time this municipal consent becomes effective (as provided in
§ A213-28 below), and for and throughout the renewal term (as defined
in § A213-5 below), the municipality shall renew and continue its consent
for the company to place in, upon, along, across, above, over and under
the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places in
the municipality poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and
other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and
operation in the municipality of a cable television system.
§ A213-5. Duration of franchise. [Amended 7-21-2004 by Ord. No.
910-04]
The consent herein granted shall expire on November 9, 2013, 15 years
from the expiration date of the previous certificate of approval issued by the
Board of Public Utilities.
§ A213-6. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If the company seeks a successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration
of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval
in accordance with the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq. The
company shall also petition the Board for a certificate of approval
authorizing continued operation during the period following expiration of
the consent granted herein and until such a time that a decision is made by
the municipal governing body relative to the renewal of said consent.
§ A213-7. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property hereafter
annexed hereto.
§ A213-2 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A213-8
A213:819
§ A213-8. Franchise fee.
§ A213-9. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to offer service along any public right-ofway
to any person's residence or business located in the municipality, in
accordance with the proposal for the provision of services as described
in the application. Any additional extension of the system will be made in
accordance with the proposal as set forth in the application.
§ A213-10. Operation and service.
A. The company shall, during each year of operation under the consent
granted herein, pay to the municipality 2% of the gross revenues from
all recurring charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by
subscribers to its cable television reception service in the municipality,
or such other amount as may be fixed by law.
B. In the event applicable law hereafter permits a larger franchise fee to
be collected, but does not fix the amount thereof, the municipality and
the company shall negotiate in good faith with respect to the amount
thereof.
A. In transmitting its television signals to subscribers in the municipality,
the company shall provide a quality of signal that is at least as good as
that customarily provided under prevailing industry standards, and the
company shall comply with any requirements imposed by the federal
regulations, and any federal pronouncements, and (to the extent not
preempted by federal law) any state pronouncements relating to
technical standards for the transmission of television signals,
transmission quality or facilities and equipment.
B. The company agrees that it will provide such programming and services
consistent with the company's application as herein defined and any
additional services that the company believes are in the public interest
and in compliance with applicable law.
C. The company shall maintain all parts of the system in good working
order at all times and shall respond to all service calls and correct
malfunctions as promptly as possible, on a seven-day-per-week basis.
D. The company shall cause any and all construction plans relating to work
on any extensions of the company's plant or work which could have a
significant impact on public works within the municipality to be filed
with the municipality's Engineer. Nothing herein shall create any rights
or obligations with respect to construction work which are inconsistent
with any regulations or regulatory authority of the OCT or the Board.
E. In order to maintain its level of telephone accessibility for calls relating
to maintenance and repairs ("service") and to improve it for calls
relating to installation, addition or deletion of programming services
§ A213-8 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § A213-10
A213:820
§ A213-11. Compliance with law.
Notwithstanding any specific mention of applicable federal or state statutes
or regulations above, the company shall comply with all applicable
requirements of the federal act, the federal regulations, the state act and
regulations (to the extent not preempted) and any other valid statute,
regulation, rule or promulgation, specifically including, but without
limitation, those relating to equal employment opportunity.
§ A213-12. Construction requirements.
and other customer inquiries ("business"), the company shall do the
following:
(1) The company shall comply with any and all requirements of the
OCT or other regulatory bodies with respect to telephone
accessibility, facilities and personnel and shall use its best efforts to
comply with any OCT guidelines relating to the foregoing.
(2) Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment or complaint with respect to
telephone accessibility to the Complaint Officer (as designated in
§ A213-11 hereof) or impair the right of the Complaint Officer to
take any action which is appropriate under law.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the nature topography, the company shall, at it sole expense, restore
and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good condition as
existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
shall at its expense remove, re-lay and relocate its equipment.
C. Temporary removal of cables. The company shall, upon request of the
municipality, at the company's expense, temporarily raise, lower or
remove its lines and/or equipment in order to facilitate the moving of
buildings or machinery or in other like circumstances; provided,
however, that if such request is occasioned or necessitated as a result of
any nonmunicipal work or projects of any kind by a third party(ies),
then and in such event, the cost and expense for the company to
temporarily raise, lower or remove its lines and/or equipment to
facilitate the moving of any buildings or machinery or in other like
circumstances, shall be borne directly by such third party(ies).
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such trees
§ A213-10 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A213-12
A213:821
§ A213-13. Local office.
During the term of this franchise and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Such local business office
shall be open during normal business hours and, in no event, less than 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
§ A213-14. Municipal complaint officer.
The OCT is hereby designated as the Complaint Officer for the municipality
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall be received and
processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5 (recodified from N.J.A.C.
14:17-7.1 to 14:17-6.5).
§ A213-15. Programming.
§ A213-16. Construction timetable.
The company shall be required to complete any proposed construction
within the service area described in the application.
§ A213-17. Performance bond.
To secure its faithful performance of its obligations under a renewal of
the franchise during the renewal term, the company shall provide a
performance bond in the penal sum of $25,000. Such bond shall specifically
secure the faithful performance of all undertakings of the company as
represented in the application and in the commitments. The municipality
reserves the right by resolution to require a reasonable increase in the
amount of said bond, subject to review by the OCT and approval by the
Board.
from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company.
Such trimming shall be performed only after approval by the Township
Forester and only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance
for the company wires and cables. The company will be allowed to trim
trees without approval in emergency situations or where it may place
the company in violation of other regulatory requirements.
A. Although nothing herein shall require the company to carry or transmit
any particular television stations or programming source, the company
shall provide the subscribers in the municipality with at least the same
broad categories of programming, in approximately the same quantity,
as are now provided and which appear in the application.
B. The company shall comply with any state law or regulation and shall
use its best efforts to comply with any guideline, with respect to
maintaining space for a statewide interconnect channel.
§ A213-12 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § A213-18
A213:822
§ A213-18. Free services.
A. The company shall provide the installation of one outlet and basic
monthly service to each school, library and the following municipal
buildings in the municipality, free of charge: Borough Hall, D.P.W.
Office, Municipal Annex, Fire Headquarters and Ambulance Building.
Each additional outlet installation shall be paid for by the institution on
a materials-plus-labor basis. Monthly services on such additional
outlets shall be charged at the regular tariffed rates for additional
outlets.
B. In consideration of a ten-year franchise, Cablevision of Oakland shall
offer the the following equipment to the Township of Rochelle Park for
use in the production of public access television, per attached letter of
September 21, 1998:
(1) One olson modulator.
(2) One super VHS VCR.
(3) One character generator.
(4) One television monitor.
C. All of this equipment will be provided free of charge by Cablevision of
Oakland. The use of this equipment will enable the township to
cablecast character-generated messages on the cablevision access
channel.
D. Upon written request from the Township, the company shall provide to
state and locally accredited elementary and secondary schools and
municipal public libraries in the Township, without charge, the
following: one standard installation per school or library; one cable
modem per installation; and basic cable modem service for the term of
this ordinance for each installation. Each school and library shall be
permitted, at its own cost, to network up to 25 computers to the cable
modem provided by Cablevision. This offer shall be subject to the terms,
conditions and use policies of the company, as those policies may exist
from time to time. [Added 7-21-2004 by Ord. No. 910-04]
E. Upon written request from the Township, the company shall provide to
the Township’s Town Hall, without charge, the following: one standard
installation; one cable modem per installation; and basic cable modem
service for the term of this ordinance for each installation. The
Township shall be permitted to network, at its own cost, four personal
computers to the cable modem provided by Cablevision. This offer shall
be subject to the terms, conditions and use policies of the company as
those policies may exist from time to time.” [Added 7-21-2004 by
Ord. No. 910-04]
F. In consideration for the rights granted by this ordinance, Cablevision
shall provide a one-time grant of $3,000 to be used by the Township
§ A213-18 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A213-18
A213:823
§ A213-19. Public, education or governmental access channels.
The company shall provide access time to noncommercial public,
governmental and educational entities in the municipality on its local access
channels for noncommercial use as set forth in the application filed with the
municipality.
§ A213-20. Rates.
The municipality will not regulate the rates the company may charge
subscribers for its service, provided that, in the event the federal act
or other applicable law hereafter is amended to permit the exercise of
regulatory power over rates by municipalities, the municipality reserves the
right to exercise the maximum power permitted by law.
§ A213-21. Emergency uses.
The company shall be required to have the capability to override at the
headend the audio portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting
of emergency messages by municipal governing bodies.
§ A213-22. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000, covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damage or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system and
an excess liability (or umbrella) policy in the amount of $10,000. The
municipality shall be named as an additional insured under said policy.
§ A213-23. Incorporation of application.
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application and
any amendment thereto submitted, in writing, to the municipality by the
company, except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as
terms and conditions of this consent. The application and any other relevant
writings submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a
part hereof by reference to the extent they do not conflict with the state and
federal law.
§ A213-24. (Reserved)203
toward the purchase of PEG access programming and production
equipment. The equipment purchased shall be under the exclusive
control of the Township, and may be used solely for noncommercial
programming by the Township, its residents and schools, for the benefit
of Cablevision subscribers within the municipality. [Added 7-21-2004
by Ord. No. 910-04]
203. Editor's Note: Former § A213-24, Number of subscribers irrelevant, was repealed
4-21-1999 by Ord. No. 791-99.
§ A213-18 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § A213-25
A213:824
§ A213-25. Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid, preempted or unconstitutional by
any court or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision of this
ordinance, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions hereof.
§ A213-26. Consistency with future regulations.
Should any of the federal or state statutes, regulations or pronouncements
applicable to the regulation of cable television be modified in any way, such
modifications, to the extent they embody required terms and conditions
and meaningfully can be incorporated into this ordinance, shall be so
incorporated, consistent with any applicable effective dates specified in
such modification. To the extent that any such modification places limits
on permissible terms and conditions, and any provision of this ordinance
becomes invalid by virtue of such modification, the preceding section shall
apply.
§ A213-27. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances that are inconsistent with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed, but only to the extent of
such inconsistencies.
§ A213-28. When effective.
§ A213-29. Miscellaneous terms and conditions.
A. This municipal consent shall become effective as of the date upon which
the municipality receives written notification that the company accepts
the provisions of this ordinance, including the commitments.
B. This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication, pursuant to law.
A. Favorable terms. In the event that the township approves or permits a
cable system to operate in the municipality on terms more favorable or
less burdensome than those contained in this franchise, such more
favorable or less burdensome terms shall be applicable in this
franchise.
B. Request for nonfranchised competitive relief. In the event that a
nonfranchised multichannel video programmer provides services to
residents of the municipality, the company shall have a right to request
franchise amendments that relieve the company of regulatory burdens
that create a competitive disadvantage to the company. In requesting
amendments, the company shall file a petition seeking to amend the
franchise. Such petition shall indicate the presence of a nonfranchised
§ A213-25 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A213-29
A213:825
§ A213-30. (Reserved)
§ A213-31. Senior citizen discount. [Added 7-21-2004 by Ord. No.
910-04]
Cablevision shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount of 10%
off the monthly rate of the broadcast basic level of cable television reception
service to any person 62 years of age or older who subscribes to the
company’s cable television service, subject to the following: such discount
shall only be available to eligible senior citizens who do not share the
subscription with more than one person in the same household who is less
than 62 years of age; in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.2, subscribers
seeking eligibility for the discount must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and Disabled
program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21; the senior discount herein relates
only to the broadcast basic level of cable television service, and shall
not apply to any additional service, feature, or equipment offered by the
company, including any premium channel services and pay-per-view
services; and senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television
service beyond expanded basic service, including any premium or perchannel
a la carte service, shall not be eligible for the discount.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
competitor(s); identify the basis for the company's belief that a certain
provision of this franchise places the company at a competitive
disadvantage; and identify the regulatory burdens to be amended or
repealed in order to eliminate the competitive disadvantage. The
township shall not unreasonably withhold granting the company's
petition and so amending the franchise.
C. Removal of facilities. Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this
franchise, the company, at its sole cost and expense and upon the
direction of the township, shall remove the cables and appurtenant
devices constructed or maintained in connection with the services
authorized herein, unless the company, its affiliated entities or assigns
should within six months after such expiration, termination or
revocation obtain certification from the FCC to operate an open video
system, or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunication services.
§ A213-29 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § DL-1
A213:826
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
804-00 Capital ordinance NCM
805-00 Salaries for noncontractual
employees
NCM
806-00 8-16-2000 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
807-00 7-26-2000 Police Department: fees for
services amendment
Ch. 28, Art. II
808-00 Bond for 2000 road program NCM
809-00 Bond for removal of storage
tanks
NCM
810-00 8-16-2000 Length of Service Awards
Program
Ch. 21
811-00 12-20-2000 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
812-00 11-13-2000 Alcoholic beverages:
consumption on private
property
Ch. 58, Art. III
813-00 Salaries for patrolmen NCM
814-00 Salaries for SOA NCM
815-00 11-13-2000 Authorization to enter into
agreement to participate in
Bergen County Open Space,
Recreation, Farmland and
Historic Preservation Trust
Fund
NCM
816-00 12-20-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
817-01 Increase in CAP NCM
818-01 2-21-2001 Filming and videotaping Ch. 101
819-01 2-21-2001 Towing amendment Ch. 172
820-01 2-21-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
821-01 2-21-2001 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
822-01 Bond for municipal building NCM
823-01 2-21-2001 Police Department: fees for
services amendment
Ch. 28, Art. II
824-01 Bond for 2001 Road Program NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A213:827
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
824A-01 Salaries for noncontractual
employees
NCM
825-01 Bond for improvements to
Carlock Field
NCM
826-01 Bond for DPW truck with
plow
NCM
827-01 Bond amendment NCM
828-01 4-18-2001 Newsracks Ch.161, Art. III
829-01 4-18-2001 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
830-01 5-16-2001 Limousines amendment Ch. 169, Art. I
831-01 5-16-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
832-01 8-15-2001 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
833-01 7-18-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
834-01 7-18-2001 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
835-01 8-15-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
836-01 8-15-2001 Police Department:
establishment and regulation
amendment
Ch. 28, Art I
837-01 8-15-2001 Length of Service Awards
Program amendment
Ch. 21
838-01 9-19-2001 Garage sales Ch. 110
839-01 Withdrawn
840-01 Withdrawn
841-01 10-17-2001 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
842-01 10-17-2001 Fire Department amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1058-13
843-01 11-19-2001 Condemnation proceedings
of portions of premises
NCM
844-01 12-19-2001 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 102
845-01 12-19-2001 Police Department:
establishment and regulation
amendment
Ch. 28, Art. I
§ DL-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § DL-1
A213:828
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
846-02 2-20-2002 Increase in CAP NCM
847-02 4-17-2002 Alcoholic beverages:
regulations and control
amendment
Ch. 58, Art. I
848-02 2-20-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
849-02 Police Department fees Withdrawn
850-02 Capital ordinance NCM
851-02 Bond NCM
852-02 5-15-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
NCM; duplicate
ordinance
853-02 5-15-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
854-02 6-19-2002 Salaries NCM
855-02 6-19-2002 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
856-02 7-17-2002 Limousines amendment Ch. 169, Art. II
857-02 7-17-2002 Shade Tree Commission Ch. 42
858-02
Board of
Health
7-17-2002 Retail food establishments Ch. 194
859-02 Salaries NCM
860-02 Withdrawn
861-02 8-21-2002 Acquisition of property NCM
862-02 8-21-2002 Limousines amendment Ch. 169, Art. II
863-02 9-18-2002 Police Department:
establishment and regulation
amendment
Ch. 28, Art. I
864-02 9-18-2002 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
865-02 9-18-2002 Repeal Ord. Nos. 849-02 and
852-02
Repealer only
866-02 9-18-2002 Tattooing and body piercing
repealer; land use and
development regulations
amendment
Ch. 167, editor's
note only; Ch. 185
867-02 10-16-2002 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A213:829
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
868-02 11-13-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
869-02 11-13-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
870-02 Number omitted
871-02 12-18-2002 Alcoholic beverages:
regulation and control
amendment
Ch. 58, Art. I
872-02 12-18-2002 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 80
873-03 Increase in CAP NCM
874-03 2-19-2003 Landscaping amendment Ch. 123
875-03 2-19-2003 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
876-03 2-19-2003 Alcoholic beverages:
regulation and control
amendment
Ch. 58, Art. I
877-03 2-19-2003 Auxiliary Police Ch. 28, Art. IV
878-03 3-19-2003 Defense and indemnification Ch. 8
879-03 3-19-2003 Noise amendment Ch. 135
880-03 4-16-2003 Personnel amendment Ch. 27
881-03 Salaries NCM
882-03 Salaries NCM
883-03 5-21-2003 Sidewalk construction and
removal
Ch. 161, Art. IV
884-03 5-21-2003 Limousines amendment Ch. 169, Art. II
885-03 Bond NCM
886-03 6-18-2003 Noise amendment Ch. 135
887-03 7-16-2003 Basketball hoops amendment Ch. 64
888-03 7-16-2003 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 100
889-03 8-20-2003 Contractors amendment Ch. 83
890-03 8-20-2003 Schedule A and Schedule B Ch. 21
891-03 8-20-2003 Hotel and motel occupancy
tax
Ch. 166, Art. I
892-03 Capital ordinance NCM
893-03 Capital ordinance NCM
§ DL-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § DL-1
A213:830
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
894-03 9-17-2003 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 150
895-03 Capital ordinance NCM
896-03 10-15-2003 Parking on posted lands
amendment
Ch. 141
897-03 10-15-2003 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 28
898-03 10-15-2003 Property sale NCM
899-03 11-12-2003 First aid and emergency
squad
Ch. 16
900-03 11-12-2003 Sewers amendment Ch. 155
901-03 11-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
902-03 11-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
903-03 12-17-2003 Fines Chs. 88, 102, 141,
177, 180
903-04 CAP ordinance NCM
904-04 3-17-2004 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
905-04 4-21-2004 Personnel policy Repealer, Ch. 27
906-04 Salary ordinance See Ch. 39
907-04 Bond ordinance NCM
908-04 6-16-2004 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 150
909-04 7-21-2004 Defense and indemnification
amendment
Ch. 8
910-04 7-21-2004 Cable television franchise
amendment
Ch. A213
911-04 Salary ordinance See Ch. 39
912-04 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Not adopted
913-04 9-15-2004 Dog licensing and
registration amendment; fire
prevention amendment;
parking on posted lands;
abandoned vehicles
amendment; vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 88, Art. I; Ch.
102; Ch. 141; Ch.
177; Ch. 180
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A213:831
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
914-04 9-15-2004 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
915-04 10-20-2004 Recreation Committee Ch. 36
916-04 11-10-2004 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
917-05 1-19-2005 Exceed CAP NCM
918-05 CAP ordinance NCM
919-05 2-16-2005 Shade Tree Commission
abolished
Ch. 42, repealer
920-05 2-16-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 100
921-05 3-16-2005 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 102
922-05 3-16-2005 Sewers: connection fees Ch. 155, Art. II
923-05 3-16-2005 Stormwater management
regulations
Ch. 160
924-05 4-20-2005 Land use and development
fees amendment
Ch. 185
925-05 4-20-2005 Salaries See Ch. 39
926-05 5-18-2005 Personnel policies:
background checks
Repealed by Ord.
955-06
927-05 5-18-2005 Payroll services: electronic
disbursements
Ch. 26, Art. I
928-05 6-15-2005 Zoning Map amendment NCM
929-05 6-15-2005 Bond NCM
930-05 2005 noncontractual
employees
NCM
931-05 8-17-2005 Flood hazards areas
amendment
Ch. 104
932-05 8-17-2005 Littering amendment Ch. 127
933-05 8-17-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
934-05 9-21-2005 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
935-05 9-21-2005 Sex offender residency
restrictions
Ch. 156
936-05 Bond NCM
937-05 10-19-2005 Cats and other animals Ch. 73, Art. IV
938-05 Salaries See Ch. 39
§ DL-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § DL-1
A213:832
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
939-05 Salaries See Ch. 39
940-06 Bond: capital projects NCM
941-06 Exceed CAP NCM
942-06 Bond: resurfacing Grove
Street
NCM
943-06 Bond: resurfacing Oldis
Street
NCM
944-06 Salaries: patrolmen NCM
945-06 5-17-2006 Land development:
stormwater control
Ch. 185, Art. XXII
946-06 Bond: DPW design and
engineering
NCM
947-06 6-21-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 28
948-06 Salaries: 2006
noncontractual employees
See Ch. 39
949-06 6-21-2006 Alcoholic beverages:
regulation and control
amendment
Ch. 58, Art. I
950-06 Bond NCM
951-06 Emergency appropriation NCM
952-06 8-16-2006 Landscaping amendment Ch. 123
953-06 8-16-2006 Fire Department amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1058-13
954-06 8-16-2006 First aid and emergency
squad amendment
Ch. 16
955-06 8-16-2006 Personnel policies:
background checks
Ch. 27, Part 1
956-06 8-16-2006 Sewer laterals NCM
957-06 Bond NCM
958-06 11-8-2006 Salaries See Ch. 39
959-07 Emergency appropriation NCM
960-07 COLA ordinance NCM
961-07 3-21-2007 Contracts: political campaign
contributions by professional
service providers
Ch. 84, Art. I
962-07 3-21-2007 Marriage and civil union
ceremonies
Ch. 127A
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A213:833
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Res. No.
2007-76
4-18-2007 Personnel policies and
procedures amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1105-16
963-07 5-16-2007 Code Enforcement
Department
Ch. 80
964-07 5-16-2007 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 102
965-07 5-16-2007 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
966-07 Bond NCM
967-07 Salaries See Ch. 39
968-07 Salaries See Ch. 39
969-07 Bond NCM
970-07 7-18-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
Res. No.
2007-151
7-18-2007 Personnel policies and
procedures amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1105-16
971-07 10-17-2007 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
972-07 8-15-2007 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
licensing of collectors
amendment
Ch. 112, Art. I
973-07 9-18-2007 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
974-07 9-19-2007 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch.185
975-07 10-17-2007 Bond NCM
976-07 10-17-2007 Police Department: fees for
services amendment
Ch. 28, Art. II
Res. No.
2007-211
10-24-2007 Personnel policies and
procedures amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1105-16
977-07 12-19-2007 Salaries amendment See Ch. 39
978-08 2-20-2008 Bingo and raffles
amendment
Ch. 66
979-08 3-19-2008 Exceed budget; establish cap
bank
NCM
980-08 3-19-2008 Personnel policies and
procedures
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1105-16
981-08 Nepotism ban Not adopted
§ DL-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § DL-1
A213:834
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
982-08 4-16-2008 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
983-08 4-16-2008 First Aid and Emergency
Squad amendment
Ch. 16
984-08 5-21-2008 Salaries (DPW 2008, 2009
and 2010)
See Ch. 39
985-08 5-21-2008 Fire Department amendment Repealed by Ord.
No. 1058-13
986-08 6-18-2008 Personnel policies and
procedures amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1105-16
987-08 7-16-2008 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
988-08 7-16-2008 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
989-08 8-13-2008 Salaries, 2008
noncontractual
See Ch. 39
990-08 8-13-2008 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
991-08 Bond NCM
992-08 10-15-2008 Salaries amendment See Ch. 39
993-08 10-15-2008 Alcoholic beverages:
regulation and control
amendment
Ch. 58, Art. I
994-08 Bond NCM
995-08 12-17-2008 Personnel policies and
procedures amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1105-16
996-08 12-17-2008 Towing amendment Ch. 172
997-09 Not adopted
998-09 8-19-2009 Emergency appropriation for
revaluation
NCM
999-09 Bond NCM
1000-09 4-15-2009 Exceed budget; establish cap
bank
NCM
1001-09 5-20-2009 Construction codes; Code
Enforcement Department
amendment
Ch. 80
1002-09 6-17-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A213:835
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1003-09 6-17-2009 First Aid and Emergency
Squad amendment
Ch. 16
1004-09 6-17-2009 Certificates of occupancy Ch. 75
1005-09 6-17-2009 Recreation Committee; use
of recreation facilities
amendment
Ch. 36
1006-09 6-24-2009 Bond NCM
1007-09 7-15-2009 Mandatory recycling
amendment
Ch. 112, Art. IV
1008-09 7-15-2009 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 102
1009-09 Not adopted
1010-09 8-13-2009 Personnel policies and
procedures amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1105-16
1011-09 9-16-2009 Salaries, 2009 See Ch. 39
1012-09 10-21-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
1013-09 10-21-2009 General penalty Ch. 1, Art. II
1014-09 12-16-2009 Bond NCM
1012-10 3-17-2010 COLA ordinance NCM
1013-10 4-21-2010 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 102
1014-10 Number omitted
1015-10 6-16-2010 Planning Board/Zoning
Board of Adjustment
amendment; land use and
development regulations
amendment
Chs. 9; 10; 80;
161; 169; 185
1016-10 6-16-2010 First Aid and Emergency
Squad amendment
Ch. 16
1017-10 6-16-2010 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 100
1018-10 6-16-2010 Parking on posted lands
amendment
Ch. 141
1019-10 7-21-2010 Salaries, 2010 NCM
1020-10 8-18-2010 Various fees amendments Chs. 58; 88; 97;
100
1021-10 8-18-2010 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § DL-1
A213:836
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1022-10 10-20-2010 Police Department:
establishment and regulation
amendment
Ch. 28, Art. I
1023-10 10-20-2010 Police Department:
establishment and regulation
amendment
Ch. 28, Art. I
1024-10 11-10-2010 Historical Society Ch. 18
1025-10 11-10-2010 First Aid and Emergency
Squad amendment
Ch. 16
1026-10 11-10-2010 Fees and licenses
amendment
Ch. 100
1027-11 1-19-2011 COLA ordinance NCM
1028-11 3-16-2011 Bond NCM
1029-11 3-16-2011 Construction codes; Code
Enforcement Department
amendment
Ch. 80
1030-11 5-18-2011 Police Department: internal
affairs policy and procedures
Ch 28, Art. V
1031-11 5-18-2011 Police Department:
establishment and regulation
amendment
Ch. 28, Art. I
1032-11 6-15-2011 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
1033-11 6-15-2011 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
1034-11 6-15-2011 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
1035-11 6-15-2011 Recreation Committee: use
of recreation facilities
amendment
Ch. 36
1036-11 7-20-2011 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
1037-11 7-20-2011 Bond NCM
1038-11 8-17-2011 Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment
amendment; land use and
development regulations
amendment
Chs. 9; 10; 80;
161; 169; 185
1039-11 10-19-2011 Stormwater management
regulations amendment
Ch. 160
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A213:837
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1040-11 10-19-2011 Stormwater management
regulations amendment
Ch. 160
1041-11 10-19-2011 Stormwater management
regulations amendment
Ch. 160
1042-11 11-9-2011 Care of streets and highways
amendment; removal of
snow, ice, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 161, Arts. I
and II
1043-11 11-9-2011 Alarms amendment Ch. 55
1044-12 2-15-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1045-12 3-21-2012 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
1046-12 3-21-2012 Police Department:
establishment and regulation
amendment
Ch. 28, Art. I
1047-12 3-21-2012 Personnel policies and
procedures amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1105-16
1048-12 3-21-2012 General provisions: general
penalty amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II
1049-12 3-23-2012 Bond NCM
1050-12 Not adopted
1051-12 6-20-2012 2012 salaries See Ch. 39
1052-12 12-19-2012 2012 salaries amendment See Ch. 39
1053-12 10-17-2012 First Aid and Emergency
Squad amendment
Ch. 16
1054-12 10-17-2012 Bond NCM
1055-13 3-20-2013 Police Department:
establishment and regulation
amendment
Ch. 28, Art. I
1056-13 3-20-2013 Salaries, DPW 2013-2015 See Ch. 39
1057-13 3-20-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1058-13 3-20-2013 Fire Department Ch. 14
1059-13 5-15-2013 Salaries, noncontractual
employees 2013
See Ch. 39
1060-13 5-15-2013 First Aid and Emergency
Squad amendment
Ch. 16
1061-13 5-15-2013 Bond NCM
1062-13 6-19-2013 Salaries amendment See Ch. 39
§ DL-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § DL-1
A213:838
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1063-13 10-16-2013 First Aid and Emergency
Squad amendment
Ch. 16
1064-13 12-18-2013 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
rules and regulations
amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II
1065-13 12-18-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
1066-14 Withdrawn
1067-14 3-9-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1068-14 4-16-2014 Personnel policies: policies
and procedures amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1105-16
1069-14 6-18-2014 Salaries, noncontractual
employees 2014
See Ch. 39
1070-14 7-16-2014 Redevelopment plan NCM
1071-14 7-16-2014 Bond NCM
1072-14 8-20-2014 Streets and sidewalks:
removal of snow, ice, grass
and weeds amendment
Ch. 161, Art. II
1073-14 8-20-2014 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 70
1074-14 8-20-2014 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 150
1075-14 8-20-2014 Bond NCM
1076-14 9-17-2014 Towing amendment Ch. 172
1077-14 10-15-2014 Salaries, noncontractual
employees 2014 amendment
See Ch. 39
1078-14 10-15-2014 Vacant and abandoned
property: registration and
maintenance
Ch. 151, Art. I
1079-14 11-20-2014 Excavations in streets
amendment
Ch. 97
1080-15 Bond NCM
1081-15 Bond NCM
1082-15 Bond NCM
1083-15 Bond NCM
1084-15 Bond NCM
1085-15 6-17-2015 Secondhand dealers Ch. 154
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A213:839
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1086-15 6-17-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
removal of snow, ice, grass
and weeds amendment
Ch. 161, Art. II
1087-15 6-17-2015 Police Department:
establishment and regulation
amendment
Ch. 28, Art. I
1088-15 6-17-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 180
1089-15 7-15-2015 Bond NCM
1090-15 11-12-2015 Land use and development
regulations amendment
Ch. 185
1091-15 12-16-2015 Library Director Ch. 21A
1092-15 12-16-2015 Defense and indemnification
amendment
Ch. 8
1093-15 12-16-2015 Filming and videotaping
amendment
Ch. 101
1094-16 2-17-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1095-16 2-17-2016 Superintendent of Public
Works amendment
Ch. 31
1096-16 2-17-2016 Redevelopment plan NCM
1097-16 3-16-2016 Salaries (DPW) See Ch. 39
1098-16 4-20-2016 Bond NCM
1099-16 6-15-2016 Salaries (employees) NCM
1100-16 5-18-2016 Bond NCM
1101-16 6-15-2016 Fire prevention Ch. 102
1102-16 7-20-2016 Bond NCM
1103-16 8-17-2016 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 150
1104-16 9-21-2016 Garbage, rubbish and refuse:
rules and regulations
amendment; collection of
paper amendment;
mandatory recycling
amendment
Ch. 112, Art. II;
Ch. 112, Art. III,
Ch. 112, Art. IV
1105-16 10-19-2016 Personnel policies and
procedures amendment
Ch. 27, Part 2
1106-17 2-15-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
1107-17 1-25-2017 Police Department: special
law enforcement officers
Ch. 28, Art. VI
§ DL-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § DL-1
A213:840
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1108-17 5-17-2017 Bond NCM
1109-17 5-17-2017 Historical Society
amendment
Ch. 18
1110-17 6-21-2017 Salaries (noncontractual) See Ch. 39
1111-17 6-21-2017 Rental property: short-term
rentals
Ch. 150A, Art. I
1112-17 Not adopted
1113-17 7-19-2017 Excavations in streets
amendment
Ch. 97
1114-17 8-16-2017 Secondhand dealers
amendment
Ch. 154
1115-17 9-27-2017 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 150
1116-17 11-8-2017 Redevelopment Plan NCM
1117-17 Not adopted
1118-17 Tabled
1119-17 12-20-2017 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
1120-17 Tabled
1121-17 Tabled
1122-18 2-28-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
1123-18 2-28-2018 Peddling and Soliciting:
Nonsolicitation List
Ch. 144, Art. IV
1124-18 3-28-2018 Fire Prevention Amendment Ch. 102
1125-18 Salaries See Ch. 39
1126-18 Bond NCM
1127-18 Appropriation NCM
1128-18 Appropriation NCM
1129-18 Tabled
1130-18 9-26-2018 Towing Amendment Ch. 172
1131-18 9-26-2018 Library Director Repealer Ch. 21A, reference
only
1132-18 9-26-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
1133-18 12-12-2018 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
1134-18 10-24-2018 Personnel Policies: Policies
and Procedures Amendment
Ch. 27, Pt. 2
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A213:841
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1135 NCM
1136-19 2-27-2019 Crane Regulations Ch. 86
1137-19 4-24-2019 Land Use and Development
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 185
1138-19 NCM
1139-19 NCM
1140-19 7-24-2019 Smoking: Municipal
Buildings Amendment
Ch. 159, Art. I
1141-19 7-24-2019 Flood Hazard Areas
Amendment
Ch. 104
1142-19 NCM
1143-19 7-24-2019 Personnel Policies: Policies
and Procedures Amendment
Ch. 27, Pt. 2
1144-19 7-24-2019 Land Use and Development
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 185
1145-19 7-24-2019 Land Use and Development
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 185
1146-19 7-24-2019 Land Use and Development
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 185
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1147-19 7-24-2019 Salaries See Ch. 39 39
1148-19 10-23-2019 Personnel Policies:
Policies and
Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 27, Pt. 2 39
1149-19 10-23-2019 Salaries See Ch. 39 39
1150-19 10-23-2019 Land Use and
Development
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 185 39
1151-19 11-20-2019 Salaries See Ch. 39 39
1152-19 12-18-2019 Contracts: Political
Campaign
Contributions by
Redevelopers
Ch. 84, Art. II 39
§ DL-1 ROCHELLE PARK CODE § DL-1
A213:842
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1153-19 12-18-2019 Land Use and
Development
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 185 39
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A213:843

LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
185 Attachment 1
Schedule A
Area and Bulk Regulations
Township of Rochelle Park, New Jersey
[Amended 6-19-2002; 3-17-2004 by Ord. No. 904-04; 11-10-2004 by Ord. No. 916-04; 9-19-2007 by Ord. No. 974-07; 7-24-2019 by Ord. No. 1144-19; 3-25-2020 by
Ord. No. 1156-20]
Zone
Minimum
Lot Area
(sq. ft)
Minimum
Lot Width
(ft.)(2)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(ft.)
Minimum
Front Yard
(ft.)
Minimum
Side Yard
One/Total
(ft.)
Side
Corner Lot
(ft.)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(ft.)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Improved
Coverage
(percent)
Maximum
Building
Height
(st/ft)(1)
Max. DU
Per
Building
(sq. ft.)
Residential 5,000 50 100 25 5/15 15 30 25% of first 5,000
square feet and
12.5% remaining
square footage up
to a maximum of
1,600 square feet
50% 2 ½/30 1
Garden Apartment 10,000 100 100 25 15/30 No standard 25 30% NA 2½/35 16
Affordable Housing 80,000 100 150 40 25/50 No standard 50 40% 75% 3/36 20 per acre
AHO-1 This is an overlay zone. The area and bulk standards of each existing (underlying) zone district shall apply. For multifamily construction, the Affordable
Housing Zone area and bulk standards apply.
AHO-2 This is an overlay zone. The area and bulk standards of each existing (underlying) zone district shall apply. For multifamily construction, the Affordable
Housing Zone area and bulk standards apply.
Senior Citizen
Accommodation
3 acres 50 150 50 35/70 No standard 50 20% 40% 4/55 No standard
Senior Citizen Housing 30,000 100 150 25 25/50 No standard 50 25% 70% 4/50 No standard
Senior Citizen
Accommodation
3 acres 50 50 35/70 No standard 50 20% 40% 3/36 90
Business A, B and C No standard No standard No
standard
25 10/20 No standard 10(3) 40% No standard 3/36 No standard
Business Overlay BA 1
This is an overlay zone. The area and bulk standards of each existing (underlying) zone district apply, except for building height. The maximum building
height is 4 stories and 48 feet. For business and restaurant establishments the Business A zone area and bulk standards apply. Fast-food restaurants must
comply with the regulations set forth in § 185-108D.
Neighborhood Business 25,000 125 200 25 10/20 15 25 35% 70% 2½/35 No standard
Industrial A and B No standard No standard No
standard
25 10/20 No standard 10 (3) 60% No standard 3/36 No standard
Notes:
(1) Maximum height includes elevator towers and any other installation on the roof of the building.
(2) For an irregularly shaped lot, with sides that are not parallel, the average width may be taken in place of the actual street frontage, provided that the structure shall be set back so the front
building line meets the minimum width.
(3) When a rear lot line abuts a residential district, the minimum rear yard setback shall be 25 feet.
185 Attachment 1:1 Supp 40, Jul 2020


LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
185 Attachment 2
Township of Rochelle Park
SCHEDULE B
Schedule of District Use Regulations
[Amended 4-24-2019 by Ord. No. 1137-19; 7-24-2019 by Ord. No. 1144-19; 12-18-2019 by
Ord. No. 1153-19; 3-25-2020 by Ord. No. 1156-20]
No building or premises shall be erected, altered or used except for uses designated for each
district as follows:
Zone Principal Permitted
Uses
Conditional Uses Accessory Uses
Residential 1. Single-family
detached dwellings
2. Community
residences subject to §
185-108A
3. Municipal buildings
and facilities
1. Essential services subject to
§ 185-126C
2. Public, private or parochial
schools for general education
licensed by the State of New
Jersey, subject to § 185-126B
3. Churches, temples or other
places of worship, including
parish houses, Sunday schools,
rectories, parsonages or
convents subject to § 185-126A
4. Veterans, civic and
community clubs, and
charitable, religious and
philanthropic uses subject to §
185-126D
5. Satellite dish antennas,
subject to § 185-126E
6. Home occupations subject
to § 185-126G
1. Private garages, subject to §
185-120
2. Swimming pools and tennis
courts, subject to § 185-121
3. Garden houses, sheds and
playhouses, subject to § 185-
118
4. Fences and walls, subject to
§ 185-122
5. Signs subject to Article XX
6. Off-street parking subject to
§ 185-103E
7. Offices of resident
professionals, subject to § 185-
124
Garden
Apartment
1. Garden apartments
2. Community
residences subject to §
185-108A
3. Municipal buildings
and facilities
Any Residential District
conditional use under the same
conditions as prescribed therein
Any Residential District
permitted accessory use under
the same conditions as
prescribed therein
185 Attachment 2:1 Supp 40, Jul 2020
ROCHELLE PARK CODE
Zone Principal Permitted
Uses
Conditional Uses Accessory Uses
Affordable
Housing AH
1. Multifamily
dwellings
2. Community
residences subject to
§ 185-108A
3. Municipal buildings
and facilities
1. None 1. All customary and
incidental uses
Affordable
Housing
Overlay-1
1. Uses permitted in
the underlying zoning
2. Multifamily
dwellings and
townhouse dwellings
subject to a minimum
affordable set-aside in
conformance with
§ 185-110.1
3. Community
residences subject to
§ 185-108A
4. Municipal buildings
and facilities
1. None 1. All customary and
incidental uses
Affordable
Housing
Overlay-2
1. Uses permitted in
the underlying zoning
2. Multifamily
dwellings and
townhouse dwellings
subject to a minimum
affordable set-aside in
conformance with
§ 185-110.2
3. Community
residences subject to
§ 185-108A
4. Municipal buildings
and facilities
1. None 1. All customary and
incidental uses
Senior Citizen
Accommodation
SCA
1. Age restricted
dwellings for senior
citizens
2. Assisted living
facilities
3. Residential health
care facilities
4. Community
residences subject to §
185-108A
Any Affordable Housing
District conditional use under
the same conditions as
prescribed therein
Any Affordable Housing
District permitted accessory
use under the same conditions
as prescribed therein
185 Attachment 2:2 Supp 40, Jul 2020
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Zone Principal Permitted
Uses
Conditional Uses Accessory Uses
Senior Citizen
Housing SCH3
1. Multifamily
dwellings, garden
apartments and
townhouse dwellings
age restricted for senior
citizens
2. Community
residences subject to §
185-108A
Any Senior Citizen
Accommodation District
conditional use under the same
conditions as prescribed therein
Any Senior Citizen
Accommodation District
accessory use under the same
conditions as prescribed therein
Business A 1. Retail trade and
service establishments,
excluding drive-in
facilities
2. Eating and drinking
establishments,
excluding drive-in
facilities
3. Business and
professional offices
4. Banks and financial
institutions, excluding
drive-in facilities
5. Municipal buildings
and facilities
6. Child-care centers
subject to § 185-108B
7. Hand wash systems2
[Added 12-20-2000 by
Ord. No. 811]
1. Essential services subject to
§ 185-126C
2. Service stations subject to §
185-126H
3. Veterans, civic and
community clubs, charitable,
religious and philanthropic
organizations subject to § 185-
126D
4. Satellite dish antennas,
subject to § 185-126E
5. Churches, temples or other
places of worship, including
Sunday Schools, rectories,
parsonages and convents,
subject to
§ 185-126A
6. Public, private or parochial
schools for general education
licensed by the State of New
Jersey, subject to § 185-126B
7. Nursing homes and
residential health care facilities
subject to
§ 185-126J
8. Auto sales shall be
permitted as a conditional use
only along Route 17.
1. Off-street parking and
loading facilities
2. Signs
3. Fences
Business B 1. Any Business A
District Use
1. Motels, subject to
§ 185-126I
1. Off-street parking and
loading facilities
2. Signs
3. Fences
185 Attachment 2:3 Supp 40, Jul 2020
ROCHELLE PARK CODE
Zone Principal Permitted
Uses
Conditional Uses Accessory Uses
Business C 1. Any use permitted in
residential districts
except a residence
2. Professional and
business offices and
studios, data processing
centers, travel agencies
3. Banks
4. Funeral homes
1. Any Business A conditional
use
1. Off-street parking and
loading facilities
2. Signs
3. Fences
Business
Overlay BA 1
1. Uses permitted in
Business A zone
2. Adult video stores,
establishments selling
adult entertainment,
theaters, minitheaters,
adult book stores, live
entertainment
consisting of adult
themes or other
sexually oriented
businesses subject to
the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2
3. Restaurants, catering
and fast-food
establishments
4. Tattooing parlors or
studios(5)
5. Body piercing
parlors or studios(5)
6. Retail
establishments for the
sale of medical
marijuana licensed by
the State of New Jersey
under the
Compassionate Use
Medical Marijuana Act,
not including
cultivation, harvesting,
manufacturing or
processing facilities.
None 1. Off-street parking and
loading facilities
2. Signs
3. Fences
185 Attachment 2:4 Supp 40, Jul 2020
LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Zone Principal Permitted
Uses
Conditional Uses Accessory Uses
Neighborhood
Business (1)
1. Beauty parlors
2. Barbershops
3. Cleaning
establishments
4. Candy stores
5. Drugstores
6. Bakeries
7. Shoe repair shop
8. Real estate offices(4)
9. Insurance offices(4)
10. Locksmith(4)
11. Martial arts studio(4)
12. Hardware store(4)
13. Photographic
studio(4)
14. Mailbox/business
service(4)
15. Newsstand(4)
16. Tanning salon(4)
17. Sports memorabilia
store(4)
18. Pet supply store(4)
19. Stationery store(4)
20. Antique store(4)
21. Tailor shop(4)
22. Art gallery(4)
23. Financial services
office(4)
24. Butcher shop(4)
25. In addition to the
foregoing specific uses,
the permitted uses
within this zone shall
include retail
establishments which
provide goods and
services which are
substantially similar to
those specifically listed
above and which
provide goods and
services for limited
areas of the community.
Specifically excluded,
however, shall be those
uses which are
permitted in the BA-1
District (Business
Overlay).(6)
1. None 1. Off-street parking and
loading facilities
2. Signs
3. Fences
185 Attachment 2:5 Supp 40, Jul 2020
ROCHELLE PARK CODE
Zone Principal Permitted
Uses
Conditional Uses Accessory Uses
Industrial A 1. Any Business A use
2. Storage, warehouses
and truck terminals
3. Assembly and/or
distribution of goods or
products
4. Light manufacturing
plants which do not
entail emission of odor,
dust, gas or excessive
amount of noise
1. Essential services subject to
§ 185-126C
2. Satellite dish antennas,
subject to § 185-126E
3. Service Stations, subject to
§ 185-126H
4. Nursing homes and
residential health care
facilities, subject to
§ 185-126J
1. Off-street parking and
loading facilities
2. Signs
3. Fences
Industrial B 1. Any Industrial A use 1. Motels, subject to
§ 185-126I
2. Billboards, subject to § 185-
126K
1. Off-street parking and
loading facilities
2. Signs
3. Fences
(1) It is the intent of this zone to maintain the same types of retail establishments which exist in the zone,
which generally allow for only low traffic retail uses. The following uses are prohibited in this zone:
luncheonettes, taverns, sandwich stand, pizza stores and take-out facilities.
(2) In addition to the requirements in Schedule A, this use shall require that the drainage and flow of
water shall contain a recycling system, and no drainage and flow of water shall be allowed into the
sewer or storm drain facilities within the township.
(3) Prior uses in this zone, specifically business uses, are continued as alternate uses. [Added 8-16-2000
by Ord. No. 806]
(4) [Added 9-18-2002 by Ord. No. 864-02]
(5) [Added 9-18-2002 by Ord. No. 866-02]
(6) [Added 2-19-2003 by Ord. No. 875-03]
185 Attachment 2:6 Supp 40, Jul 2020