Adopting Ordinance
:1

Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AO:1

Municipal Code
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AO:3

Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [New]
This book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Springfield (1996)" and is herein referred to as the "Revision" or "Code".
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [New; Ord. No. 02-08 § I(C)]
For the purpose of this Revision and in the interpretation and application of all other
ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
ADMINISTRATOR — Shall mean the Administrator of the Township duly appointed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.
CLERK OR TOWNSHIP CLERK — Shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-137.
DAYS — Shall mean calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the township government
established or designated by ordinance or this Revision as a department, together with
any agency or instrumentality of the township government assigned to such
organizational unit by the Township Committee.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Township Committee of the Township of
Springfield.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Revision.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Township of Springfield in the County of Union,
State of New Jersey, and any corporate successor thereof.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath. In such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be construed
to be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL AND THE TITLE OF AN OFFICER OR OFFICIAL—Shall
be construed as if the words of the Township of Springfield followed it.
ORDINANCE—Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Revision, so long as it shall have been adopted by the procedure
required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it shall remain in force and effect
pursuant to law.
OWNER — Shall mean any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of a building
or land.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural person, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or unincorporated groups; or
any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors or any kind of personal representatives
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:1
of any thereof in any capacity, acting either for himself or for any other person, under
either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Shall mean next before and next after
respectively.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC PLACES
— Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public ground, public square,
public park or other public place within the Township.
RESOLUTION — Shall mean an action expressing the sense or will of Township
Council on a matter of special or temporary interest. It may be written as required by
law or in the form of a verbal motion and may be adopted at the meeting at which it is
introduced, without publication or public hearing.
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every class of road, square,
place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT, — As applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Springfield in the County of Union and
State of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE OR COMMITTEE — Shall mean the Governing Body of
the Township, constituted and elected pursuant to law.
WEEK — Shall mean seven days.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [New; Ord. No. 02-28 §§ I(A), (C)]
For the purpose of this Revision and any other ordinances heretofore or hereafter
adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the present.
Any non-gender neutral word will be considered to include all genders and neuter, unless
otherwise required by the context thereof.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
Shall is mandatory and may is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and
including the last day, and if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall
be excluded.
Writing and written includes printing, typewriting and any other mode of
communication using paper or similar material which is in general use, as well as legible
handwriting.
And may be construed as meaning or, and or as and, if the sense requires and indicates
such meaning.
§ 1-2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 1-3
1:2
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing and
established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in any year.
Any citation of a Statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be deemed to
refer to such Statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or not such designation is
included in the citation.
Chapter shall mean one of the major divisions of this Revision, identified by an Arabic
number, and divided by subject matter.
Article shall mean a grouping of related sections within a chapter, designated by a title
and a Roman numeral.
Section shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
Subsection shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal number
following a section number.
Paragraph shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an alphabetical
letter and/or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [1991 Code §§ 1-10, 1-11; Ord. No. 93-2; New]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Revision shall be declared to
be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part, by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or paragraph shall, to the extent that it is
not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such
determination shall be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections
or paragraphs of this Revision.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.1
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [New; Ord. No. 2006-05 § 1]
For violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the Township of
Springfield, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in connection with the
provision violated, the maximum penalty upon conviction of the violation shall be by
one or more of the following: imprisonment in the County Jail or in any place provided
by the municipality for the detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding 90 days;
or by a fine not exceeding $2,000; or by a period of community service not exceeding 90
days.
§ 1-5.2. Minimum Penalty. [New]
The Township Committee may prescribe that for the violation of any particular provision
1. Editor's Note: Penalty provision in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:49-5. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, as amended
January 5, 2006, the adoption of the penalty of $2,000 assumes the following: Any municipality that chooses to impose a
fine in an amount greater than $1,250 upon an owner for violations of housing or zoning codes shall provide a thirtyday
period in which the owner shall be afforded the opportunity to cure or abate the condition and shall also be
afforded an opportunity for a hearing before a court of competent jurisdiction for an independent determination
concerning the violation. Subsequent to the expiration of the thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250 may be
imposed if a court has not determined otherwise or, upon reinspection of the property, it is determined that the
abatement has not been substantially completed.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5.2
1:3
of the Code or of any particular ordinance at least a minimum penalty shall be imposed
which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not exceeding $100. The
court before which any person is convicted of violating any ordinance or Code provision
shall have power to impose any fine, term of punishment, or period of community
service not less than the minimum and not exceeding the maximum fixed in the Code or
such ordinance.
§ 1-5.3. Additional Fine for Repeat Offenders. [New]
Any person who enters a plea of guilty or who is convicted of violating this Code or
an ordinance within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision
of this Code or of the same ordinance, shall be sentenced by a court to an additional
fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a
repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed
for a violation of the ordinance or Code provision, but shall be calculated separately from
the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance or Code provision.
If the Township Committee chooses not to impose an additional fine upon a person for a
repeated violation of any municipal ordinance, the Committee may waive the additional
fine by ordinance or resolution.
§ 1-5.4. Default of Payment of Fine. [New]
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance
may, in the discretion of the court by which he was convicted, and in default of the
payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in the County Jail or place of
detention provided by the Township, for any term not exceeding 90 days, or be required
to perform community service for a period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-5.5. Separate Violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of any provision
of this Code or any other ordinance of the Township exists shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 1-5.6. Applications. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an appropriate
penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal
Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all if there is no
minimum penalty set by ordinance, may be appropriate for a particular case or violation.
§ 1-6. MAINTENANCE OF CODE BY TOWNSHIP CLERK. [1991 Code § 1-7;
Ord. No. 93-2; New]
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Township Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing "The
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Springfield, 1996" required to be
filed in the office of the Clerk for the use of the public. All changes in the Revision
and all ordinances adopted by the Township Committee subsequent to the adoption
of the Revision, which the Township Committee shall adopt specifically as a part
§ 1-5.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 1-6
1:4
of this Revision, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to the Revised General
Ordinances, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-7. SEAL. [1991 Code § 101-1; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
The seal heretofore provided and used by and for the Township is hereby established
and continued as the seal of the Township. The seal is hereby described: The Continental
soldier on the seal is indicative of the Revolutionary background of the Township and
is representative of a statue erected at the Presbyterian Church in the center of the
Township in commemoration of the Battle of Springfield during the Revolutionary War.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5

Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 1-7 ADMINISTRATION § 1-7
2:1

ARTICLE I
Township Committee
§ 2-1. LEGISLATIVE POWER. [1991 Code § 30-1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:63-4 et seq., all legislative power of the Township shall be
exercised by the Township Committee.2
§ 2-2. ORGANIZATION. [1991 Code § 30-2]
The Township Committee will organize annually on January 1 or during the first seven
days of January in any year, at which time it will elect a Chairman, who shall have the
title of "Mayor," from among its members, and a Vice Chairman, who shall have the title
of "Deputy Mayor." The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Township Committee
and perform such other duties as the Township Committee may prescribe.
§ 2-3. THE MAYOR.
§ 2-3.1. Powers and Duties of the Mayor. [1991 Code § 30-3; New]
The Mayor shall:
a. Preside at all meetings of the Township Committee.
b. Appoint advisory committees to study and make recommendations to the Township
Committee.
c. Appoint advisory committees and or members to certain boards and commissions,
as permitted or required by law.
d. Appoint personnel to represent the municipality on State, County and regional
boards, committees, authorities or commissions when requested to do so by the
County or the State or when the best interests of the municipality will be served by
participation with other municipalities in regional undertakings. Such appointments
shall be with the advice and consent of the Township Committee unless otherwise
provided by law.
e. Issue proclamations concerning holidays and events of interest in the Township.
f. Serve as the municipality's chief official at meetings and ceremonies.
g. Execute contracts, agreements and other legal documents following authorization
by the Township Committee.
2. Springfield Township is governed under the Township form of government outlined in Chapter 63 of Title 40A of the
New Jersey Statutes. The Administrative Chapter has been drafted in conformity with the Township law and in many
instances, provisions have been restated in the Code. Other enabling laws pertaining to the Administrative Chapter are
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, Police Department; N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7, Fire Departments; N.J.S.A. 2A:9-7 et seq., Municipal
Court; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69, Zoning Board of Adjustment; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, Planning Board; N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq.,
Board of Health. Other authority to regulate the internal affairs of the Township is contained in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2. For
statutes requiring the taking of oaths of office and requiring bond of certain officers and employees, see Local Fiscal
Affairs Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:5-33 et seq. For salary grades and ranges, wages, compensation and fees of all officers and
employees of the Township, see the current salary ordinances of the Township. Such ordinances are not included in
these Revised Ordinances, but are saved from repeal. See Adopting Ordinance.
§ 2-1 ADMINISTRATION § 2-3.1
2:3
§ 2-3.2. Duties of the Deputy Mayor. [1991 Code § 30-2; New]
In the absence of the Mayor, when the Mayor has informed the Township Committee
of his or her expected absence and the duration thereof, or in the event the Mayor is
incapacitated from performing his or her duties, the Deputy Mayor shall have all of the
powers and duties of the Mayor and shall serve and be known as the "Acting Mayor".
§ 2-4. MEETINGS.
§ 2-4.1. Regular Meetings. [1991 Code § 30-4A]
The Township Committee shall meet on the second and fourth Tuesdays in each month
and have such other meetings or adjourned meetings at such time and place as it may by
resolution direct, but all regular meetings shall be held within the Township.
§ 2-4.2. Special Meetings. [1991 Code § 30-4; New; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
A special meeting may be called at any time upon written request of a majority of the
members of the Township Committee. The request and call for a special meeting shall
specify the purpose of the meeting, and no business shall be transacted at any special
meeting other than that specified. The call for a special meeting shall be filed with
the Clerk and served upon each Committee member as hereinafter provided at least
48 hours prior to the time for which the meeting is called, provided that the Mayor
may determine that an emergency exists affecting the health or safety of the people,
which requires consideration by the Township Committee within a shorter time, and
upon such determination which the Mayor shall set forth in the call, the call may be
filed with the Clerk at any time prior to the time set for the meetings. Upon the filing
of any call for a special meeting, subject to the requirement of the Sunshine Law, the
Clerk shall forthwith give notice thereof by telephone to each Township Committee
member at such place as each shall have previously designated for that purpose, and
shall also serve or cause to be served a written copy of the call upon each Township
Committee member, by delivery of a copy to each of them personally or by the leaving
of a copy at each of their usual places of abode. The Police Department shall cooperate
with the Clerk in effectuating such service of notice. Upon waiver of notice by all
members of the Township Committee, a special meeting may be held without prior
notice notwithstanding the above provisions of this section.
§ 2-4.3. Open Meetings; Rules of Procedure. [1991 Code § 30-5]
All regular and special meetings of the Township Committee shall be open to the public.
The rules of procedure to be followed for the conduct of business of the Committee shall
be provided by resolution.
§ 2-4.4. Conference Meetings. [1991 Code § 30-6]
In accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq., the
h. Serve as a member ex officio on certain statutory boards and commissions.
i. Exercise every other power usually exercised by Township Mayors or conferred
upon him or her by law and formal action by the Township Committee.
§ 2-3.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-4.4
2:4
Committee may meet at any time in informal conference, which shall include executive
sessions and work sessions, for the consideration of any Township business or to meet
with any officer or employee of the Township or any other person on Township business.
No person other than those specifically invited by the Committee to attend shall be
authorized to participate in any such conference.
§ 2-4.5. Quorum. [1991 Code § 30-7; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(D)]
A majority of the whole number of members of the Township Committee shall constitute
a quorum, and no ordinance shall be adopted by the Township Committee without the
affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum of the Committee. If a quorum is not present
15 minutes after the appointed time for any meeting, those members present may declare
the meeting adjourned.
§ 2-4.6. Roll-Call Vote; Minutes. [1991 Code § 30-8]
When mandated by law, the vote upon every resolution or ordinance shall be taken by
roll call, and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the minutes. The minutes of each
meeting shall be signed by the Township Clerk.
§ 2-4.7. Agenda. [New; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(D)]
The agenda for each meeting of the Township Committee shall be prepared by the
Township Clerk. Except for important or timely matters which may be added to the
agenda at any time with the approval of a majority of those present of the Township
Committee, the agenda for each meeting of the Committee shall include only such
matters of Committee business as have been prescribed or delivered to the Township
Clerk not later than 12:00 noon on the Friday preceding the meeting. The Township
Clerk will prepare a tentative agenda which shall be considered and approved by the
Committee at its agenda or conference meeting preceding the regular or special meeting.
The Clerk shall post a copy of the agenda in a conspicuous place in the meeting room.
§ 2-4.8. Ordinances. [1991 Code § 30-9]
All ordinances shall be introduced, read, heard and enacted in the manner provided by
general law.
§ 2-5. APPOINTMENTS TO WORKING COMMITTEES. [1991 Code § 30-10;
Ord. No. 91-17; Ord. No. 92-27; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
The Mayor shall appoint members of the working committees of the Township
Committee. Such nomination process may be a part of the annual reorganization meeting
in January. These working committee appointments will be made so that each member
of the Township Committee serves on an equal number of working committees. Any
reorganization of these working committees shall be done so that equality of
membership is maintained. The current number and functions of the five working
committees shall not be altered except by an ordinance duly adopted.
§ 2-6. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
§ 2-6.1. Disclosure Required. [Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
§ 2-4.4 ADMINISTRATION § 2-6.1
2:5
§ 2-6.2. Recusal. [1991 Code § 30-12; Ord. No. 92-30; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
Where a conflict of interest exists or may exist, as the Committee deliberates or votes on
that issue, it is expected that the Committee member recuse himself from the vote so as
not to bring into question the fair and impartial action of the Committee.
§ 2-7. HIRING AUTHORITY. [Ord. No. 2002-21]
No person shall be hired for employment by the Township, except by a roll call majority
vote of the Township Committee members present.
§ 2-8. through § 2-10 (RESERVED)
a. Any and all members of the Township Committee must submit to the Township
Administrator a written notice of any business dealings with one or more employees
of the Township. A business dealing is to be considered an enterprise in which
money is exchanged for services rendered, some monetary benefit is expected to
accrue for either or both parties or a venture where a third party may expect
monetary benefits. These can be, but are not limited to, partnerships, corporations
(not publicly listed) or professional relationships. Items excluded from this include,
but are not limited to, taxes or Committee salaries.
b. These notices will be retained by the Administrator and may be reviewed by any
member of the Township Committee. These are to be considered as part of the
permanent record of this Township and may be referred to by members of the
Township Committee.
§ 2-6.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-8
2:6
ARTICLE II
Officers and Employees
§ 2-11. (RESERVED)3
§ 2-12. TOWNSHIP ADMINISTRATOR.
§ 2-12.1. Creation of Office of Township Administrator. [1991 Code § 8-1; Ord.
No. 98-30 § 8-1; Ord. No. 2012-34 § 3]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136, there is hereby created the position of the Township
Administrator of the Township of Springfield.
§ 2-12.2. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 98-30 § 8-2; Ord. No. 99-31 § 1[A]; Ord. No.
2005-04 § I]
§ 2-12.3. Appointment; Term; Vacancy or Absence; Removal. [Ord. No. 98-30
§ 8-3; Ord. No. 2005-24 § I; amended 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
a. The Township Administrator must be a New Jersey resident, and preference shall
be given to persons living within Union County and contiguous counties.
b. The Township Administrator shall have the necessary executive and administrative
abilities and qualifications, based upon relevant education, training and experience
in municipal government. Minimum qualifications shall include the possession of
an advanced (post-graduate) degree, or alternatively, a minimum of one year
experience in a comparable position, preferably in a New Jersey municipality.
a. The Township Administrator shall be appointed by a majority vote of the full
membership of the Township Committee.
b. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-137, the term of office of the Township Administrator
shall be at the pleasure of the Township Committee.
c. The Township Administrator shall be removed from office only in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-138.
d. During periods of temporary absence that do not exceed 10 consecutive days (e.g.,
vacation, conference or minor illness), the Township Administrator shall appoint an
acting administrator, and shall provide advance notice of such appointment to the
Township Committee, which appointment shall terminate upon the return to work
of the Township Administrator. However, the Township Committee may appoint
an acting administrator of its own choosing whenever the Township Administrator
is temporarily absent, disabled or disqualified, which appointment shall supersede
any temporary appointment made under this subsection.
e. In the event of a temporary absence or disability of the Township Administrator
which exceeds 10 days in length, the Township Committee may, by resolution,
appoint an officer or employee of the Township of Springfield to perform the duties
3. Editor's Note: Subsections 2-11.1 through 2-11.3 regarding departmental organization were deleted by Ord. No.
2015-19.
§ 2-11 ADMINISTRATION § 2-12.3
2:7
§ 2-12.4. Full-Time or Part-Time; Salary; Political Activity. [1991 Code § 8-8;
Ord. No. 98-30 § 8-4; Ord. No. 99-31 § CII; amended 11-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-20]
§ 2-12.5. Duties and Responsibilities. [1996 Code § 2-12; Ord. No. 98-30; Ord. No.
99-31; Ord. No. 2002-21; Ord. No. 02-28 § (B); Ord. No. 2012-34 § 4; Ord. No.
2015-19; amended 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
of the Township Administrator during such temporary absence, disability or
disqualification.
a. The position of Township Administrator may be full-time or part-time, as shall be
specified by resolution of the Township Committee at the time of hire, and the
Township Administrator shall not be entitled to overtime or compensatory time
without the express written, prior approval of the Township Committee. The
Township Administrator may hold more than one employment title within the
Township. The Township Administrator may hold outside employment, provided
that the Township Administrator provides notice to the Township Committee of his/
her intent to hold such outside employment; and such employment does not 1)
interfere with the performance of the Township Administrator's duties; or 2) present
a conflict of interest.
b. The salary of the Township Administrator shall be set from time to time by
ordinance.
c. The Township Administrator shall not engage in any political activity within the
Township of Springfield.
d. The Township Administrator shall be familiar with and abide by the New Jersey
Local Government Ethics Law. The Administrator should also be guided by the
principles set forth in the Code of Ethics promulgated by the International City/
County Management Association, to the extent they do not conflict with the
Township Code and New Jersey law.
a. The Township Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the
Township and shall be responsible to the Township Committee for the proper and
efficient administration of the affairs of the Township; and shall be responsible for,
and coordinate the implementation and enforcement of, all directives, policies and
decrees established by the Township Committee. Except for the purposes of inquiry
and the provision of information, the individual members of the Township
Committee shall not give orders or directions to any department that is subordinate
to the Township Administrator either publicly or privately. The Township
Committee as a whole, by majority vote, may override the Township
Administrator's decision and give direction to any such department.
b. The Township Administrator shall be responsible for future governmental and
community planning, the recommendation of such to the Township Committee and
the coordination of all efforts to institute same.
c. The Township Administrator shall gather information and present same to the
Township Committee concerning pending state, county and other municipal
§ 2-12.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-12.5
2:8
legislation, effecting local government in general and the Township specifically.
d. The Township Administrator shall coordinate the activities of all municipal
departments and shall secure from the various departments periodic reports on the
operation of such departments, including but not limited to inventory, receipts,
disbursements, personnel matters and general operations. Those department heads
or Township officials, if any, who are now or hereafter required by statute to render
periodic reports to the Township Committee shall file a copy of their reports with
the Township Administrator. All municipal departments, except to the extent
prohibited by law or the Township Code, shall be subject to the direction and
supervision of the Township Administrator. To the extent that any questions arise
concerning the respective authority of the Township Administrator, a department
head or other Township official, then the affected parties shall immediately provide
such question(s) in writing to the Township Committee's Administration
Subcommittee and Township Attorney in writing. If the Subcommittee does not
resolve the question(s) to the satisfaction of the affected individuals, then the issue
shall be transmitted to the Township Committee as a whole for final and binding
resolution.
e. The Township Administrator, in cooperation with all department heads, shall from
time to time conduct studies of all activities and operations of the Township
government and recommend to the Township Committee changes to increase
efficiency, economy and effectiveness.
f. The Township Administrator shall serve as Personnel Officer of the Township, and
as such shall consult with department heads relative to the hiring, suspension,
discharge, promotion and advancement of all employees. The Township
Administrator shall implement the appointment and removal of employees only as
authorized by the Township Committee. The Township Administrator shall advise
the Township Committee, as each situation warrants, regarding disciplinary action
against any employee. The Township Administrator shall be responsible for the
maintenance and enforcement of sound personnel policies and practices, consistent
with all applicable collective negotiation agreements, and shall study and make
recommendations with regards to the personnel organizations and policies of the
Township and of its departments after consultation with department heads. The
Township Administrator shall be responsible for the maintenance of an up-to-date
table of organization of the Township and shall present same to the Township
Committee upon request. The Township Administrator shall be responsible for
performing periodic performance reviews on all department heads, and ensuring
that period performance reviews are performed within all departments by the
various department heads.
g. The Township Administrator shall act as coordinator for the submission to the
Township Committee of budget requests of all departments. Department heads shall
submit their proposed budgets to the Administrator and such additional supporting
data as requested. The Township Administrator shall be assisted by the Township
Chief Financial Officer in the preparation and submission to the Township
Committee, on or before January 15th of each year, a proposed budget for the fiscal
year, and shall prepare an explanatory budget message. The Township
Administrator shall be responsible for the implementation of the programs
contained in the budget.
§ 2-12.5 ADMINISTRATION § 2-12.5
2:9
h. The Township Administrator shall attend all meetings of the Township Committee;
shall, upon request, attend all Township Committee subcommittee meetings, and
may attend the meetings of all other municipal committees, with a right to take part
in the discussion but not to vote. The Township Administrator shall receive notice
of all regular and special meetings of the Township Committee and all advisory
committees.
i. The Township Administrator shall assist the Township Clerk with the preparation
of the agenda for each meeting of the Township Committee and shall supply
records and information pertinent thereto to the Township Committee and its
subcommittees.
j. The Township Administrator shall keep the Township Committee informed as to
the conduct of all Township affairs and shall submit periodic reports, either in
writing or orally, and on any other matters as the Township Committee shall
request. The Township Administrator shall make such recommendations to the
Township Committee as necessary and advisable for the welfare of the Township.
k. The Township Administrator shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases,
permits and privileges granted by the Township are complied with by action of the
proper municipal officials, and, upon knowledge of any violation or breach, call the
same to the attention of the Township Committee.
l. Based upon a recommendation from a department head, or without, the Township
Administrator may recommend to the Township Committee the employment of one
or more experts or consultants to perform work and render advice on special matters
or work projects in the Township.
m. The Township Administrator shall coordinate and administer the activities relating
to the letting of contracts and the performance and faithful execution of the same,
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some other Township
officer or official by applicable law or the Township Code.
n. In conjunction with the Township's Chief Financial Officer and Purchasing Agent,
the Township Administrator shall review the purchasing practices and policies of
all departments for the purpose of ensuring that purchases are made in accordance
with applicable law, the Township Code and sound purchasing practices.
o. The Township Administrator may require prompt receipt from the Township Clerk
of copies of any general and official correspondence addressed to the Township or
any member of the Township Committee.
p. All complaints regarding functions, obligations, services or personnel of the
Township not specifically addressed to any other official or employee shall be
referred to the office of the Township Administrator. The Township Administrator
or a designee shall investigate and dispose of such complaints, and the Township
Administrator shall keep a written record of such complaints and when and what
action was taken in response thereto and provide to the Township Committee a
copy thereof when requested to do so.
q. The Township Administrator, with the cooperation of the Township Chief Financial
Officer and all Department Heads, shall maintain a continuing review and analysis
§ 2-12.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-12.5
2:10
§ 2-13. TOWNSHIP CLERK.
§ 2-13.1. Appointment; Term; Vacancy; Tenure; Removal. [Ord. No. 98-33
§ 27-1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133, the Township Committee shall appoint a Municipal
Clerk to be known as the Township Clerk of the Township of Springfield (hereinafter,
"Township Clerk"). The term of office, filling of a vacancy, tenure and removal from
office shall be governed by Statute.
§ 2-13.2. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 98-33 § 27-2]
§ 2-13.3. Direction of Township Committee. [Ord. No. 98-33 § 27-3]
The Township Clerk shall perform the duties of the office subject to the sole and
exclusive direction of the Township Committee, which duties may be amended or altered
at the discretion of the Township Committee.
§ 2-13.4. Full-Time; Salary; Political Activity. [Ord. No. 98-33 § 27-4]
of budget operations, work programs and costs of municipal services.
r. The Township Administrator shall actively pursue grants from and keep the
members of the Township Committee informed about federal aid projects, state aid
projects and any other aid programs for which the Township may qualify.
s. The Township Administrator shall promptly inform all department heads and other
appropriate municipal employees and officials of all actions and directions from the
Township Committee, and shall study, recommend, implement and enforce
procedures and policies for the compiling, editing and prompt dissemination and
release of public information upon the authorization of the Township Committee.
The Township Administrator shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the
Township from the prior year, and upon review and approval by the Township
Committee disseminate it to the residents of the Township as economically as
possible.
t. The Township Administrator shall perform such other duties as may be, from time
to time, specifically required by the Township Committee.
a. The Township Clerk must be a New Jersey resident, and preference shall be given
to persons living within Union County and contiguous counties.
b. The Township Clerk shall fulfill all statutory prerequisites and shall have the
necessary abilities and qualifications, based upon relevant education, training and
experience in municipal government within New Jersey.
a. The position of Township Clerk shall be full-time, and the Township Clerk shall
not be entitled to overtime or compensatory time without the express, prior approval
of the Township Committee, except as set forth herein. The Township Clerk shall
not engage in any other occupation or employment, except as permitted by the
Township Committee.
§ 2-12.5 ADMINISTRATION § 2-13.4
2:11
§ 2-13.5. Secretary to Township Committee. [Ord. No. 98-33 § 27-5; amended
11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
As secretary to the Township Committee, the Township Clerk shall, at the direction
of the Township Committee and with the assistance of the Township Administrator,
prepare the agenda for all meetings of the Township Committee, be present at all
meetings of the Township Committee unless otherwise instructed by the Township
Committee, keep a journal of all proceedings of every meeting, retain the original copies
of all ordinances and resolutions, and record the minutes of all meetings of the Township
Committee.
§ 2-13.6. Duties and Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 98-33 § 27-6; Ord. No. 2012-34
§ 5; Ord. No. 2015-19]
b. The salary of the Township Clerk shall be set from time to time by ordinance.
c. The Township Clerk shall not engage in any political activity within the Township
of Springfield.
d. The Township Clerk shall be entitled to compensatory time, on a straight time basis,
for attendance at official meetings during other than normal working hours, other
than those of the Township Committee or any of its committees.
a. The Township Clerk shall act as secretary of the municipal corporation and
custodian of the municipal seal of all minutes, books, deeds, bonds, contracts, and
archival records of the Township, unless otherwise provided by ordinance.
b. The Township Clerk shall serve as the administrative officer responsible for the
acceptance of applications for licenses and permits, and the issuance of licenses and
permits, unless otherwise provided by Statute or ordinance.
c. The Township Clerk shall serve as coordinator and records manager responsible for
implementing local archive and records retention programs as mandated by Statute,
unless otherwise provided by Statute or ordinance.
d. The Township Clerk shall prepare all legal advertisements in connection with
ordinances, contracts, resolutions requiring same, amendments to the budget, bond
sales, bids, the capital budget, Open Public Meetings Act requirements and any
other matter which shall require publication.
e. The Township Clerk shall, under the supervision of the Township Administrator,
prepare and distribute to the appropriate Department Heads or other persons:
ordinances, resolutions, other documents and correspondence relative to the actions
taken by the Township Committee.
f. The Township Clerk shall certify the Township Budget and file with the appropriate
State agency as required by Statute.
g. The Township Clerk shall receive and accept service of process of all Summonses,
Complaints, Notices of Claim and other legal documents on behalf of the Township
and direct them to the proper persons.
h. The Township Clerk shall administer the oath of office to all employees and
§ 2-13.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-13.6
2:12
§ 2-14. (RESERVED)
§ 2-15. (RESERVED)4
§ 2-16. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.5
officials of the Township, and shall keep accurate records of all such appointments.
The Township Clerk shall also be responsible for obtaining, maintaining and
appropriate filing of all forms as required by the Local Government Ethics Law.
i. The Township Clerk shall be responsible for the clerical administrative duties of
the Administrative Department, and for overseeing the performance of all such
functions.
j. The Township Clerk, under the direction of the Township Administrator, shall
maintain all employee attendance records, including sick, compensatory and
vacation time, and shall ensure that verification procedures concerning such records
are established and maintained.
k. The Township Clerk shall represent the Township on all joint insurance funds of
which Springfield is a member, unless otherwise designated by the Township
Committee.
l. The Township Clerk shall maintain all certificates of ownership for Townshipowned
vehicles and shall maintain updated records.
m. The Township Clerk shall issue assessment searches and shall maintain a register
of all multifamily dwellings within the Township.
n. The Township Clerk shall serve as the Chief Administrative Officer in all elections
held within the Township, including but not limited to recall elections and initiative
and referendum, and shall serve as the Chief Registrar of Voters within the
Township, as well as perform such related duties as provided by Statute.
o. The Township Clerk shall maintain a record of all real property which is owned,
leased, sold or acquired by the Township, and shall make such records available for
inspection, as required by Statute.
p. The Township Clerk shall serve as the Secretary to the Springfield Board of
Alcoholic Beverage Control and shall perform all the duties thereof pursuant to
Statute and State regulation.
q. The Township Clerk shall perform such other duties as are now or hereafter may be
imposed by State Statute or regulation, by municipal ordinance, resolution or
regulation, or by direction or appointment of the Township Committee.
r. The Township Clerk, if appointed Local Registrar by the Board of Health, shall
perform all the duties of that office.
4. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2015-19 deleted the Department of Finance and moved Subsection 2-15.10 to 2-16.7.
5. Editor's Note: For provisions relating to Tenure of Office for the Chief Financial Officer, see N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.8.
§ 2-13.6 ADMINISTRATION § 2-16.1
2:13
§ 2-16.1. Findings. [New]
Section 5 of the Public Laws 1988, Chapter 110, amending Public Law of 1971, Chapter
13 and Public Law of 1977, Chapter 39 and supplementing Chapter 9 and Title 40A of
the New Jersey Statutes mandates that each municipality establish the position of Chief
Financial Officer to carry out the responsibilities set forth at N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq.
§ 2-16.2. Creation of Office; Appointment and Powers. [1991 Code § 114-3]
There is hereby created the position of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.4. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the Township
Committee and shall have such powers and duties as provided by general law and
Township ordinance.
§ 2-16.3. Compensation. [New]
The Chief Financial Officer shall be compensated as established by the Salary
Ordinance.
§ 2-16.4. Term. [New]
The term of the position of Chief Financial Officer shall be four years, which shall run
from January 1 in the year in which the Chief Financial Officer was appointed.
§ 2-16.5. Qualifications. [New; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
The appointment of the Chief Financial Officer shall be consistent with the provisions
of Public Laws of 1988, Chapter 110. No person shall be appointed as Chief Financial
Officer unless such person holds a municipal officer certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.1 et seq.
§ 2-16.6. Duties of Chief Financial Officer. [Ord. No. 2012-34 § 8; Ord. No.
2015-19]
In addition to those duties set forth in Subsection 2-16.1 set forth above, the Chief
Financial Officer shall be the head of the Department of Finance charged with
responsibility for payroll, accounts payable, human resources and financial reporting.
The Chief Financial Officer shall also serve as Treasurer of the Township and have,
perform and exercise all of the functions, powers and duties of Treasurer as provided by
general Law.
§ 2-16.7. Assistant Township Treasurer. [Ord. No. 96-15 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-19]
a. Establishment of Position. There is hereby established within the Township of
Springfield the position of "Assistant Township Treasurer."
b. The position of Assistant Township Treasurer shall be filled by recommendation of
the Township Treasurer and the Township Administrator and by appointment by
the Township Committee of the Township of Springfield for a term which shall not
exceed one year, but which will expire at the end of each calendar year, and such
person shall serve at the pleasure of the Township Committee.
§ 2-16.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-16.7
2:14
§ 2-16.8. Assistant Chief Financial Officer. [Added 5-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07]
§ 2-17. TAX COLLECTOR.6
§ 2-17.1. Appointment; Term. [1991 Code § 111-1]
The Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Township Committee and shall hold office
for a period of four years.
§ 2-17.2. Powers and Duties. [1991 Code § 111-1; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A); Ord. No.
2011-16 § 1A]
The Tax Collector shall possess all the powers and duties established by law. The Tax
c. The position of Assistant Township Treasurer shall be for a twenty-five-hour work
week, at a salary set by ordinance.
d. The Assistant Township Treasurer shall report to the Township Treasurer, and shall
perform such duties as designated thereby, including but not limited to the
following: Enter cash receipts; evaluate accounts for investments; prepare monthly
reconciliations on all accounts; review and process payment vouchers; certify
Township funds; prepare general ledgers for Township accounts in accordance with
technical accounting directives from the State of New Jersey; filing of
correspondence and general typing; and such other duties within the Office of the
Treasurer as designated and assigned by the Township Treasurer.
a. Establishment of position. There is hereby established within the Township of
Springfield the position of "Assistant Chief Financial Officer."
b. The position of Assistant Chief Financial Officer shall be filled by recommendation
of the Township's Chief Financial Officer and the Township Administrator and by
appointment by the Township Committee for a term which shall not exceed one
year, but which will expire at the end of each calendar year, and such person shall
serve at the pleasure of the Township Committee.
c. The position of Assistant Chief Financial Officer shall be full-time, at a salary set
by ordinance.
d. The Assistant Chief Financial Officer shall report to the Township's Chief Financial
Officer and shall perform such duties as designated thereby, including, but not
limited to, the following: enter cash receipts; evaluate accounts for investments;
prepare monthly reconciliations on all accounts; review and process payment
vouchers; certify Township funds; prepare general ledgers for Township accounts
in accordance with technical accounting directives from the State of New Jersey,
annual financial statements, supplemental debt statements, annual debt statements,
internet report of contributions, quarterly tax returns, including Form 941 and Form
NJ927 and Form WR30, best practice inventory listing, and annual report for
Workers' Compensation Bureau; and such other duties within the Office of, and as
may be designated and assigned by, the Chief Financial Officer.
6. Editor's Note: For provisions relating to tenure of the Tax Collector, see N.J.S.A. 40A:9-144.
§ 2-16.7 ADMINISTRATION § 2-17.2
2:15
Collector shall:
§ 2-17.3. Qualifications. [New]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.7, no person shall be appointed or reappointed as Tax
Collector unless he holds a Tax Collector Certificate.
§ 2-17.4. Deputy Tax Collector. [Ord. No. 98-25 § 1 [111-2]]
The Township Committee may appoint a Deputy Tax Collector. The Deputy Tax
Collector shall have sufficient education, experience or training to assist the Tax
Collector in all aspects of the functioning of that office. In the absence of the Tax
Collector, the Deputy Tax Collector shall perform all the duties of that office. The
Township Committee may require the Deputy Tax Collector to be certified by the State
of New Jersey as a Tax Collector, or to obtain certification by a date certain after the
date of hiring.
§ 2-17.5. Acting Tax Collector. [Ord. No. 2008-31 § I]
The Township Committee may, upon notification that the incumbent Tax Collector will
become unavailable to perform the duties of that office due to retirement leave, appoint
an Acting Tax Collector to serve as the Springfield Tax Collector in anticipation of and
during that unavailability. The Acting Tax Collector shall have all of the qualifications
of the Tax Collector, have all of the powers, duties, obligations and responsibilities of
the Tax Collector, and subject to a probationary period to be established upon hiring,
automatically assume the position of Tax Collector upon the final retirement of the
a. Enter in suitable books to be kept for that purpose the sums received by the office
each day for taxes, with the names of the persons on whose account the same have
been paid;
b. Keep a record and account of the finances of the Township;
c. Within 60 days after the end of the fiscal year or when otherwise required by the
Township Committee, make and furnish a report thereof, with a detailed and true
statement of all moneys received by the office and disbursed therefrom and for what
purposes from the commencement of the official year to the date of such report or
for such period as the Township Committee may require, and a list of delinquent
taxpayers for the previous year;
d. File the report, with two copies of the statement and list of delinquents, with the
Clerk within the time hereinabove specified or when otherwise required by the
Township Committee;
e. As necessary and as directed, arrange for sales of real estate for delinquent taxes;
f. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-54, the Tax Collector shall provide to any party
entitled to redeem a tax sale certificate up to two calculations of the amount
required for redemption within any calendar year at no cost. For each subsequent
calculation requested, the requestor shall pay a fee in the amount hereinafter set
forth, at the time of such request. All such requests shall be in writing to the Tax
Collector.
§ 2-17.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-17.5
2:16
incumbent Tax Collector.
§ 2-18. TAX ASSESSOR.
§ 2-18.1. Appointment; Term. [New; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146, the Township Committee shall appoint a Tax Assessor
for a term of four years from the first day of July next following such appointment.
§ 2-18.2. Compensation. [New]
The Township Committee, by ordinance, shall determine the amount of compensation of
the Assessor.
§ 2-18.3. Qualifications. [New]
A Tax Assessor shall hold a Tax Assessor Certificate as required by N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25
et seq.
§ 2-18.4. Duties. [New]
The Tax Assessor shall have the duty of assessing property for the purpose of general
taxation.
§ 2-18.5. Deputy Tax Assessor. [Added 10-13-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-20]
§ 2-19. TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY.7
§ 2-19.1. Appointment of Township Attorney. [1991 Code § 18-1; New; Ord. No.
2010-44; Ord. No. 2011-02]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, the Township Attorney shall be appointed by the
Township Committee for a term of one year. The Township Attorney shall be an
attorney-at-law of New Jersey, but need not be a resident of the Township.
§ 2-19.2. Powers and Duties. [1991 Code § 18-2]
The Attorney shall give all legal counsel and advice required by the Township
a. Position Created. There is hereby established within the Township, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146, the position of Deputy Tax Assessor.
b. Appointment and Compensation. The Township Committee shall, as it deems
necessary, appoint a Deputy Tax Assessor, whose term shall be four years from the
first day of July next following the appointment. The Township Committee, by
ordinance, shall determine the amount of compensation of the Deputy Tax
Assessor.
c. Qualifications and Duties. The Deputy Tax Assessor shall hold a tax assessor
certificate and shall act under the direct supervision of, and assist, the Tax Assessor.
7. [Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2015-19 amended the title of § 2-19 to be Township Attorney.]
§ 2-17.5 ADMINISTRATION § 2-19.2
2:17
Committee or any member thereof and shall in general serve as the legal advisor to
the Township Committee on all matters of Township business. He shall represent the
Township in all judicial and administrative proceedings in which the Township or any
of its officers or agencies not separately represented may be a party or have an interest.
In furtherance of his general powers and duties, but without limiting them, the Attorney
shall:
§ 2-19.3. Supervisory Authority. [Ord. No. 2015-19]
The Township Attorney shall supervise the Prosecutor and any additional or alternate
prosecutor as well as the Public Defender, any additional Public Defender and any
replacement Public Defender. All said prosecutors and public defenders shall report
directly to the Township Attorney.
§ 2-20. PROSECUTORS.
§ 2-20.1. Appointment of Prosecutor and Additional Prosecutor. [1991 Code
§ 86-1; Ord. No. 2007-26 § 11(C)]
There shall be a Prosecutor appointed annually by the Township Committee. There may
also be appointed by the Township Committee, an Additional Prosecutor to prosecute
matters before the Additional Judge. One person may serve in both capacities. Each shall
have the qualifications required by law.
§ 2-20.2. Powers and Duties. [1991 Code § 86-2; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A); Ord. No.
2007-26 § II(D); Ord. No. 2012-34 § 10]
The Prosecutor shall have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to such office
by the Statutes of the State of New Jersey and the rules governing the New Jersey
courts and such other authority as may be granted by the Township Committee. The
Prosecutor shall report directly to the head of the Department of Law, namely the
Township Attorney.
a. Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents, contracts, deeds,
ordinances and resolutions made, executed or adopted by or on behalf of the
Township.
b. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any interest of the
Township.
c. With the approval of the Township Committee, compromise or settle litigation in
which the Township is involved.
d. Render written opinions upon questions of law submitted to him by the Township
Committee or any member thereof with respect to their official powers and duties.
e. Supervise and direct the work of other members of his firm and any additional
attorneys and technical and professional assistants the Township Committee may
authorize for special or regular employment in or for the Township.
§ 2-19.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-20.3
2:18
§ 2-20.3. Alternate Prosecutor. [Ord. #2001-04; Ord. No. 2007-12 § I(A); Ord. No.
2007-19 § I]
The Township Committee may appoint one or more Alternate Prosecutors, each of
whom shall be an attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey, to serve in the absence or
unavailability of the Prosecutor, each of whose term shall expire on December 31 of the
year of appointment.
§ 2-20.4. Payment of Alternate Prosecutors and For Special Sessions. [Ord. No.
2007-19 § I]
An Alternate Prosecutor shall be paid a fee of $200 per regular or special court session.
The Prosecutor shall be paid a fee of $200 per special court session.
§ 2-21. PUBLIC DEFENDERS.
§ 2-21.1. Appointment of Public Defender and Additional Public Defender. [1991
Code § 86-3; Ord. No. 2007-26 § II(F)]
There shall be a Public Defender appointed annually by the Township Committee. There
may also be appointed by the Township Committee, an Additional Public Defender to
serve before the Additional Judge. One person may serve in both capacities. Each shall
have the qualifications required by law.
§ 2-21.2. Powers and Duties. [1991 Code § 86-4; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A); Ord. No.
2007-26 § II(G); Ord. No. 2012-34 § 11]
Each Public Defender shall have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to such
office by the Statutes of the State of New Jersey and the rules governing the courts of
New Jersey and such other authority as may be granted by the Township Committee.
Public Defenders shall report directly to the head of the Department of Law, namely the
Township Attorney.
§ 2-21.3. Salary. [1991 Code § 86-5]
The salary to be paid the Public Defender shall be as set by ordinance.
§ 2-21.4. Application Fee. [1991 Code § 86-6; Ord. No. 94-2; Ord. No. 98-1 § 1]
Any person applying for representation by the Municipal Public Defender shall be
required to pay an application fee of not more than $200, and not to exceed an amount
necessary to pay the actual costs of Municipal Public Defender's services. In accordance
with guidelines promulgated by the New Jersey Supreme Court, the Municipal Court
may waive any such application fee, in whole or in part, if the court determines, in its
discretion, upon a clear and convincing showing by the applicant that the application fee
represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation. The Municipal
Court may permit any person to pay the application fee over a period of time not to
exceed four months.
§ 2-20.3 ADMINISTRATION § 2-21.5
2:19
§ 2-21.5. Replacement Public Defender. [Ord. No. 98-1 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-05 § I]
If the regular Municipal Public Defender cannot defend any person entitled to such
representation for whatever reason pursuant to law, there may be appointed a temporary
replacement Public Defender who shall be paid a fee of $150 per court session (either a
single morning, afternoon or evening court session).
§ 2-22. CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL. [1991 Code §§ 33-1 and 33-2; 1991 Code
§ 77-14; Ord. No. 2001-29; Ord. No. 07-20 § I; Ord. No. 02-28 §§ I(A), (C); New;
Ord. No. 2012-34 § 12; Ord. No. 2015-19; amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-24]
§ 2-22.1. Appointment.
The Township Committee shall appoint a Construction Official to serve for a term
of four years, who shall be the chief administrator of the Construction Bureau within
the Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code Enforcement and who
shall, prior to the appointment, be qualified by training and experience in the duties
of a construction official, and as otherwise required by the State Uniform Construction
Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
The Construction Official position may be filled by way of shared services consistent
with New Jersey law.
§ 2-22.2. Duties.
The Construction Official shall have the following powers and duties in addition to
duties specifically assigned and those set forth elsewhere within the Township Code,
to the extent that such powers and duties are not inconsistent with the State Uniform
Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) and the regulations promulgated
thereunder.
a. Enforce the provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code and of all other
ordinances of the Township and laws of the State relative to the construction,
maintenance, use or demolition of buildings and appurtenances thereto.
b. Report to the Township Committee at the regular meeting thereof each month the
number and nature of all permits issued during the preceding month. The report
shall be in writing and shall include an itemized statement of all fees received
during the preceding month and delivered to the Township Treasurer, and receipts
therefor.
c. Promptly examine all applications for permits and all plans, drawings and
specifications submitted in connection therewith and, upon payment of the required
fee, promptly issue all permits for work supposed to be done and shown to comply
with all applicable codes, ordinances, regulations and State laws.
d. Inspect all work being done under any permit issued and revoke any such permit
when the work covered thereby shall not be prosecuted in accordance with the
terms of the permit and the approved plans and specifications, and shall likewise
revoke forthwith any permit issued when the work is prosecuted in violation of any
of the terms or provisions of the Building Code or any other regulation of the
§ 2-21.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-22.2
2:20
§ 2-22.3. through § 2-22.9 (Reserved)
§ 2-22.10. Construction Control Person; Assistant.
Township or in violation of the laws of the State of New Jersey. Revocation shall
be subject to appeal.
e. As is necessary, inspect any building or structure of any kind whatsoever, the safety
of which may appear to be doubtful or the continued use of which may appear to be
dangerous to persons using or occupying the same, and require the owner of such
building or structure to make such changes and take such precautions in and about
the same as may be required by law or by ordinance or as deemed advisable for the
safety of persons using or occupying same; and where deemed necessary in the
interest of such buildings or structures, direct further action by the owner of such
building.
f. Keep safely and in an orderly manner all applications for permits, together with all
plans and specifications accompanying the same, and copies of all permits and
notices issued. All such applications, plans, specifications and copies of permits and
notices shall be open to public inspection during established business hours
pursuant to State law.
a. There is hereby established within the Construction Bureau of the Township of
Springfield the position of Construction Control Person.
b. The Construction Control Person shall perform the following duties under the
general supervision of the Construction Official:
1. Perform administrative duties for the Building Subcode Official, Plumbing
Inspector, Fire Subcode Officials, Electrical Inspector, Zoning Officer/
Property Maintenance Official and Multihousing Inspector.
2. Maintain central files by block and lot containing all permit activities as
required by State Statutes and local ordinances and any other applicable
governmental regulations.
3. Maintain local files by address in order to keep current records of
correspondence received and sent.
4. Perform bookkeeping duties as required to maintain records in accordance
with State Statutes, local requirements and any other governmental
regulations.
5. Perform such duties as are necessary and required by the State of New Jersey
for multihousing inspections.
6. Order and maintain supplies for the Building Subcode Official, Plumbing
Inspector, Fire Subcode Officials, Electrical Inspector, Zoning Officer/
Property Maintenance Official and Multihousing Inspector.
7. Perform such other tasks as are reasonably requested by the aforementioned
Inspectors.
§ 2-22.2 ADMINISTRATION § 2-22.10
2:21
§ 2-22.11. Zoning Official.
There is hereby established within the Department of Engineering, Construction
Services and Code Enforcement the position of Zoning Official who shall enforce
the Municipal Land Use Law, Zoning and Land Use Ordinances and the Property
Maintenance Code of the Township and such other ordinances and laws as New Jersey
Statutes and the Revised General Ordinances of the Township may provide. The Zoning
Official shall have appropriate training and/or experience and shall be appointed by the
Township Committee at a salary set by ordinance.
8. Determine what categories of work the proposed construction shall fall into,
using the following guidelines:
(a) Major work: all jobs that do not fit into the categories of minor work or
small jobs.
(b) Small job: total cost of job is under $5,000, does not require prior
approvals, involves two or more trades and may or may not require plan
review.
(c) Minor work: involves one trade (or subcode) and does not require prior
approvals or plan reviews.
9. Determine what prior approvals and plan reviews are required for the proposed
work.
10. Collect the appropriate fees.
11. Assist the applicant in properly completing forms.
12. Monitor the plan review deadlines.
13. Perform technical section fee calculations for minor work or applications not
requiring plan review.
14. Perform fee calculations for all applications.
15. Maintain accurate logs and records of permits issued and fees collected.
16. Perform all duties required of a construction control person pursuant to
regulations and guidelines adopted by the State.
17. Perform such other duties and responsibilities under the supervision of, and as
required by, the Director of the Department of Engineering, Construction
Services and Code Enforcement to assist in the efficient operation of that
Department, comparable to the duties set forth within this Subsection 2-22.10,
provided that such duties and responsibilities do not interfere with the efficient
operation of the Construction Bureau.
c. There shall also be established the position of Assistant Construction Control
Person, who shall perform some or all of the duties as enumerated herein, under the
general supervision of the Construction Official and, where applicable pursuant to
Subsection 2-22.10b17, under the supervision of the Director of the Department of
Engineering, Construction Services and Code Enforcement.
§ 2-22.10 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-22A
2:22
§ 2-22A. DIRECTOR OF DEPARTMENT OF ENGINEERING,
CONSTRUCTION SERVICES AND CODE ENFORCEMENT. [Added
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
a. There is hereby created within the Township of Springfield a Department of
Engineering, Construction Services and Code Enforcement. The Department of
Engineering, Construction Services and Code Enforcement shall oversee the
engineering, planning, zoning, construction services, affordable housing and code
enforcement functions of the Township; and shall also provide administrative
services to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Environmental
Commission. The Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code
Enforcement shall include within it a Construction Bureau as set forth in Chapter
XII of the Township Code at Subsections 12-1.2 through 12-1.8, which Bureau
shall continue to be headed by the Township's Construction Official.
b. The Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code Enforcement
shall be headed by a full-time Director who shall be appointed by the Township
Committee and shall oversee the operations of the Department. The Director of
Engineering, Construction Services and Code Enforcement may be, but is not
required to be, the Township Engineer, as determined by the Township Committee.
The Director shall not undertake any actions, responsibilities or tasks which are the
statutory and regulatory responsibility of the Construction Official, but shall
oversee the operations of the Construction Bureau to the extent permitted by law,
and shall coordinate with the Construction Official in matters that impact the
Construction Bureau.
c. The Director shall have the following minimum qualifications: bachelor's degree in
civil engineering from an accredited college or university; five years' experience in
the municipal engineering field (without PE license) or three years' experience in
the municipal engineering field (with PE license); municipal engineering
construction inspector certificate; EIT certificate; possession of PE license is
preferred, but is not required; fundamental knowledge of GIS systems;
demonstrated leadership ability and familiarity with municipal engineering matters
including but not limited to road and drainage improvements, stormwater
management, sewers, planning, zoning, development and redevelopment,
construction, property maintenance, and related matters or equivalent experience as
determined by the Township Committee upon appointment.
d. The Director, in consultation with the Township Administrator and consistent with
all applicable collective negotiation agreements, shall assign and/or reassign
appropriate administrative staff employed within the Township's Department of
Engineering, Construction Services and Code Enforcement to efficiently and
effectively discharge all of the functions, responsibilities and obligations of the
Department, and meet the staffing needs of the Department.
e. (Reserved)
f. Nothing in this Subsection 2-22A shall be deemed to override and/or supersede any
statutory authority of, or powers vested in, the Construction Official, the Township
Engineer, and the Construction Bureau.
§ 2-22A ADMINISTRATION § 2-23
2:23
§ 2-23. TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
§ 2-23.1. Appointment. [1991 Code § 48-1; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A); Ord. No.
2008-01 § I]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140, there shall be a Township Engineer, who shall be
appointed by the Township Committee for a term of one year and who shall be a duly
licensed professional engineer of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-23.2. Duties. [1991 Code § 48-2; Ord. No. 02-28 §§ I(A), (D); Ord. No.
2015-19]
The Engineer shall perform the duties prescribed by general law and ordinance, and
shall:
§ 2-23.3. Termination of Service. [1991 Code § 48-3; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
Upon the termination of service with the Township, the Engineer shall surrender all
papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to the
administration of all engineering duties.
§ 2-24. ENGINEERING TECHNICIAN.
§ 2-24.1. Establishment of Position. [Ord. No. 95-7 § 1; amended 12-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-24]
There is hereby established within the Department of Engineering, Construction
Services and Code Enforcement of the Township of Springfield the position of
"Engineering Technician."
§ 2-24.2. Term. [Ord. No. 95-7 § 2; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(D)]
The position of Engineering Technician shall be filled by recommendation of the
Township Engineer and by appointment by the Township Committee of the Township
a. Prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs and specifications for public works
and improvements undertaken by the Township either on force account or by public
contract.
b. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and control records with
respect to public works and facilities owned or operated by the Township.
c. Provide technical supervision with respect to operation, maintenance and repair of
the Township storm sewer system.
d. Provide technical and engineering device and assistance to Township departments
as needed. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
e. Serve within of the Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code
Enforcement. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
f. Serve as a member of the Multiple Dwelling Emergency Committee.
§ 2-23 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-24.2
2:24
of Springfield, and such person shall serve at the pleasure of the Township Committee.
§ 2-24.3. Hours; Salary. [Ord. No. 95-7 § 3; amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-24]
The position of engineering technician shall be a part-time position of less than hours
per week, without benefits, with compensation to be determined by the Township
Committee in accordance with Township's salary ordinance at the time of appointment.
§ 2-24.4. Duties. [Ord. No. 95-7 § 4; amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
The Engineering Technician shall report to the Director of the Department of
Engineering, Construction Services and Code Enforcement and the Township Engineer,
and shall perform such duties as designated thereby, including but not limited to the
following: Creation and maintenance of an effective filing system for engineering
projects; filing of site plan, final plat building plans and other documents; revise all
maps maintained and used by all departments of the Township; inventory and create
reproducible mylars of all maps of Township properties; perform field inspections as
instructed.
§ 2-25. SUPERVISOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 2-25.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2015-19]
There is hereby established the position of Supervisor of Public Works who shall be
appointed by the Township Committee.
§ 2-25.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 2015-19]
The Supervisor of Public Works shall be the Head of the Department of Public Works
which Department shall be charged with supervision, function and maintenance of
Roads, Parks and Trees, Buildings and Grounds, Sewers, Recycling and Vehicle
maintenance.
§ 2-26. through § 2-27 (RESERVED)
§ 2-28. MECHANIC.
§ 2-28.1. Position Created. [1991 Code § 73-1]
Pursuant to the authority granted by law, there is hereby created the position of mechanic
in the Department of Public Works in the Township.
§ 2-28.2. Appointments. [1991 Code § 73-2]
In accordance with existing or future needs of the Township, the Township Committee
may appoint one or more mechanics to fill the position and job title herein created.
§ 2-28.3. Term; Compensation; Duties. [1991 Code § 73-3]
Any person appointed as a mechanic shall be employed subject to all terms and
§ 2-24.2 ADMINISTRATION § 2-28.3
2:25
conditions prevailing for other persons employed by the Township in the Department
of Public Works. Compensation shall be paid to the mechanics in accordance with the
Salary Ordinance as exists or may be amended. The duties of this position shall be in
accordance with a job description adopted by the Township Committee.
§ 2-29. BOOKKEEPER.
§ 2-29.1. Position Created. [1991 Code § 73-4]
There is hereby created the position of bookkeeper.
§ 2-29.2. Term of Office. [1991 Code § 73-5; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(D)]
The bookkeeper shall be appointed by the Township Committee.
§ 2-29.3. Appointment; Salary; Vacancy. [1991 Code § 73-6]
The bookkeeper shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Township
Committee for a term which shall not exceed one year but will expire at the end of
each calendar year. The salary and hours of employment of the bookkeeper shall be
fixed and determined by the Township Committee. Any vacancy existing in the office
of the bookkeeper may be filled for the balance of the unexpired term by the Township
Committee.
§ 2-29.4. Duties. [1991 Code § 73-7]
The person appointed shall report to the Treasurer and function under the supervision of
the Treasurer. Generally, the bookkeeper will perform the following functions: accounts
receivable, accounts payable, processing of insurance claims and payments, processing
of tax payments to the State and Federal governments, payroll, pension reports, billings,
processing pension application and payments, bank account reconciliations, assisting the
Treasurer in preparation of monthly reports and such other duties as may be assigned by
the Treasurer or the Township Committee.
§ 2-29.5. Continuing Education. [1991 Code § 73-8]
The person appointed may, at the discretion of the Township Committee, be required to
take such courses as are necessary to receive a certificate as a municipal finance officer,
as provided by statute and regulations. The cost of such course shall be at the expense of
the employee. Failure to continue education or achieve certification in a timely fashion
may disqualify the person from employment in the position of bookkeeper.
§ 2-30. RECYCLING COORDINATOR.
§ 2-30.1. Establishment. [1991 Code § 77-15A; Ord. No. 2002-06; amended
11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
There shall be, within the Department of Public Works, an Office of Recycling
Coordinator. The Recycling Coordinator shall be appointed by the Township
Committee. The duties of that Office, as hereinafter set forth, shall be performed by
the Recycling Coordinator with assistance, if necessary, from those persons within
§ 2-28.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-30.1
2:26
the department as designated by the Township Administrator in consultation with the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works. The duties of the Office may be
performed by one or more persons, and need not be the only duties of such person.
§ 2-30.2. Duties. [1991 Code § 77-15B]
The Recycling Coordinator shall perform the following duties, which shall include
publicity, management and clerical:
§ 2-31. ADDITIONAL EMPLOYEES.
§ 2-31.1. General Parks and Recreation Worker. [Ord. No. 97-01 § 1; Ord. No.
02-28 § I(B)]
a. Publicity. The recycling concept must be sold to the single-family resident, multiunit
residents and commercial and business properties. This shall include education
of the public.
b. Management. A plan of action shall be developed and followed, bringing
Springfield into compliance with the State-mandated recycling quotas. As a
manager, the Recycling Coordinator shall be the coordinator of all recycling in the
Township and oversee the operation of the County collection.
c. Clerical. Records of all forms of recycling shall be maintained in an orderly fashion
and reported to the County and State as required. Federal, State and local grant
applications will be prepared by the Coordinator and filed as authorized by the
Township Committee.
d. Office. The Coordinator will be in charge of the office, oversee the moneys
collected and maintain regular office hours.
a. There is hereby established within the Recreation Department of the Township of
Springfield the position of "General Parks and Recreation Worker."
b. The position of General Parks and Recreation Worker shall be filled by
recommendation of the Recreation Director and by appointment by the Township
Committee. There shall be a six-month probationary period.
c. The General Parks and Recreation Worker shall report to the Recreation Director
and shall perform such duties as designated thereby as set forth in the formal job
description, including but not limited to the following: maintain general cleanliness
for all recreation facilities and be responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of all
parks and recreation sites within Springfield; at Sarah Bailey Civic Center, be
responsible for maintaining and cleaning the building, both inside and out, setting
up and taking down meeting rooms as necessary, performing minor repairs,
maintaining the grounds, including snow removal, and assist in the office as
needed; concerning parks, remove garbage and debris on a daily basis, assist in
mowing of lawns and preparation of fields, small construction projects involving
maintenance of buildings and playground equipment, painting and other minor
maintenance projects; perform any and all other jobs as deemed necessary and
required by the Recreation Director.
§ 2-30.1 ADMINISTRATION § 2-31.1
2:27
§ 2-31.2. Park and Ride Administrator. [Ord. No. 98-26 § 1; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(B); Ord. No. 2007-12 § I(B)]
There is hereby established within the Township the part-time position of Park and Ride
Administrator. The general duties of the position shall be to administer and coordinate,
on a daily basis, the functioning of the Township of Springfield park and ride bus service
to New Jersey Transit trains. Such position shall entail approximately 15 hours per week
and include availability for emergency telephone calls. This position shall be within the
Administrative Department of the Township of Springfield, and shall report directly to
the Township Administrator. If the duties of this position are performed by a full-time
municipal employee, no additional stipend shall be paid to such employee.
§ 2-31.3. Building/Grounds Technician.8 [Added 2-11-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-02]
§ 2-32. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR AND DEPUTY
COORDINATOR. [Ord. No. 2010-07; Ord. No. 2012-30 § 2]
d. The qualifications for this position shall include: at least 18 years of age, a valid
New Jersey driver's license (CDL preferred), capable of working with heavy
equipment, and a knowledge of park maintenance.
a. Position Created. There is hereby established the position of Building/Grounds
Technician within the Department of Public Works for the Township of
Springfield.
b. Appointment. The position of Building/Grounds Technician shall be filled by
recommendation of the Supervisor of Public Works and by appointment by the
Township Committee of the Township of Springfield. The Township Committee
may appoint one individual to fill the position and job title herein created.
c. Probation. There shall be a six-month-to-one-year probationary period for the
position of Building/Grounds Technician, the length of which period shall be at the
discretion of the Supervisor of Public Works upon hiring or promotion.
d. Term; Compensation; Duties. Any person appointed as a Building/Grounds
Technician shall be employed subject to all terms and conditions prevailing for
other persons employed by the Township in the Department of Public Works,
subject to any applicable collective negotiation agreements, the Township Code and
applicable law. Compensation shall be paid in accordance with the Salary
Ordinance as exists or as may be amended. The duties of this position shall be in
accordance with a job description adopted by the Township Committee.
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40 et seq., the Mayor shall appoint, from among the
residents of the municipality, an Emergency Management Coordinator at a salary
set by ordinance, who shall serve a term of three years. The powers, duties and
responsibilities of the Emergency Management Coordinator shall be as follows:
1. The Emergency Management Coordinator is directed to create an organization
8. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 2-31.3, Emergency Management Coordinator and Deputy Coordinator, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 2005-29 and 2009-23, was repealed by Ordinance No.
2010-07. See § 2-32 for Emergency Management Coordinator and Deputy Coordinator.
§ 2-31.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-32
2:28
§ 2-33. PURCHASING AGENT. [Added 4-24-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-08]
for emergency management utilizing, to the fullest extent, the existing
agencies within this Township.
2. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be well-versed and trained in
planning operation involving the activities of many different agencies which
will operate to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the Township in the event of a disaster.
3. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be empowered to proclaim a
state of local emergency and to issue and enforce orders necessary to protect
the life and property of the Township residents after first conferring with the
Mayor.
4. The Emergency Management Coordinator must be a resident of the Township
and have completed any and all necessary courses in civil defense and the
professional development series from the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
5. The Emergency Management Coordinator must comply with all Federal,
State, County or municipal training guidelines.
b. The Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator shall be appointed by the
Emergency Management Coordinator with the consent of the Mayor. The Deputy's
term will run coextensive with that of the Emergency Management Coordinator.
Wherever possible, the Deputy shall be appointed from among salaried officers of
the Township.
c. The Emergency Management Coordinator and Deputy Emergency Management
Coordinator shall be subject, in the performance of their duties, only to the rules,
regulations and orders of the Township Committee.
d. Nothing in this section shall override and/or supersede any statutory authority or
powers with regard to the implementation of the Emergency Operations Plan
required by Statute.
a. There is hereby created the position of Purchasing Agent for the Township of
Springfield.
b. The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the Township Committee.
c. The Purchasing Agent is required to possess a valid Qualified Purchasing Agent
certificate, as issued by the New Jersey Division of Local Government Services,
Department of Community Affairs.
d. The Purchasing Agent shall have, on behalf of the Mayor and Municipal Council of
the Township of Springfield, the authority, responsibility and accountability for the
purchasing activity pursuant to Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et
seq.); to prepare public advertising for and to receive bids and requests for
proposals for the provision or performance of goods, services and construction
contracts; to award contracts pursuant to New Jersey law in accordance with the
regulations, forms and procedures promulgated by state regulatory agencies and
§ 2-32 ADMINISTRATION § 2-33
2:29
§ 2-34. through § 2-39 (RESERVED)
Springfield Township; and conduct any activities as may be necessary or
appropriate to the purchasing function of the Township of Springfield.
e. The Township Committee designates Martha Lopez to serve as the Township of
Springfield's initial Purchasing Agent under and pursuant to this section, on a parttime
basis, subject to an appropriate resolution setting forth the conditions of such
appointment and employment.
§ 2-33 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-34
2:30
ARTICLE III
Police Department; Fire Department; Department of Recreation
§ 2-40. (RESERVED)9
§ 2-41. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
For statutory provisions concerning the Police Department, see N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
§ 2-41.1. Established; Organization. [1991 Code § 83-1; Ord. No. 2004-15 § I;
Ord. No. 2006-8 § I(A); Ord. No. 2008-23 § I; Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 1, 7; Ord. No.
2010-25; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1A; Ord. No. 2012-14; Ord. No. 2012-30; Ord. No.
2012-35 § 1]
§ 2-41.2. Qualifications; Probation; Removal. [1991 Code § 83-2; Ord. No. 2006-8
§ I(B); Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 1,7; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1A; amended 3-8-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-04]
§ 2-41.3. Powers and Duties of Members. [1991 Code § 83-3; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(A); Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 1,7; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1A]
a. There is hereby established the Department of Police of the Township of
Springfield. The maximum complement of the Department of Police in the
Township is as follows: a Chief of Police, who shall be the head of the department;
Captains (two); Lieutenants (three); Sergeants (10); Corporals (four); if any patrol
officers shall qualify for same patrol officers (29), including all patrol officers
designated as a Corporal), each of whom shall be appointed pursuant to this Code
and compensated as set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the Township. The
Township may also employ such Special Law Enforcement Officers as allowable
law in accordance with Subsection 2-41.13.
b. The actual complement shall be recommended to the Township Committee and
shall be appointed by the Township Committee, from time to time, all of whom
shall act and be known as Police Officers of the Township.
a. Any person appointed a member of the Police Department shall possess the
requisite qualifications prescribed by the applicable Statutes of New Jersey.
b. No officer shall be removed from office except for the reasons established and in
accordance with the procedure laid down in applicable state laws. No member of
the Police Department who shall be removed from office for cause shall be entitled
to receive any salary from the date of suspension on charges or from the date of
removal where no suspension has previously been made.
c. All appointments to the position of Captain shall include a probationary period of
nine calendar months from the effective date of the promotion.
a. Each member of the Police Department shall perform the duties customarily
incident to the position held and as may be prescribed by the Chief of Police or, in
9. Editor's Note: Former § 2-40, Department of Public Safety, previously codified herein and containing portions of
Ordinance Nos. 2009-23 and 2011-04 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2012-30.
§ 2-40 ADMINISTRATION § 2-41.3
2:31
§ 2-41.4. Powers and Duties of Chief. [1991 Code § 83-4; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A);
Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 3,7; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1A; Ord. No. 2012-30]
§ 2-41.5. Police Headquarters. [1991 Code § 83-5; Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 1,7; Ord.
No. 2011-04 § 1A]
The headquarters of the Police Department shall be located in the Municipal Building.
The members of the force of the Police Department shall, unless otherwise ordered by
the Chief of Police report there for duty at the hours assigned to them.
§ 2-41.6. Uniforms. [1991 Code § 83-6; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A); Ord. No. 2009-23
§§ 1,7; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1A]
case of the Chiefs illness or absence, by the officer next in the chain of command
and all other pertinent regulations, ordinances and resolutions of the Township
regulating the Police Department.
b. The members of the Police Department shall have and exercise all powers now or
which may hereafter be conferred upon them or which they may be empowered to
exercise by the laws of the State of New Jersey, and shall serve all process issuing
out of the criminal side of the Municipal Court of the Township.
a. The Chief of Police or, in case of the Chiefs illness or absence, the officer next in
the chain of command shall exercise control over the Department, its members and
property, subject to the order of the Township Committee.
b. The Chiefs entire time shall be devoted to the duties of the office. The Chief shall
issue orders and instructions to the members of the Police Department and shall
designate the day and night hours of the members of the Department and assign the
members thereof to the hours of duty so designated and shall make such reports in
writing to the Township Committee as it shall require. The Chief shall have the
power to suspend from duty any members of the Police Department upon charges
preferred by the Chief or by third parties. The Chief shall report every such
suspension to the Township Committee within 24 hours after it is made.
c. The Chief of Police shall be directly responsible to the Township Committee as the
appropriate authority for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations thereof,
pursuant to policies established by the appropriate authority under N.J.S.A. 40a:
14-118.
d. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for implementing the rules and regulations
adopted and promulgated by the Township Committee for the government of the
police force and for the discipline of its members.
a. The uniforms of the Chief and of the members of the Police Department shall be of
regulation pattern, approved by the Township Committee, and must be worn on all
occasions when on duty, unless otherwise ordered by the Township Committee.
b. Any member of the Police Department, upon ceasing to be such member, shall
immediately surrender to the Chief of Police the officer's official badge and other
property of the Township in the officer's possession.
§ 2-41.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-41.7
2:32
§ 2-41.7. Hours of Service. [1991 Code § 83-7; Ord. No. 2009-01 § I; Ord. No.
2009-23 §§ 1,7; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1A]
The hours of employment of the members of the Police Department shall not exceed 16
consecutive hours in any twenty-four-hour time period, except in case of an emergency
situation.
§ 2-41.8. Promulgation of Revised Police Manual. [1991 Code § 83-8; Ord. No.
2006-9 § I; Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 1,7; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1A; Ord. No. 2013-05]
Pursuant to the authority vested in it by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Township Committee
of the Township of Springfield does hereby adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
for the governance of the Police Department of the Township of Springfield and for the
discipline of its members, to be known as the Township of Springfield, Department of
Police, Police Rules and Regulations Manual (2013), as it may from time to time be
amended by resolution by the Township Committee of the Township of Springfield, as
allowed by law, in the form as annexed hereto.10
§ 2-41.9. Discipline. [New; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(D); Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 4,7; Ord.
No. 2012-30]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Township Committee is hereby designated as
the appropriate authority. The Township Committee or its designated representative
or representatives shall have full charge of all matters pertaining to personnel
administration, including serving as hearing officer and/or appointing an independent
hearing officer to hear disciplinary charges filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147.
§ 2-41.10. Divisions. [Ord. No. 2004-15 § I; Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 5,7; Ord. No.
2010-02 § I; amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
The Police Department shall consist of two divisions: a Patrol Division and an
Investigative Division. Assignment of patrol officers and/or other superior officers to
those Divisions shall be made at the discretion of the Chief of Police.
§ 2-41.11. Detectives/Investigators within Investigative Division. [Ord. No.
2010-02 § II; amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-04]
a. The position of detective/investigator is hereby established. A detective/
investigator shall conduct criminal investigations for the Investigative Division of
the Police Department while in civilian clothing and shall conduct preparation of
cases for prosecution and perform such other duties as are from time to time
assigned by the Chief of Police.
b. While the Chief of Police may assign a patrol officer and/or other superior officer
to the Investigative Division, appointment to the position of detective shall only be
made upon the written recommendation of the Chief of Police and the approval of
a majority of the Township Committee by resolution.
c. A patrol officer and/or other superior officer appointed as a detective in accordance
10. Editor's Note: The Manual referred to herein may be found in the Township offices.
§ 2-41.7 ADMINISTRATION § 2-41.11
2:33
§ 2-41.12. Fees for Services from the Police Department. [1991 Code § 165-3; Ord.
No. 95-19A; Ord. No. 02-22 § I(A); Ord. No. 2005-20 § I; Ord. No. 2008-14 § I(A);
Ord. No. 2009-04 § I; Ord. No. 2009-23 § 7; Ord. No. 2010-02 § II; Ord. No.
2011-04 § 1A; Ord. No. 2012-24; Ord. No. 2012-27 § 1; 7-18-2017 by Ord. No.
2016-16; amended 9-22-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-16]
(Additional fees may be charged pursuant to Subsection 2-91.2, where applicable)
Copies of motor vehicle accidents (per report) $5
Copies of stolen property reports (per report) $5
Copies of written statements, where permitted (per report) $5
Copies of reference letter, criminal (per report) $5
Copies of audio and/or video evidence, including the price
of CD/DVD/tape and postage, if any (per CD/DVD/tape)
$50
Extra copies of warrants and complaints (per page) $5
Discovery - letter size paper (8 1/2" x 11") or smaller $0.75 per page
Discovery - legal size paper (8 1/2" x 14") $0.75 per page
Fingerprinting, where the prints are not used by this
Township (per page)
$3
Permit to purchase handgun $2
Town administered outside employment NJ Motor Vehicle
Services post
$40 per hour
Senior Citizens' building traffic post $45 per hour
Springfield Board of Education and nonprofit organizations $45 per hour
All other employment
Inside security Consistent with labor
union agreement
Outside and traffic $60 per hour
Vehicle fees $30 per hour (3-hour
minimum)
Additional administrative fee for MVS jobs $6 per hour
Additional administrative fee on all other jobs $7.50 per hour
§ 2-41.13. Special Law Enforcement Officers. [Ord. No. 2012-35 § 2]
with Subsection b above shall receive the same salary as he/she would have
received as a patrol officer or other superior officer unless the Township
Committee, by ordinance, or the applicable collective bargaining agreement
provides additional or different compensation for a detective.
d. No person shall at any time serve in the position of detective of the Investigation
Division unless and until he has been appointed in accordance with the provision of
the within section.
§ 2-41.11 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-41.13
2:34
a. Establishment and Organization. There is hereby established the position of Special
Law Enforcement Officer for the Township of Springfield. The position of Special
Law Enforcement Officer shall be a temporary office and shall not be a permanent
regular office. No Special Law Enforcement Officer, by virtue of his or her
appointment, shall be a member of the Police Department. Such officer(s) shall
serve the Township, subject to the eligibility criteria, limitations and requirements
set forth in the Special Law Enforcement Officers Act, N.J.S.A. 40A: 14-146.8 et
seq.
b. Appointment of Special Law Enforcement Officers; Hours of Duty; Term of Office.
The Chief of Police, with the prior approval of the Township Committee, may
appoint Special Law Enforcement Officer(s) to the Township's Police Department.
The number of Special Law Enforcement Officers appointed may not exceed 25%
of the total number of regular Police Officers. Special Law Enforcement Officer(s)
shall not be permitted to work more than 20 hours per week, except as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.16. The Township may designate one Special Law
Enforcement Officer to whom this limitation on hours employed shall not apply.
The term of appointment for the Special Law Enforcement Officer(s) shall be one
year.
c. Qualifications of Special Law Enforcement Officers. No person shall be appointed
to the position of Special Law Enforcement Officer within the Township unless he
or she:
1. Is a resident of the State during the term of appointment;
2. Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and intelligently and
have a high school diploma or its equivalent;
3. Is sound in body and of good health;
4. Is of good moral character;
5. Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or which would
make him or her unfit to perform the duties of his or her office; and
6. Has successfully undergone the same psychological testing that is required of
all full-time Police Officers in the Township.
d. Duties: Classification. Any Special Law Enforcement Officer(s) shall be a Class
Two Officer and shall be authorized to exercise full powers and duties similar to
those of a permanent, regularly appointed full-time Police Officer. No Special Law
Enforcement Officer(s) may carry a firearm except while engaged in the actual
performance of the Officer's official duties and when specifically authorized by the
Chief of Police or, in his absence, by the chief law enforcement officer of the
Township. The use of any firearm by a Special Law Enforcement Officer shall not
be permitted until that Officer has satisfactorily completed the training and
instruction required by law. The Special Law Enforcement Officer(s) shall have the
power to arrest when on duty and as authorized by the Chief of Police or, in his
absence, the chief law enforcement officer of the Township.
e. Compliance with Rules and Regulations of Police Department. Every Special Law
§ 2-41.13 ADMINISTRATION § 2-41.13
2:35
§ 2-41.14. Police Department Promotion Policy and Procedures. [Ord. No.
2014-16; amended 12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-17]
Enforcement Officer, while on duty, shall abide by the rules and regulations
(including any and all standard operating procedures) of the Police Department.
Any violation of rules and/or regulations, where the penalty for a Police Officer is
suspension or dismissal, may result in the immediate dismissal of the Special Law
Enforcement Officer.
f. Fees. The Township may charge a reasonable fee for equipment and uniforms
supplied for any Special Law Enforcement Officer(s), but may not charge a fee for
the costs of training or issuing a certificate of appointment. The Township shall not
be required to compensate a Special Law Enforcement Officer for time spent in
training.
a. Purpose: to provide all eligible candidates for promotion with fair notice and equal
access to the promotional process; additionally, to strive to identify the mostqualified
members of the Police Department for promotion to leadership positions
within the Department and to set forth the components of the promotional process
that will be utilized in carrying out the process.
b. Policy. Promotion denotes vertical movement in the organization hierarchy from
one rank to another, accompanied by increases in salary. The promotional process
begins with identifying employees who have the potential for assuming greater
responsibility and who possess the skills, knowledge and abilities required to
perform at the level being considered for promotion. This agency will use a
promotional process governed by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-130, as well as one which is in
compliance with applicable standards of the New Jersey State Association of Chiefs
of Police (NJSACOP).
c. Procedures.
1. Promotional procedure for the rank of Sergeant.
(a) Notification.
(1) The Township will allow a minimum twelve-week notice from the
date of the announcement of the promotional process to the date the
written exam is given. This is at the discretion of the Chief of Police
in cases of emergency.
(2) Notification shall be contained in a written announcement which
will be posted at Police Headquarters and will be issued to each
eligible candidate via Police Department email.
(3) Eligible officers shall indicate via departmental email, to the Chief
of Police, or designee, their intention to take part in the examination
process, within 10 days of the posting.
(b) Eligibility.
(1) Officers having achieved five complete years of service as a sworn
officer with the Springfield Police Department, after the deduction
§ 2-41.13 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-41.14
2:36
of any unpaid suspension time, as of the date of the announcement
of the promotional process are eligible for the promotional process.
(2) Credit of six months for every one year of service as a full-time state,
county, or local sworn law enforcement officer, or credit of six
months for every two years of full-time service as a military police
officer, will be given to officers hired with previous experience. If
an officer meets both criteria, he/she will be given credit for
whichever is greater. This credit will be added to the officer's years
of service with the Springfield Police Department. Officers having a
total of five complete years, in this manner, with a minimum of three
years as a full-time Springfield police officer, are eligible for the
promotional process. Service credit will not be used for seniority
point purposes.
(c) Promotional criteria. The promotional criteria for the rank of Sergeant
shall include, but will not be limited to, the following:
(1) Eligibility for promotion.
(2) Written examination.
(3) Resume review.
(4) Oral interview.
(5) File review.
(6) Seniority.
(d) Process.
(1) Written examination (50% of total weighted score).
(i) There will be a written examination administered by the New
Jersey State Association of Chiefs of Police. A list of study
materials will be posted 10 days after the initial notification.
The written exam will be aimed at the level of supervision
being sought and is to be administered to all eligible candidates
at the same time and place. Examination times will be
scheduled, where possible, to allow eligible candidates
sufficient rest prior to the exam. Candidates are responsible for
the purchase of any study materials.
(ii) The number of candidates that will proceed to the oral
interview phase will be based on the following: 1) candidates
achieving the five highest scores; or 2) candidates achieving the
highest 50% of the scores of all the candidates taking the
written exam; whichever is greater. The 50% shall be rounded
up, i.e.: If 11 candidates take the exam, the six highest scores
would move on to the oral interview process; if eight candidates
take the exam, the five highest scores would move on to the
oral interview process. In the case of a tie in the highest scoring,
§ 2-41.14 ADMINISTRATION § 2-41.14
2:37
the tied candidates would also proceed to the oral interview
process.
(iii) The written results will be combined with the scores of the oral
interviews prior to seniority being applied.
(iv) Eligible candidates wishing to proceed in the selection process
shall submit a resume and cover letter detailing their respective
experiences with the Springfield Police Department. These
documents should include, but not be limited to, a description
of any program or programs that the individual participated in
or initiated, experience, education, training, certifications, and
any other relevant information that the candidate wishes to
have considered for the promotional process. The resume and
cover letter shall be submitted to the Chief of Police when
directed, prior to the date of the oral interview. These
documents will be reviewed by the Chief of Police, or designee,
and will be forwarded to the oral interview panel for their
review and possible use during the oral interviews.
(2) Oral interview (50% of total weighted score).
(i) Eligible candidates for the position of Sergeant wishing to
continue in the process will advance to the oral interview phase
of the promotional process. The oral interview process shall be
conducted by the New Jersey State Association of Chiefs of
Police. The Chief, and/or designee, and the Captain (both of
whom will not score the candidates) may sit in to observe only
during the interviews.
(ii) The dates and times of the oral interviews shall be posted.
Subject matter for these interviews may include, but not be
limited to, general principles of supervision; command;
leadership; organization; arrest, search and seizure;
management principles; case law (NJ and US); criminal law;
the United States Constitution and New Jersey State
Constitution, rules of evidence; motor vehicle law; Bill of
Rights; New Jersey Attorney General Guidelines and
Directives; Incident Command System; School Memorandum
of Understanding; OPRA Regulations; Springfield Police
Department rules, regulations, policies and procedures;
Township of Springfield municipal ordinances; and Union
County Prosecutor's Office directives/legal updates. Candidates
are responsible for the purchase of any study materials.
(iii) Each candidate shall be interviewed by the oral interview panel
under similar conditions in order to evaluate the merit and
fitness of such candidate for promotion.
(iv) A score for each candidate will be forwarded to the Chief of
Police and/or designee.
§ 2-41.14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-41.14
2:38
(3) Seniority. Each candidate will be awarded 1/2 of a point onto his/her
total score for every completed year, after the deduction of any
unpaid suspension time, of service to the Springfield Police
Department as of the date of the announcement of the promotional
process. For each completed three-month period, a candidate will
receive 0.125 points. There will be a maximum of 10 points awarded
for seniority.
(e) Score tabulation.
(1) Written: 50%.
(2) Oral interview: 50%.
(3) Individuals shall have their scores from both the written exam and
the oral interview combined.
(4) Seniority points will be added to the tabulation of the written and
oral interview scores.
(5) Deductions for disciplinary actions (previous five years from
announcement of the promotional process and up until the time of
the score tabulation) will then be taken from the total sum of the
written, oral, and seniority points.
(i) Reprimand = -0.75 point (per incident).
(ii) Suspension = -1.5 points (per incident).
(6) Candidates shall be ranked in order, with the person achieving the
highest overall score, after all tabulations, as number one.
(7) In the event two or more candidates obtain equal final tabulated
scores, the ranking order will be determined by time served in rank.
(f) Candidate recommendation.
(1) For any promotion, the Chief of Police shall consider the first three
names of candidates standing highest on the list of eligible
candidates for recommendation to the Township Committee for
promotion to the rank of Sergeant. Due consideration will be given,
including, but not limited to, attendance records (workers'
compensation and/or anything covered under statute excluded),
leadership qualities, accountability, job performance, past three
years' evaluations and performance notices (positive/negative), and
any other disciplinary actions. The Chief of Police has the authority
to choose from the top three ranked candidates.
(2) The list for eligible candidates for promotion will be adjusted after
each selection by the Chief of Police to maintain a ranking of first
through last based on the overall scores of the remaining eligible
candidates for promotion.
(g) Duration of the list. The promotion list will remain active for one year
§ 2-41.14 ADMINISTRATION § 2-41.14
2:39
from the date of the posting of final rankings.
2. Promotional procedure for the rank of Lieutenant.
(a) Notification.
(1) The Township will allow a minimum twelve-week notice from the
date of the announcement of the promotional process to the date the
written exam is given. This is at the discretion of the Chief of Police
in cases of emergency.
(2) Notification shall be contained in a written announcement, which
will be posted at Police Headquarters and shall be issued to each
eligible candidate via the Police Department email system.
(3) Eligible officers shall indicate, via departmental email, to the Chief
of Police, or designee, their intention to take part in the examination
process within 10 days of the posting.
(b) Eligibility. Candidates must have a minimum of 18 months of continuous
service as a Sergeant with the Springfield Police Department, after the
deduction of any unpaid suspension time, as of the date of the
announcement of the promotional process to be eligible for the
promotional process.
(c) Promotional criteria. The promotional criteria for the rank of Lieutenant
shall include, but will not be limited to, the following:
(1) Eligibility for promotion.
(2) Written examination.
(3) Resume review.
(4) Oral interview.
(5) File review.
(6) Seniority.
(d) Process.
(1) Written examination (50% of total weighted score).
(i) There will be a written examination administered by the New
Jersey State Association of Chiefs of Police. A list of study
materials will be posted 10 days after the initial notification.
The written exam will be aimed at the level of supervision
being sought and is to be administered to all eligible candidates
at the same time and place. Examination times will be
scheduled, where possible, to allow eligible candidates
sufficient rest prior to the exam. Candidates are responsible for
the purchase of any study materials.
(ii) The candidates achieving the five highest scores shall proceed
§ 2-41.14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-41.14
2:40
to the oral interview phase. In the case of a tie in the highest
scoring, the tied candidates would also proceed to the oral
interview phase.
(iii) The written results will be combined with the scores of the oral
interviews prior to seniority being applied.
(iv) Eligible candidates wishing to proceed in the selection process
shall submit a resume and cover letter detailing their respective
experiences with the Springfield Police Department. These
documents should include, but not be limited to, a description
of any program or programs that the individual participated in
or initiated, experience, education, training, certifications, and
any other relevant information that the candidate wishes to
have considered for the promotional process. The resume and
cover letter shall be submitted to the Chief of Police when
directed, prior to the date of the oral interview. These
documents will be reviewed by the Chief of Police, or designee,
and will be forwarded to the oral interview panel for their
review and possible use during the oral interviews.
(2) Oral interview (50% of total weighted score).
(i) Eligible candidates for the position of Lieutenant wishing to
continue in the process will advance to the oral interview phase
of the promotional process. The oral interview process shall be
conducted by the New Jersey State Association of Chiefs of
Police. The Chief, and/or designee, and the Captain (both of
whom will not score the candidates) may sit in to observe only
during the interviews.
(ii) The dates and times of the oral interviews shall be posted.
Subject matter for these interviews may include, but not be
limited to, general principles of supervision; command;
leadership; organization; arrest, search and seizure;
management principles; case law (NJ and US); criminal law;
the United States Constitution and New Jersey State
Constitution, rules of evidence; motor vehicle law; Bill of
Rights; New Jersey Attorney General Guidelines and
Directives; Incident Command System; School Memorandum
of Understanding; OPRA Regulations; Springfield Police
Department rules, regulations, policies and procedures;
Township of Springfield municipal ordinances; and Union
County Prosecutor's Office directives/legal updates. Candidates
are responsible for the purchase of any study materials.
(iii) Each candidate shall be interviewed by the oral interview panel
under similar conditions in order to evaluate the merit and
fitness of such candidate for promotion.
(iv) A score for each candidate will be forwarded to the Chief of
Police and/or designee.
§ 2-41.14 ADMINISTRATION § 2-41.14
2:41
(3) Seniority. Each candidate will be awarded 1/2 of a point onto his/her
total score for every completed year, after the deduction of any
unpaid suspension time, in the rank of Sergeant with the Springfield
Police Department as of the date of the announcement of the
promotional process. For each completed three-month period as a
Sergeant, a candidate will receive 0.125 points. There will be a
maximum of 10 points awarded for seniority.
(e) Score tabulation.
(1) Written exam: 50%.
(2) Oral interview: 50%.
(3) Individuals shall have their scores from both the written exam and
the oral interview combined.
(4) Seniority points will be added to the tabulation of the written and
oral interview scores.
(5) Deductions for disciplinary actions (previous five years from
announcement of the promotional process and up until the time of
the score tabulation) will then be taken from the total sum of the
written, oral, and seniority points.
(i) Reprimand = -0.75 point (per incident).
(ii) Suspension = -1.5 points (per incident).
(6) Candidates shall be ranked in order, with the person achieving the
highest overall score, after all tabulations, as number one.
(7) In the event two or more candidates obtain equal final tabulated
scores, the ranking order will be determined by time served in rank.
(f) Candidate recommendation.
(1) For any promotion, the Chief of Police shall consider the first three
names of candidates standing highest on the list of eligible
candidates for recommendation to the Township Committee for
promotion to the rank of Lieutenant. Due consideration will be
given, including, but not limited to, attendance records (workers'
compensation and/or anything covered under statute excluded),
management/leadership qualities, accountability, job performance,
work habits, past three years' evaluations and performance notices
(positive/negative), and any other disciplinary actions. The Chief of
Police has the authority to choose from the top three ranked
candidates.
(2) The list for eligible candidates for promotion will be adjusted after
each selection by the Chief of Police to maintain a ranking of first
through last based on the overall scores of the remaining eligible
candidates for promotion.
§ 2-41.14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-41.14
2:42
(g) Duration of the list. The promotion list will remain active for one year
from the date of the posting of final rankings.
3. Assignment of supervisory positions within the Detective Bureau.
(a) It is the goal of the Springfield Police Department to advance the mostqualified
personnel to supervisory positions within the Detective Bureau
of the Police Department to promote the efficiency of the Township and
the services of the Police Department.
(b) Any supervisory assignment to the Detective Bureau shall be made at the
discretion of the Chief of Police.
(c) It is at the discretion of the Chief of Police, based on the needs of the
Department, to determine when command positions are needed within the
Detective Bureau.
(d) If determined by the Chief of Police to fit the Department's needs in
command structure, there may be more than one supervisor within the
Detective Bureau.
(e) If more than one supervisor is within the Detective Bureau, the ranking
supervisor, or if of equal rank, the supervisor with the most time served
in rank, shall be the commander.
(f) Due consideration shall be given to the length and merit of service.
4. Assignment of investigators in the Detective Bureau.
(a) Officers are assigned to the Detective Bureau as Investigators solely at
the discretion of the Chief of Police.
(b) An officer assigned to the Detective Bureau as an Investigator, and who
may hold the rank of Corporal, shall only receive additional pay to bring
his/her salary rate to Detective pay level and shall not exceed that level.
5. Promotion of Investigator to Detective in the Detective Bureau.
(a) An Investigator assigned to the Detective Bureau may be promoted to
Detective solely at the discretion of the Chief of Police.
(b) Due consideration shall be given to the length and merit of service.
6. Promotional procedure for the rank of Captain.
(a) The promotional procedure for the rank of Captain is at the discretion of
the Chief of Police.
(b) The promotional process will include, but is not limited to:
(1) A personnel file review.
(2) A resume/cover letter review.
(3) An oral interview to be conducted by a panel consisting of three
§ 2-41.14 ADMINISTRATION § 2-41.14
2:43
§ 2-41.15. Traffic Control Officers. [Added 12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-16]
members of the New Jersey State Association of Chiefs of Police.
(c) Eligibility. Those holding the rank of Lieutenant, and/or Sergeants with a
minimum of three complete years of service, after the deduction of any
suspended time, holding the rank of Sergeant as of the date of the
announcement of the promotional process, will be eligible for the position
of Captain.
(d) Due consideration shall be given to the length and merit of service.
7. Appeals process. Within 14 days of the posting of the ranking of candidates, a
candidate may file a written letter of appeal. Said letter must contain the
reason(s) or justification(s) for an appeal and must be submitted to the Chief
of Police, through the appropriate chain of command. The Chief of Police will
assess the request and make a determination of how the request will be
addressed on a case-by-case basis. The Chief of Police may schedule a meeting
to discuss/review the testing results with officers that so request it.
8. Administration and security of promotional materials. The Chief of Police
shall be responsible for the administration of the promotional process and
security of promotional materials.
a. Establishment and organization. There is hereby established the position of traffic
control officer for the Township of Springfield. The position of traffic control
officer shall be a temporary office and shall not be a permanent regular office. No
traffic control officer, by virtue of his or her appointment, shall be a member of the
Police Department. Such officer(s) shall serve the Township, subject to the
eligibility criteria.
b. Appointment of traffic control officers; hours of duty; term of office.
1. The Chief of Police, with the prior approval of the Township Committee, may
appoint traffic control officer(s) to the Township's Police Department. The
number of traffic control officer(s) appointed may not exceed 10% of the total
number of regular police officers.
2. Traffic control officer(s) shall not be permitted to work more than 19 hours per
week.
3. The term of appointment for the traffic control officer(s) shall be one year.
c. Qualifications of traffic control officers. No person shall be appointed to the
position of traffic control officer within the Township unless he or she:
1. Is a resident of the state during the term of appointment;
2. Is able to read, write, speak, understand, and communicate in the English
language sufficiently to perform the duties of this position and has a high
school diploma or its equivalent;
3. Is sound in body and of good health;
§ 2-41.14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-41.15
2:44
4. Is of good moral character;
5. Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or which would
make him or her unfit to perform the duties of his or her office; and
6. Possesses a driver's license valid in New Jersey only if the operation of a
vehicle, rather than employee mobility, is necessary to perform essential duties
of the position.
d. Duties. Traffic control officer(s) shall, under direction of the Police Department,
perform the routine duties of directing traffic at major intersections or where
otherwise assigned, directing traffic by standing at an intersection and changing the
traffic light by pushing an electric button, standing in the middle of a street or
intersection and directing traffic by hand, ensuring the safe and effective flow of
traffic, overseeing the removal of stalled or damaged vehicles that would cause a
traffic tie-up, assuring the safety of pedestrians crossing an intersection, providing
information and directions to pedestrians or motorists, and clearing a path for
emergency vehicles when necessary.
e. Eligibility/required abilities.
1. Any traffic control officer(s) must possess the following:
(a) Knowledge of the problems and procedures involved in directing traffic
to meet departmental standards;
(b) Knowledge of the procedures used in keeping records;
(c) Knowledge of preparing reports of conditions and actions in accordance
with state procedures;
(d) Ability to understand, remember and carry out oral and written directions;
(e) Ability to analyze routine problems;
(f) Ability to organize assigned work and develop effective work methods;
(g) Ability to report significant conditions and actions taken;
(h) Ability to establish and maintain records;
(i) Ability to utilize various types of electronic and/or manual recording and
information systems used by the agency, office, or related units;
2. Persons with mental or physical disabilities are eligible as long as they can
perform the essential functions of the job after reasonable accommodation is
made to their known limitations. If the accommodation cannot be made
because it would cause the employer undue hardship, such persons may not be
eligible.
f. Compensation. Any traffic control officer(s) shall be compensated at an hourly rate
$1.50 above the hourly rate of a crossing guard employed by the Township.
g. Compliance with rules and regulations of Police Department. Every traffic control
officer, while on duty, shall abide by the rules and regulations (including any and
§ 2-41.15 ADMINISTRATION § 2-41.15
2:45
§ 2-42. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
For statutory provisions concerning the Fire Department, see N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7.
§ 2-42.1. Established; Organization; Membership. [1991 Code § 59-1; Ord. No.
02-28 §§ I(A), (D); Ord. No. 2007-02 § I; Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 2,7; Ord. No.
2010-10 § I; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1B]
There is hereby established the Fire Department of the Township of Springfield. The
Department shall consist of the following officers: a Fire Chief, who shall be the head
of the Department; Deputy Chief; Captains; firefighters consisting of paid and volunteer
members, each of whom shall be appointed pursuant to this Code.
§ 2-42.2. Chief: Powers and Duties. [1991 Code § 59-2; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A);
Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 6, 7; Ord. No. 2010-10 § I; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1B; Ord. No.
2012-30 § 2]
The Chief of the Fire Department shall be the head of the Department; shall be subject,
in the performance of the duties of Chief, only to the rules, regulations and orders of the
Township Committee.
all standard operating procedures) of the Police Department. Any violation of rules
and/or regulations, where the penalty for a police officer is suspension or dismissal,
may result in the immediate dismissal of the traffic control officer.
h. Fees. The Township may charge a reasonable fee for equipment and uniforms
supplied for any traffic control officer(s) but may not charge a fee for the costs of
training or issuing a certificate of appointment. The Township shall not be required
to compensate a traffic control officer for time spent in training.
a. The Fire Chief shall issue all orders and instructions to, shall have power to
designate the tour of duty of, and in all other respects shall have control,
management and direction of, the members of the Fire Department.
b. The Chief shall be responsible for the possession, maintenance and use of all of the
Department's apparatus and equipment for the purpose of furnishing fire protection
to the Township.
c. The Chief shall have complete authority to direct, regulate and control all persons
who shall engage in or assist in the extinguishment of fires or in furnishing fire
protection.
d. The Chief shall render a full report in writing of the matters pertaining to the duties
of the office for the preceding year at the regular meeting of the Township
Committee in the month of January in each year. The Chief shall also make a report
in writing at each regular monthly meeting of the Township Committee of all
matters pertaining to the duties of the office for the preceding month, setting forth
the place at which the Department was called upon to furnish fire protection, the
character of the buildings involved and the estimated amount of damage occasioned
by the fire.
e. The Chief shall have the power to suspend from duty any member of the Fire
§ 2-41.15 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-42.2
2:46
§ 2-42.3. Deputy Chief: Duties. [1991 Code § 59-3; Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 2,7; Ord.
No. 2010-10 § I; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1B]
The Deputy Chief shall perform the duties of the Fire Chief in the absence of the Chief,
subject to all other pertinent regulations, ordinances and resolutions of the Township
regulating the Fire Department.
§ 2-42.4. Captain: Duties. [1991 Code § 59-4; Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 2,7; Ord. No.
2010-10 § I; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1B]
The Captain shall be next in rank to the Deputy Chief. The Captain shall perform the
duties of the Deputy Chief in the absence of the Deputy Chief and shall be subject to
all pertinent regulations, ordinances and resolutions of the Township regulating the Fire
Department.
§ 2-42.4A. (Reserved)11
§ 2-42.5. Headquarters; Duty Schedule. [1991 Code § 59-5; Ord. No. 2009-23
§§ 2,7; Ord. No. 2010-10 § I; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1B; Ord. No. 2012-30 § 2]
§ 2-42.6. Uniforms. [1991 Code § 59-6; Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 2,7; Ord. No. 2010-10
§ I; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1B]
Department upon charges preferred either by the Chief or by a third person. The
Chief shall report every such suspension, within 24 hours after which it was made,
to the Township Committee.
a. The headquarters of the Fire Department shall be located in the firehouse. The
members of the Department shall report there for duty at the hours assigned to them
unless otherwise directed by the Chief of the Fire Department.
b. The schedule of actual duty of the Fire Department shall be arranged so that each
paid member shall be on actual duty for an average of forty (40) hours per week in
any eight-week cycle. Duty schedules shall be arranged by the Fire Chief with the
approval of the Township Committee.
c. The volunteer members and paid members shall work as one unified Fire
Department. The Fire Chief shall schedule the volunteer members to serve in a
manner consistent with the best interests of the Township and Fire Department. The
duty schedules for volunteer members shall be arranged by the Fire Chief with the
approval of the Township Committee.
a. The Chief of the Fire Department and other members thereof shall wear uniforms
of regular pattern to be approved by the Township Committee. Uniforms shall be
worn on all occasions by the members of the Department while on duty, unless
otherwise ordered by the Township Committee.
b. All members of the Fire Department, upon ceasing to be such members for any
cause, shall immediately surrender to the Chief their official badges and all other
11. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 2-42.4A, Firefighter/Aide to the Fire Chief, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance Nos. 2007-17 and 2009-23 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2010-10.
§ 2-42.2 ADMINISTRATION § 2-42.6
2:47
§ 2-42.7. Removal or Demotion; Hearing; Notice. [1991 Code § 59-7; Ord. No.
2009-23 §§ 2,7; Ord. No. 2010-10 § I; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1B]
§ 2-42.8. Rules and Regulations: Fire Manual Adopted. [1991 Code § 59-8; Ord.
No. 2009-23 §§ 2,7; Ord. No. 2010-10 § I; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1B; Ord. No.
2013-06]
Township property which may be in their possession.
a. A permanent member of the Fire Department may be removed from office or
demoted only for cause and after a hearing before the Township Committee upon
written charge or charges. The hearing shall be at a time and place fixed by the
Township Committee. The Chief of the Fire Department shall serve or cause to be
served the notice of hearing and copy of charges hereinabove referred to upon the
member of the Fire Department against whom charges have been instituted at least
24 hours before the time fixed for the hearing. In the event that charges are
instituted against the Chief of the Fire Department, a like notice of hearing and copy
of charges shall be served upon the Chief by the Township Clerk.
b. No members of the Fire Department who shall be removed from office for cause,
upon hearing, shall be entitled to receive any salary or compensation from the date
of suspension upon the charges or from the date of removal where no suspension
has occurred.
a. The Township Committee shall prescribe and establish rules and regulations for the
government and discipline of the Fire Department by resolution. Violations of the
rules and regulations shall be punished as per N.J.S.A. 40A:14-19 as amended.
b. The Committee shall establish by resolution and may amend and repeal by
resolution such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary for the government
and efficient working of the entire Department. The rules and regulations, when
adopted, shall be posted within five days after the adoption thereof in the room in
the Municipal Building assigned to the Fire Department and copy thereof delivered
to each and every member of the Department within five days after the adoption of
the rules or regulations or any amendment or repeal thereof. Failure to post rules
shall not invalidate such rules.
c. Promulgation of Revised Fire Manual (2013). Pursuant to the authority vested in it
by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7, and Ordinance 2010-10, the Township Committee of the
Township of Springfield does hereby adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
for the governance of the Fire Department of the Township of Springfield and for
guidance and the discipline of its members, to be known as the Township of
Springfield, Fire Department Manual (2013), as it may from time to time be
amended by resolution by the Township Committee of the Township of Springfield,
as allowed by law, in the form as annexed hereto.12
12. Editor's Note: The Manual referred to herein may be found in the Township offices.
§ 2-42.6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-42.9
2:48
§ 2-42.9. Fees for Services from the Fire Department. [Ord. No. 2005-20 § I; Ord.
No. 2008-14 § I(B); Ord. No. 2009-23 §§ 2,7; Ord. No. 2010-10 § I; Ord. No.
2011-04 § 1B]
Fee to receive package for application to the Fire Department for test and employment
by Career Department $75.
Town administered outside employment Springfield Board of Education and nonprofit
organizations $45 per hour.
All other employment $60 per hour.
Additional administrative fee on all jobs $7.50 per hour.
§ 2-42.10. Appointment of Paid Members to the Fire Department. [Ord. No.
2010-10 § 2; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1B; Ord. No. 2012-07 § 1]
a. Appointment of paid members to the Fire Department shall be made by the
Township Committee in accordance with local and State laws. All appointees to the
paid Fire Department shall serve an initial probationary period of 12 months prior
to becoming a permanent member of the Fire Department. The Township may
remove an appointee at any time during the probationary period. Appointment of
paid members to the Fire Department shall first be made from the volunteer
members of the Township Fire Department, who have served as active firefighters
for at least two years next preceding such appointment. The appointees shall not be
under 21 or over 40 years of age at the time of appointment. The Township shall
select a candidate from the top three based on the criteria described in Subsection c
below.
b. If no such volunteer member is available for such appointment the Township
Committee may consider any other duly qualified applicant for appointment. All
applicants for appointment shall submit to a criminal history background check and
psychological examination. The Township shall select a candidate from the top
three based upon the criteria described in Subsection c below. [Amended
11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-25]
c. In addition to the requirements contained in New Jersey Statues, the Township shall
consider the following criteria when making appointments of paid members of the
Fire Department.
1. Springfield Fire Department ("SFD") Volunteer Firefighter Service Credits
Points shall be established using the following work performance evaluation
of qualified firefighters having served for at least two years next preceding an
appointment to a paid position.
(a) SFD Officers will provide written evaluations of the qualified volunteer
firefighters to measure: Mastery of Skills and Job Knowledge,
Communication, Dependability, Career Development, Self-Confidence,
Customer Service, Safety, Role Model, Experience, Seniority and
Judgment.
(b) The ratings shall be applied to a schedule awarding between three and 10
§ 2-42.9 ADMINISTRATION § 2-42.10
2:49
service credit points to a candidate's passing examination score.
2. All candidates for Probationary Career Firefighter shall possess a NJ Division
of Fire Safety Firefighter 1 Certification.
3. Written examination of 100 questions worth one point each that measures the
skills, abilities, and personal characteristics that comprise a successful
firefighter shall be conducted by an entity which specializes in providing Fire
Department hiring and promotion procedures, examinations, products and
services. Candidates shall have 2 1/2 hours to complete the examination.
Candidates shall achieve a passing score of 70% on the written examination
before proceeding with the physical examination elements of the selection
procedure.
4. Physical Agility/Strength Examination by Springfield Fire Department
utilizing the following elements. Candidates must successfully complete
elements (a) and (b), below, prior to proceeding with the remaining elements.
Successful completion of elements (a) and (b), below, shall be based on
predetermined standards established by the Fire Chief, which standards shall
be based on reasonable, customary and legitimate expectations of a firefighter
and shall be communicated to the candidates. Seventy points shall be
considered passing. Failure to pass this portion of the examination shall
eliminate a candidate from further consideration.
(a) Half-Mile Run in 4.25 minutes (Pass/Fail).
(b) Seventy-Five-Foot Aerial Ladder Climb (Pass/Fail).
(c) Dummy Drag (Timed). Candidate shall earn 25 points for dragging a 125
pound mannequin for 75 feet in seven seconds or less. Candidate shall
lose one point for each 1/2 second (rounded to the nearest 1/2 second)
greater than seven seconds in which task is completed.
(d) Roof Ladder Serpentine (Timed). Candidate shall earn 25 points by
completing a 200-foot course carrying a fourteen-foot ladder in 25
seconds or less. Candidate shall lose one point for each one second
(rounded to the nearest second) greater than 25 seconds in which task is
completed.
(e) Hose Drag (Timed). Candidate shall earn 25 points by dragging a one
150-foot length 2.5 inch fire hose 50 feet in seven seconds or less.
Candidate shall lose one point for each 0.5 second (rounded to the nearest
0.5 second) greater than seven seconds in which task is completed.
(f) Stair Climb (Timed). Candidate shall earn 25 points for carrying a coiled
fifty-foot length of 1.75 inch fire hose up three flights of stairs in seven
seconds or less. Candidate shall lose one point for each 0.5 second
(rounded to the nearest half-second) greater than seven seconds in which
task is completed.
5. Oral Interview. The top 10% or top 10 candidates, whichever is greater, after
conclusion of the written examination and physical agility/strength
§ 2-42.10 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-42.10
2:50
§ 2-42.11. Appointment of Volunteer Members to the Fire Department. [Ord. No.
2010-10 § III; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1B]
Appointment of volunteer members to the Fire Department shall be made by the
Township Committee in accordance with the laws of this State. All applicants for
appointment shall submit to a criminal history background check and psychological
examination. All applicants for appointment shall satisfy the training standards, safety
standards, rules and regulations of the Township Fire Department. All appointed
volunteer members shall continue to satisfy the training standards, safety standards, rules
and regulations of the Township Fire Department during their respective service as a
volunteer member.
§ 2-42.12. Compensation of Volunteer Members of the Fire Department. [Ord.
No. 2010-10 § IV; Ord. No. 2011-04 § 1B]
The amount appropriated in the budget of the Township as compensation to volunteer
members of the Fire Department for each year shall be apportioned among the volunteer
members according to the number of fire alarms in which each volunteer member
attended and participated.
§ 2-42.13. Promotion to Superior Officer Positions; Fire Chief; Deputy Fire Chief;
Captain. [Ord. No. 2012-07 § 2; Ord. No. 2014-06]
examinations shall be selected for oral interviews. Interviews shall be
conducted by the same three-person panel selected by the Fire Chief, which
shall consist of a tour officer, a career firefighter and a member of executive
membership (i.e., Fire Chief, Deputy Chief, Administrator or Public Safety
Director). Each candidate shall be asked the same five questions prepared by
an entity which specializes in providing Fire Department hiring and promotion
procedures, products and services. Each question shall be worth 10 points.
Scores shall be based on a candidate's thoroughness/completeness of answer,
communication ability, knowledge of subject matter, interpersonal and
decision-making skills.
6. Background Check. The candidate(s) being considered for hiring by the
Governing Body will be subjected to a criminal background check.
7. Mental Fitness Assessments by a Forensic Psychologist: Any candidate being
considered for hiring by the Governing Body will be scored in one of the
following categories: Recommended for hire, Recommended with
reservations, Not recommended, or Recommended against hire. Candidates
determined to be "not recommended" or "recommended against hiring" shall
not be eligible for hire.
8. National Fire Protection Association ("NFPA") 1582 Medical Assessment.
Any candidate being considered for hiring by the Governing Body shall be
medically evaluated based on the NFPA 1582 Standard on Comprehensive
Occupational Medical Program for Fire Departments. Successful completion
of the medical assessment shall be a prerequisite to hiring.
a. Promotion to Fire Chief. Promotion to the rank of Fire Chief shall be determined on
§ 2-42.10 ADMINISTRATION § 2-42.13
2:51
the basis of qualifications, resume evaluation, interview and experience. In order
to be eligible for the position of Fire Chief, an individual must have served as
Deputy Chief for any period of time or as Fire Captain for at least two full years
at the time of the examination. The individual selected for promotion shall serve a
probationary period of nine months, during which, he/she may be returned to his/
her prior position.
1. Qualifications/Resume Evaluation. Each candidate may submit a resume to the
Public Safety Director by a prescribed date, which will be reviewed and graded
by a panel consisting of the Administrator and Fire Chief. Each resume will be
graded on a scale of zero through 10, 10 being the highest or best score. Grades
shall be based on an evaluation of the candidates: (1) Education; (2)
Leadership; (3) Administrative; (4) Operational; and (5) Training. Failure of a
candidate to submit a resume by the prescribed date will result in a score of
zero.
2. Interview. The interview shall consist of questions to be administered by the
outgoing Fire Chief, Administrator and Public Safety Director. Each candidate
shall answer the same questions. Each question shall be weighted equally with
points awarded based on thoroughness/completeness of answer,
communication ability and knowledge of subject matter. Fifty total points may
be awarded for the oral interview.
3. The candidates shall be ranked by point score and the Township Committee
shall select an eligible candidate from the top three.
4. Promotional Assessment by a forensic psychologist. The candidate(s) being
considered for promotion by the Governing Body will be scored in one of the
following categories: Recommended for promotion, Recommended with
reservations, Not recommend, or Recommended against promotion.
Candidates determined to be "not recommended" or "recommended against
hiring" shall not be eligible for promotion.
b. Promotion to Deputy Fire Chief. Promotion to the rank of Deputy Fire Chief shall
be determined on the basis of qualifications, resume evaluation, personnel file
evaluation, interview and experience. In order to be eligible for the position of
Deputy Fire Chief, an individual must have served as a Fire Captain for at least one
full year at the time of the examination. The individual selected for promotion shall
serve a probationary period of nine months, during which, he/she may be returned
to his/her prior position.
1. Qualifications/Resume Evaluation. Each candidate may submit a resume to the
Chief, by a prescribed date, which will be reviewed and graded by a panel
consisting of the Township Administrator, a Public Safety Expert selected by
the Township and Fire Chief. Each resume will be graded on a scale of zero
through 20. Twenty being the highest or best score. Grades shall be based on
an evaluation of the candidates: (1) Education; (2) Leadership; (3)
Administrative; (4) Operational; and (5) Training. Failure of a candidate to
submit a resume by the prescribed date will result in a score of zero.
2. Interview. The Interview shall consist of questions to be administered by a
panel consisting of the Fire Chief, Township Administrator and a Public
§ 2-42.13 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-42.13
2:52
Safety Expert selected by the Township. Each candidate shall answer the
same questions. Each question shall be weighted equally with points awarded
based on thoroughness/completeness of answer, communication ability and
knowledge of subject matter. Sixty total points may be awarded for the oral
interview.
3. Personnel File Evaluation. The Township finds that an individual's past
performance is a substantial consideration in the promotional process. As such,
an individual's performance evaluations, commendations and disciplinary
history must be reviewed as part of the promotional process. Personnel files
will be reviewed and graded by a panel established by the Fire Chief,
consisting of the Fire Chief, Administrator and a Public Safety Expert selected
by the Township, prior to the written examination. Each personnel file will be
graded on a scale of zero through 20 (20 being the highest or best score).
Grades shall be based on an evaluation of the candidates: (1) performance
evaluations; (2) disciplinary history; (3) commendations and (4) attendance
record.
4. The candidates shall be ranked by point score. At any time a promotion is
made, the Township Committee shall utilize the "Rule of Three" and appoint
any one of the remaining top three scoring candidates. Consistent with
Gallagher v. Mayor and Council of the Twp. of Irvington, 190 N.J.Super 394,
400 (App.Div.1983), application of N.J.S.A. 40A: 14-9.6 is limited to the
single instance when a tie produces an impasse in the appointing process, i.e.,
a tie in the test scores of a resident and a nonresident for third place on the list.
Because the rule-of-three necessitates eliminating one of the tied candidates,
N.J.S.A. 40A: 14-9.6 operates to eliminate the nonresident.
5. Promotional Assessment by a Forensic Psychologist. The candidate(s) being
considered from promotion by the Governing Body will be scored in one of
the following categories: Recommended for promotion, Recommended with
reservations, not recommended, or Recommended against promotion.
Candidates determined to be "not recommended" or "recommended against
hiring" shall not be eligible for promotion.
6. For the purposes of this subsection, "Public Safety Expert selected by the
Township" shall mean an individual, not currently employed by the Township,
with recognized expertise in public safety obtained through (a) career fire
officer experience, (b) experience providing fire department hiring and
promotion procedures, examinations, products and services; (c) experience as
a firefighter instructor at a recognized fire academy or similar institution; or
(d) substantial experience as a Municipal or County Director of Public Safety.
c. Promotional procedure for the rank of Fire Captain. [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-03]
1. Notification. Notification of intention to promote a firefighter to the rank of
Fire Captain is as follows:
(a) The Township will allow a minimum of eight weeks' notice from the date
of the announcement of the promotional process to the date the written
exam is given. This is at the discretion of the Fire Chief in cases of
§ 2-42.13 ADMINISTRATION § 2-42.13
2:53
emergency.
(b) Notification shall be contained in a written announcement which will be
posted at Fire Headquarters and will be issued to each eligible candidate
via Fire Department email.
(c) Eligible firefighters shall indicate in writing, or departmental email, to the
Chief of Fire, or designee, their intention to take part in the examination
process, within 10 days of the posting.
2. Eligibility. The eligibility requirements for rank of Fire Captain are the
following:
(a) Firefighters having achieved five complete years of service as a sworn
firefighter with the Springfield Fire Department, after the deduction of
any unpaid suspension time, as of the date of the announcement of the
promotional process, are eligible for the promotional process.
(b) Promotional criteria. The promotional criteria for the rank of Fire Captain
shall include, but will not be limited to, the following:
(1) Eligibility for promotion.
(2) Written examination.
(3) Oral examination.
(4) Education.
(5) Seniority.
(6) Personnel file evaluation.
3. Process. The process to determine the firefighter to be promoted to the rank of
Fire Captain is as follows:
(a) Written examination.
(1) There will be a written examination administered by a public safety
expert. A list of study materials will be posted 10 days after the
initial notification. The written exam will be aimed at the level of
supervision being sought and is to be administered to all eligible
candidates at the same time and place. Examination times will be
scheduled, where possible, to allow eligible candidates sufficient
rest prior to the exam.
(2) The maximum score for the written examination shall be 100 points.
(b) Oral examination.
(1) There will be an oral examination developed by a public safety
expert.
(2) A panel of no less than three public safety experts shall conduct the
oral examination of the candidates.
§ 2-42.13 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-42.13
2:54
(3) Each question shall be graded based on thoroughness and
completeness of the answer, communication ability, knowledge of
the subject matter, interpersonal skills and decisionmaking ability.
(4) The maximum score for the oral examination shall be 100 points.
(c) Education. Education points shall be determined on a basis of 1/2 point
given for each three credited firematic courses offered in a college
program leading to a degree in fire science and/or public administration.
(d) Seniority. Seniority shall be determined as follows:
(1) For each year of service, 1/2 point shall be given.
(e) Personnel file evaluation. The Township finds that an individual's past
performance is a substantial consideration in the promotional process. As
such, an individual's performance evaluations, commendations and
disciplinary history must be reviewed as part of the promotional process.
A candidate's personnel file will be reviewed by the Fire Chief and the
candidate. A loss of one point shall be incurred for each official
reprimand, suspension from duty, demotion to a lower grade or instance
of being found guilty of departmental charges.
4. For the purposes of this Subsection 2-42.13c, "public safety expert" shall mean
an individual or entity selected by the Fire Chief, not currently employed by
the Township, with recognized expertise in public safety obtained through:
(a) Career fire officer experience;
(b) Experience providing Fire Department hiring and promotion procedures,
examinations, products and services;
(c) Experience as a firefighter instructor at a recognized fire academy or
similar institution; or
(d) Substantial experience as a Municipal or County Director of Public
Safety.
5. The final total point score shall be determined by the raw score(s) of the
written exam score, oral exam score, education, personnel file evaluation and
seniority points.
6. After the results of the examination are made known, the names and grades
shall be posted within one week and kept on file in the office of the Fire Chief
and a copy forwarded to the Township Administrator.
7. The candidates shall be ranked by point score. At any time a promotion is
made, the Township Committee shall utilize the "rule of three" and appoint
any one of the remaining top three scoring candidates. Consistent with
Gallagher v. Mayor and Council of the Twp. of Irvington, 190 N.J. Super 394,
400 (App. Div. 1983), application of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-9.6 is limited to the
single instance when a tie produces an impasse in the appointing process, i.e.,
a tie in the test scores of a resident and a nonresident for third place on the list.
§ 2-42.13 ADMINISTRATION § 2-42.13
2:55
§ 2-42.14. Rapid Response Key Boxes. [Ord. No. 2013-11]
§ 2-43. through § 2-45 (RESERVED)
§ 2-46. DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION.
§ 2-46.1. Establishment. [1991 Code § 91-1]
There is hereby reestablished a Department of Recreation of the Township of
Springfield, hereinafter referred to in this section as the "Department."
Because the "rule of three" necessitates eliminating one of the tied candidates,
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-9.6 operates to eliminate the nonresident.
8. The candidate selected for promotion shall serve a probationary period of 12
months, during which he/she may be returned to his/her prior position.
9. A list of eligible candidates from each examination shall be maintained for a
period of two years from the date the scores are posted or until the list is
exhausted. This two-year period may be extended at the Fire Chief's discretion.
a. All new privately owned or public nonresidential buildings in the Township, or
existing nonresidential buildings which undergo a substantial renovation which
requires that a new certificate of occupancy be issued or which is subject to a
change in use as defined in the Uniform Construction Code or has a change in
tenancy shall be equipped with a rapid response key box at a location approved by
the Township Fire Official. The key box shall be a UL type and size approved by
the Township Fire Official.
b. Relative to the "change in tenancy" referenced in Subsection a above, the Township
Fire Official shall have the right to waive the requirement to install the required
rapid response key box if the Township Fire Official finds, in his/her sole judgment,
that the new tenancy is of the size, type or other characteristic that can safely exist
without the installation of the said rapid response key box.
c. Rapid Response Key Boxes Contents. The rapid response key boxes shall contain
the following:
1. Keys to locked points of egress, whether in interior or exterior of the buildings;
2. Keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
3. Keys to the locked elevator rooms;
4. Keys to elevator controls;
5. Keys to any other areas that may be required by the Township Fire Official.
d. Time for Compliance. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new
nonresidential building or existing building which is required to install a rapid
response key box hereby until the rapid response key box called for therein has been
installed and the same contains the items referred to in Subsection 2-42.14b above.
§ 2-42.13 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-46.2
2:56
§ 2-46.2. Director. [1991 Code § 91-2]
There is hereby reestablished an office of Director of Recreation, who shall be the head
of the Department of Recreation and is hereinafter referred to in this chapter as the
"Director."
§ 2-46.3. Appointment of Director; Qualifications. [1991 Code § 91-3; Ord. No.
94-1]
The Director shall be appointed by, report to and serve at the pleasure of the Township
Committee, with salary fixed by ordinance. Prior to completion of the probationary
period, the Director shall be evaluated by the Township Committee to determine if the
Director will be granted permanent status or dismissed. Upon granting of permanent
status, the Director shall serve a term of three years. Any vacancy existing in the office
of the Director may be filled for the balance of the unexpired term by the Township
Committee.
§ 2-46.4. Employees. [1991 Code § 91-4]
The Department may consist of other employees as required, who shall be appointed,
promoted or dismissed at the pleasure of the Township Committee upon
recommendation of the Director and whose salaries shall be fixed and determined by the
Township Committee.
§ 2-46.5. Functions of Department. [1991 Code § 91-5; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(C)]
The Department of Recreation shall, subject to the overriding control of the Township
Committee, perform the following functions:
a. Plan, control, manage, coordinate and operate all public parks, playgrounds,
recreational places and facilities under the jurisdiction of the Township
government.
b. Provide a year-round program of recreational activities, including athletic, cultural,
artistic and other programs consistent with the recreational interests of the
Township residents and approved budgets therefor.
c. Promote cooperation with the Springfield Board of Education with regard to
recreational programs administered by the Department.
d. Recommend to the Township Committee adoption and administration of rules and
regulations for the conduct of all persons utilizing recreational facilities while
participating in programs or activities sponsored by the Department, including
recommendations for penalties for violations thereof.
e. Cooperate with other municipal departments, service clubs and other organizations
in furthering recreational and cultural interests in the Township.
f. Recommend to the Township Committee the amount of and methods of collection
of fees to cover participation in athletic, recreational or cultural programs sponsored
by the Department.
§ 2-46.2 ADMINISTRATION § 2-46.6
2:57
§ 2-46.6. (Reserved)
§ 2-46.7. Duties of Director. [1991 Code § 91-6; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
The Director shall perform the following duties:
§ 2-47. through § 2-56 (RESERVED)
a. Take charge of and be responsible for the work of the Department.
b. Be responsible to the Township Committee for the proper custody and preservation
of the records and property under the Department's control and be answerable to the
Township Committee for the faithful performance of the duties of the office.
c. Prepare detailed annual plans and budget recommendations for maintenance and
operation of all parks, playgrounds and facilities for recreational and cultural
programs sponsored by the Township.
d. Administer and expend departmental funds in accordance with the budget
appropriations and ordinances.
e. Be a member of and attend all meetings of the Recreation Committee and take into
consideration its requests and proposals when preparing the annual and long-range
plans and budget recommendations to be presented for final approval by the
Township Committee.
§ 2-46.6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-47
2:58
ARTICLE IV
Boards, Committees and Commissions
§ 2-57. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COUNCIL.
§ 2-57.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2010-07 § II]
There shall be a local Emergency Management Council established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
App. A:9-41.
§ 2-57.2. Appointment. [Ord. No. 2010-07 § II]
The local Emergency Management Council shall consist of not more than 15 members,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall hold office at the will and pleasure of the
Mayor. Any vacancies in the membership of the Council shall be filled by the Mayor.
The Mayor shall determine the number of members who shall serve on the Council;
however, the Mayor shall not appoint fewer than five such members.
§ 2-57.3. Duties. [Ord. No. 2010-07 § II]
The local Emergency Management Council shall assist the Township in establishing
various local volunteer agencies needed to meet the requirements of all local Emergency
Management activities in accordance with rules and regulations established by the
Governor in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. App. A:9-41. The local
Emergency Management Council is authorized, within the limits of appropriations,
to establish an adequate organization to assist in supervising and coordinating the
emergency management activities of the Township. It shall be lawful for the members of
the local Emergency Management Council also to be members of other agencies created
by reason on any emergency.
§ 2-57.4. Organization. [Ord. No. 2010-07 § II]
The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be a member of the Emergency
Management Council and shall serve as its Chairman.
§ 2-57.5. Cooperation. [Ord. No. 2010-07 § II]
The Police Department and Departments of the Township Government shall cooperate
with and assist the Council as necessary.
§ 2-58. BOARD OF HEALTH.
§ 2-58.1. Establishment. [1991 Code § 65-1; Ord. No. 98-34 § 1[B]; Ord. No. BOH
02-2005 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-17; Ord. No. 2013-01]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-1, there shall be a Board of Health consisting of seven persons,
who shall be residents of the Township. If any of the members are members of any of the
professions allied to medicine or health care, they shall not be required to be residents of
the Township. The Township Clerk, if appointed Local Registrar by the Board of Health,
shall perform all the duties of that office.
§ 2-57 ADMINISTRATION § 2-58.2
2:59
§ 2-58.2. Organization; Membership. [1991 Code § 65-2; Ord. No. BOH 02-2005
§ 1; Ord. No. 2012-17; Ord. No. 2013-01]
§ 2-58.3. Compensation. [1991 Code § 65-3; Ord. No. 93-2; Ord. No. BOH 02-2005
§ 1; Ord. No. 2012-17; Ord. No. 2013-01]
The members of the Board of Health shall serve without compensation.
§ 2-58.4. Powers and Duties; Meetings. [1991 Code § 65-4; Ord. No. BOH 02-2005
§ I; Ord. No. 2012-17; Ord. No. 2013-01]
§ 2-59. (RESERVED)
§ 2-60. EDUCATION AND TRAINING: PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 2-60.1. Findings. [1991 Code § 73-9; Ord. No. 91-30]
a. The Board shall organize annually on or before the first Wednesday in January, or
as soon thereafter as reasonably practicable.
b. Each member of the Board shall be appointed by the Township Committee for a
term of three years. The Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
among its members and may employ a secretary, registrar and attorney and such
other personnel as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the powers vested in
it.
c. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board shall be filled in the same
way and manner as the original appointment, but for the unexpired portion of the
term only.
a. The Board shall administer and enforce all health ordinances of the Township now
in effect, whether adopted by the former Township Committee acting as the Board
of Health or any prior Board of Health, and it shall exercise any other powers as
may be granted to it and shall perform such other duties as may be required by any
statute of the State of New Jersey now in effect or which may hereafter be enacted.
b. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations, as it may deem necessary to
govern its procedure. It shall meet regularly at least once a month, except during
the months of July and August, and at such other times as the Board may determine
or at the call of the Chairman.
Note: Pursuant to Ordinance No. 2013-01, Section 4, the initial organization
meeting of the Board shall take place within 14 days of the appointment of a
majority of the new Board members. This ordinance shall be implemented by initial
appointments as follows, where after all appointments shall be made pursuant to
2-58.2b: there shall be three members appointed for a term not to exceed three
years, two members appointed for a term not to exceed two years, and two members
appointed for a term not to exceed one year, all appointments ending on December
31 of the appropriate year.
a. The duties and responsibilities of members of the Planning Board and the Zoning
§ 2-58.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-60.1
2:60
§ 2-60.2. Course of Instruction Required. [1991 Code § 73-10; Ord. No. 91-30;
Ord. No. 96-2 § 1[a]]
All newly appointed members of the Springfield Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, unless exempt as hereafter set forth, shall complete an appropriate course
of instruction within three months after their appointment, or as soon thereafter as an
appropriate course shall be offered.
§ 2-60.3. Type of Course. [1991 Code § 73-11; Ord. No. 91-30; Ord. No. 96-21
§ 1[b]]
If practical the Township Engineer, Township Planner, Attorneys to the Planning Board
and Board of Adjustment and other appropriate employees of the Township of
Springfield shall, within the first three months of each year, hold a course for all new
members of the Springfield Planning Board or Springfield Board of Adjustment which
covers the areas of study previously set forth herein. If the Township does not offer such
Board of Adjustment require that the members understand and apply law and
regulations (Chapter 35 Land Use, the Municipal Land Use Law13 and case law) to
the specific facts involved in a particular application.
b. To properly carry out their functions, it is advisable that members of the Planning
Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment be familiar with the substantive law and
procedural rules applicable to the Boards on which they serve.
c. A mechanism should be established whereby, at Township expense, the members
of each Board are afforded an opportunity to become familiar with at least the
following areas:
1. The purposes of planning zoning.
2. New Jersey's Municipal Land Use Law.
3. The function and jurisdiction of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
4. The procedural rules of each Board.
5. Springfield's Land Use regulations.
6. Ethical constraints; recognizing potential conflicts of interest.
7. Understanding the contents of an application before either Board.
8. Understanding and interpreting site plans, elevations, landscaping plans,
lighting plans, stormwater detention plans, etc.
9. The criteria required to be shown for favorable action by either Board.
10. Recognizing jurisdictional problems.
11. Environmental issues and considerations in planning and zoning.
13. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 2-60.1 ADMINISTRATION § 2-60.3
2:61
course, then alternatively, the new members may take an appropriate course, such as
the course offered by the New Jersey Planning Officials or any other course comparable
thereto.
§ 2-60.4. Noncompliance. [1991 Code § 73-12; Ord. No. 91-30; Ord. No. 96-21
§ 1[c]]
Members of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment who fail to take
the recommended course of instruction within the required time period, unless there is
demonstrated good cause for failing to do so, shall be summarily removed from their
positions by the appointing authority. It shall be within the discretion of the appointing
authority of each member as to the determination of compliance herewith and good
cause for failing to do so.
§ 2-60.5. Exemptions. [1991 Code § 73-13; Ord. No. 91-30; Ord. No. 96-21 § 1[d]]
§ 2-60.6. Costs. [1991 Code § 73-14; Ord. No. 91-30]
The cost of providing the education and training described in this section shall be borne
by the Township, including but not limited to the cost of any publications, tuition
and out-of-pocket expenses incurred by Board members and reasonably related to their
fulfilling the requirements of this section. Costs and expenses shall be paid out of
each Board's respective budget and may be funded through an education and training
surcharge on applicant fees, in addition to any line item for this purpose within the
municipal budget. The Township Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer is hereby directed
to establish an escrow fund to be used exclusively for such purpose and to which the
surcharge shall be deposited.
§ 2-60.7. Construal of Provisions; Eligibility. [1991 Code § 73-15; Ord. No. 91-30]
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to effect in any way the eligibility of any person
to be appointed to either Board by their respective appointing authorities.
§ 2-61. through § 2-64 (RESERVED)
§ 2-65. (RESERVED)
Former § 2-65, Springfield Improvement Team, previously codified herein was repealed
December 17, 2013 by Ord. No. 2013-17.
a. Members who take the course of instruction are thereafter exempt from the
requirements of this section, provided that their service on either Board is without
interruption for more than two years.
b. The Class I and Class III members of the Planning Board are exempt from the
provisions of this section. Members of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment serving as of the effective date of this section are exempt from the
provision of this section; however, all the aforementioned members are encouraged
to avail themselves of the training opportunities offered to the same extent as other
members.
§ 2-60.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-66
2:62
§ 2-66. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-66.1. Creation. [1991 Code § 51-1]
An Environmental Commission is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et
seq.
§ 2-66.2. Membership. [1991 Code § 51-2; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor, one of whom
shall also be a member of the Planning Board and all of whom shall be residents of
the Township. The members shall serve without compensation, except as hereinafter
provided. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman and
Presiding Officer of the Commission.
§ 2-66.3. Removal of Members. [1991 Code § 51-3]
The Mayor or Township Committee may remove any member of the Environmental
Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a hearing
thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel. A
vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment.
§ 2-66.4. Alternate Members. [1991 Code § 51-4; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(C)]
§ 2-66.5. Records and Reports. [1991 Code § 51-5]
a. The Mayor may appoint not more than two alternate members. Alternate members
shall be designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate
No. 2."
b. The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms of
the alternate members first appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one
year for Alternate No. 2 so that the term of not more than one alternate member
shall expire in any one year. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
c. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not
vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member.
In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
a. The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities
and make an annual report to the Township Committee.
b. The Commission may make such expenditures and appoint such clerks and other
employees as it may require, provided that the same shall be within the limits of
appropriations made to it by the Township Committee.
§ 2-66 ADMINISTRATION § 2-66.6
2:63
§ 2-66.6. Powers. [1991 Code § 51-6]
The Environmental Commission is established for the protection, development or use
of natural resources, including water resources, located within the territorial limits of
the Township. It shall have power to conduct research into the use and possible use
of the open land areas of the Township and may coordinate the activities of unofficial
bodies organized for similar purposes, and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute
books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary
for its purposes. It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain information
on the proper use of such areas, and may recommend to the Planning Board plans and
programs for inclusion in the Master Plan and the development and use of such areas.
§ 2-66.7. Acquisitions. [1991 Code § 51-7]
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the Township
Committee, acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the Township
by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes and shall
administer the same for such purposes, subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift.
Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development right,
easement, covenant or other contractual right, including a conveyance on conditions
or with limitations or reversions, as may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve,
protect, limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces
and other land and water areas in the Township.
§ 2-66.8. Maintenance of Natural Resource Inventory. [Ord. No. 2011-25]
The Environmental Commission shall be responsible to update and maintain the Natural
Resource Inventory, at a minimum, electronically or digitally once per year for posting
on the official Township website and in printed version for inclusion in any formal
Master Plan revision.
§ 2-67. RECREATION COUNCIL.14
§ 2-67.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2015-15]
There is hereby established a Recreation Council, hereinafter referred to in this section
as the "Council" or "Recreation Council."
§ 2-67.2. Composition of Recreation Council; Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2015-15]
The Recreation Council shall consist of the following members:
a. A representative of the Township Committee, appointed by the Township
Committee.
b. The Director of Recreation.
c. The Assistant Director of Recreation.
14. Editor's Note: Prior legislative history includes 1996 Code §§ 2-67.1 — 2-67.7 and Ordinance Nos. 2007-01, 2013-02.
§ 2-66.6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-67.2
2:64
§ 2-67.3. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2015-15]
The members of the Recreation Council shall serve in such capacity without
compensation.
§ 2-67.4. Organization. [Ord. No. 2015-15]
§ 2-67.5. Meetings. [Ord. No. 2015-15]
The Recreation Council shall hold quarterly public meetings at a time and day
determined by the Director of Recreation, which meetings shall be held in the Township
Municipal Building or at such other suitable public place as the Director of Recreation
may determine upon notice to the Township Committee and to the public. Additional
meetings may be called at any time by the Director of Recreation, upon notice to all
Council members.
§ 2-67.6. Functions. [Ord. No. 2015-15]
The Recreation Council shall perform the following functions:
d. The Recreation Program Coordinator.
e. The club president or the club president's designate, as recommended by the
Director of Recreation to the Township Committee, of the following named clubs,
appointed by the Township Committee at or after each Township Committee
organization meeting: Soccer Club of Springfield, Springfield Junior Baseball
League, Springfield Jr. Dawgs Football, Springfield Basketball Association,
Springfield Lacrosse Club, Springfield Cheerleading Program, Springfield Girl's
Softball Program, Springfield Men's Softball League, Springfield Women's Softball
League, Springfield Boy Scouts, Springfield Girl Scouts, and Senior Citizens of
Springfield. The terms of all members shall expire at the end of each calendar year.
Any vacancies due to Recreation Council resignation or succession within the club
may be filled by a recommendation by the Director of Recreation to the Township
Committee.
f. A representative of the Springfield Public Schools Athletic Department, upon such
representative being appointed by the Township Committee.
a. The Director of Recreation shall serve as the Chairperson of the Recreation
Council. In the absence of the Director of Recreation, the Assistant Director of
Recreation shall serve as the Chairperson of the Council.
b. The Director of Recreation shall appoint a Secretary for the Recreation Council.
The Secretary shall keep minutes of all meetings and official correspondence of the
Council, as well as complete and detailed records of its activities. The Secretary
shall submit a copy of the minutes to the Township Committee.
a. Foster communication, cooperation, input, and implementation of coordinated
programs among youth, adults, and seniors.
b. Provide feedback and recommendations to assist the Recreation Department in
developing or modifying guidelines and procedures to guide the Recreation
§ 2-67.2 ADMINISTRATION § 2-67.6
2:65
§ 2-67.7. Nonliability of Director and Council. [Ord. No. 2015-15]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to make the Director of Recreation, or
Recreation Council, or members of the Recreation Council, responsible for the death or
injury of any person or damage to any property.
§ 2-68. MUNICIPAL ALLIANCE COMMITTEE.15
§ 2-68.1. Establishment, Membership, Term. [Ord. No. 2002-02]
There is hereby established within the Township of Springfield, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:2BB-9, a Municipal Alliance Committee. Membership on the Committee shall be
determined by the Township Committee on a yearly basis, and may include one or more
of the following persons: Chief of Police; President of the School Board; Superintendent
of Schools; representative of Parent-Teacher Association; other appropriate school board
employees; a representative of the Chamber of Commerce; the Municipal Court Judge;
representatives of local civic organizations; representatives of local religious groups;
other residents of Springfield. Appointments shall be made by the Mayor, with the
consent of the Township Committee, and all such appointments shall be for a one-year
term, ending on December 31 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for
the balance of the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments.
§ 2-68.2. Committee Functions. [Ord. No. 2002-02]
The Committee, in consultation with the Union County Local Advisory Committee on
Alcoholism and Drug Abuse, shall identify alcoholism and drug prevention, education
and community needs within the Township of Springfield. The Committee shall also
implement programs formulated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-8. The Committee shall
also perform such other functions as requested by the Township Committee, and shall
serve as an advisory committee to the Township Committee.
§ 2-69. REMOVAL FOR ABSENTEEISM.
§ 2-69.1. Removal. [1991 Code § 77-13; Ord. No. 02-28; Ord. No. 2010-08]
Department in servicing clubs and program participants; as well as creating new
programs and services, or retiring existing ones.
c. Cooperatively work, communicate, and plan for programs, field use, and building
use with one another and the Recreation Department.
d. Offer other applicable assistance to the Recreation Department, if requested by the
Director of Recreation.
a. The member of any board or any committee appointed by the chairman, the Mayor
or the Township Committee may be removed for absenteeism, and the vacancy
created by such removal shall be filled in the same manner as originally appointed.
b. While retaining all other rights of removal existing by reason of statutory provision
15. Editor's Note: Former § 2-68, Drug Abuse and Dangerous Substances Committee, containing 1991 Code §§ 40-1, 40-2
and 40-3, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2002-02.
§ 2-67.6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-69.1
2:66
§ 2-69.2. Reporting. [1991 Code § 77-13; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
It shall be the responsibility of the chairman of each board and committee to send
monthly reports of attendance to the Township Clerk. When the reports reflect absences
equal to the number prescribed in Subsection c above, a ten-day written notice shall be
sent to the member by the Township Clerk of the intent to remove.
§ 2-69.3. Hearing. [1991 Code § 77-13; Ord. No. 02-28]
Upon request of the member to be removed, a hearing will be held by the chairman or
the Township Committee to determine whether the absences were excusable.
§ 2-70. through § 2-78 (RESERVED)
or common law, it is the intent of this section to include absenteeism as a cause for
removal.
c. In accordance with the N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12.1 et seq., hereinafter referred to as "The
Citizen Service Act," the following attendance policy shall apply to all members of
any Township board, committee or commission. A member's seat on any board,
committee or commission may be declared vacant by the Mayor if that member has
been absent from any meeting for a period of six weeks or the member has missed
three consecutive meetings, whichever period shall be longer, without the express
consent of the individual board's, committee's or commission's chairperson
approval. This subsection shall preempt and supersede any other attendance
ordinance adopted by any Township board, commission or committee.
§ 2-69.1 ADMINISTRATION § 2-70
2:67

ARTICLE V
Municipal Court
§ 2-79. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT.
§ 2-79.1. Court Established; Seal. [1991 Code § 36-1]
There is hereby created and established the Municipal Court of the Township of
Springfield, pursuant to the statutes in such cases made and provided, with all the
jurisdiction, powers, rights, duties and privileges now or which may hereafter be
conferred upon it by law. The Court shall have an official seal which shall bear the
impression of the name of the Court.
§ 2-79.2. Judges; Qualifications and Appointment. [1991 Code § 36-2; Ord. No.
02-28 § I(A); Ord. No. 2007-26 § II(A)]
A Chief Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall be appointed by the Township
Committee, shall preside over the Court. An Additional Judge shall also be appointed
by the Township Committee. Each Judge shall have the qualifications required by law.
Each Judge shall be appointed for a term of three years and until a successor is appointed
and qualified. The annual compensation of each Judge shall be fixed by ordinance.
§ 2-79.3. Municipal Court Administrator. [1991 Code § 36-3; Ord. No. 2002-05;
Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
§ 2-79.4. Deputy Court Administrator. [1991 Code § 36-4; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
There is hereby established the office of Deputy Court Administrator of the Municipal
Court. The Deputy Court Administrator shall be appointed by the Township Committee.
The Deputy Court Administrator shall serve for a term of one year expiring at the end
of the calendar year and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The Deputy Court
Administrator shall perform such duties as shall be prescribed by law and the rules
governing the courts of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-80. through § 2-84 (RESERVED)
a. There is hereby established the office of Municipal Court Administrator. The
Municipal Court Administrator shall be appointed by the Township Committee and
shall serve for a term of three years expiring at the end of the calendar year and until
a successor is appointed and qualified.
b. The Municipal Court Administrator shall serve under the direction and control of
the Municipal Judge, shall be responsible to the Judge for the performance of such
duties required by law or by rules governing the courts of this State or which may
be assigned by the Judge, not inconsistent with the laws and rules, and shall have
all of the powers, duties and responsibilities now or which may hereafter be
conferred or imposed upon the Municipal Court Administrator by law or by rules
governing the courts of this State.
§ 2-79 ADMINISTRATION § 2-80
2:69

ARTICLE VI
Policies and Procedures
§ 2-85. BUDGET AND FINANCE.
§ 2-85.1. Budget Preparation. [1991 Code § 23-1]
§ 2-85.2. Budget Operations. [1991 Code § 23-2]
§ 2-85.3. Disbursements. [1991 Code § 23-3; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
Disbursements in payment of bills and demands shall be made by the Treasurer upon
preaudit and approval by the Township Committee, except that payments from payroll
account shall be made pursuant to Subsection 2-85.4 below. Each check shall be in
the form of a check payable to the order of the person entitled to receive it and shall
specify the purpose for which it is drawn and the account or appropriation to which
it is chargeable. Each check shall bear the signatures of the Mayor, the Clerk and the
Treasurer.
§ 2-85.4. Payroll Accounts. [1991 Code § 23-4]
There shall be approved an account to be designated the "Township of Springfield
Payroll Account" and the Treasurer, upon receipt of a warrant for an amount due such
payroll account, shall deposit the same to the credit of the payroll account, charging the
appropriate budgetary accounts therewith. The Treasurer shall thereafter draw checks on
the payroll account to officers and employees entitled to payment therefrom.
§ 2-85.5. Claims Procedure. [1991 Code § 23-5; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
a. During the month of November, the Township Committee shall require all
department heads to submit requests for appropriations for the ensuing budget year.
b. The Auditor shall prepare estimates of all tax revenues anticipated for the support
of each annual budget.
c. The budget document shall be prepared in such form as is required by law for
municipal budgets. There shall be appended to the budget a detailed analysis of all
items of expenditure and revenue.
a. The Township Committee shall supervise the administration of each annual budget.
In consultation with department heads, it shall establish quarterly or other periodic
allotments of appropriations as deemed necessary. Each department shall plan and
administer its expenditure program within the limits of these allotments.
b. If at any time during the budget year the Township Committee shall ascertain that
the government is faced with the probability of incurring a cash deficit within a
particular line item for the current year, it shall reconsider the work programs and
allotments of the several departments. Upon such reconsideration it may revise the
periodic budget allotments referred to in Subsection a so as to forestall, so far as
possible, the making of commitments and expenditures in excess of the revenues to
be realized during the fiscal year.
§ 2-85 ADMINISTRATION § 2-85.5
2:71
§ 2-85.6. Purchasing. [1991 Code § 23-6; New]
All purchases made and contracts awarded for any supplies, materials or equipment
or contractual services shall be pursuant to a written requisition from the head of the
department against which the proper appropriation will be charged and the certification
of the Treasurer that a sufficient balance of appropriation is available to pay therefor.
All such purchase contracts in excess of the amount established by State Statutes shall
conform to applicable requirements of State Statutes for competitive bidding. Except as
the Township Committee may specifically authorize in case of emergency, no purchase
shall be made and no bill, claim or voucher shall be approved unless the procedures
prescribed by this chapter have been followed.
§ 2-85.7. Purchasing Contracts with County. [1991 Code § 23-7]
a. Any person claiming payment from the Township other than on the payroll account
shall present a voucher to the Township Clerk on a form prescribed by the
Township, duly certified as supported by a certification and declaration of the
claimant. In the case of reimbursement for actual and necessary traveling expenses,
itemized claims supported by receipts, where available, shall be presented in order
to obtain reimbursement for expenses incurred by local officials where authorized
to travel by the Township.
b. Claims shall then be presented to the appropriate department head responsible for
the placing of the order, who shall approve them if satisfied the claims are proper.
After such approval is given, the department head shall file the claims with the
Township Clerk, who shall then present them to the Finance Committee of the
Township Committee or such Township Committee members as the Township
Committee designates by resolution at the annual organization meeting.
c. The Township Clerk shall see that on every claim appears the signature of the
officer or employee who has been duly designated by the Township to certify that
the materials have been received by or the services rendered to the Township.
d. Claims shall be reviewed by the Finance Committee of the Township Committee.
It appears to a member of the Finance Committee that any claim requires further
study or investigation, the Finance Committee may withhold action on the claim for
a reasonable period of time pending such further study or investigation. The
Finance Committee shall approve or disapprove each claim and submit it to the
Township Committee.
e. A list of all claims presented for approval of the Township Committee shall be
prepared for each regular meeting.
f. Claims shall be considered by the Township Committee, which shall approve them,
except that the Township Committee may reject any claim presented to it, stating
the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved claim shall be referred back to the
Clerk with such instructions as the Township Committee may give at the time of
the disapproval.
a. The Township is authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:23-6.26 et seq. to enter into contracts
with the County of Union to provide for the furnishing by the County to the
§ 2-85.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-85.7
2:72
§ 2-85.8. Third Party Payroll Disbursement. [Ord. No. 2004-11 § I]
Township of any and all services or facilities which the Township may otherwise
lawfully furnish or provide.
b. The contracts shall provide in detail the extent, manner and type of the services or
facilities to be furnished or performed by the County and the cost thereof.
c. The Township shall appropriate such necessary funds and the Mayor and Clerk
shall sign and seal the contracts, which shall remain in force for such term as shall
be provided therein, not exceeding 10 years.
a. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.3 et seq., in connection with the Township payroll,
the Township is hereby authorized to contract with an outside vendor to prepare
payment documentation, take possession of municipal funds, and make
disbursement on behalf of the Township.
b. The Township of Springfield Chief Financial Officer is hereby designated as the
Approval Officer.
c. The duties of the Chief Financial Officer shall include reconciliation and analysis
of all general ledger accounts affected by the activities of the outside vendor.
d. The Approval Officer is authorized to solicit proposals, and to review and approve
of the terms of the proposed contract.
e. Prior to execution of, renewal of, or extension of any such contract, the Approval
Officer shall certify to the Township Committee that the proposed contract has been
reviewed and the terms thereof approved, and that the contract satisfies the
provisions set forth herein.
f. Upon certification, the Township Committee may approve execution of such
contract.
g. The outside vendor is hereby authorized to perform the following tasks:
1. Data collection;
2. Servicer report preparation;
3. Calculation of withholding;
4. Direct deposit of payroll disbursement; and,
5. Accept transfer of municipal funds to the outside vendor's account for
subsequent payment, including, specifically to hold Township money.
h. The Township Committee shall be notified by the outside vendor if it detects
irregularities that may indicate potential fraud, noncompliance with appropriate
laws, dishonesty, or gross incompetence on the part of the Approval Officer; or
experiences circumstances that could jeopardize its ability to continue operations or
otherwise interrupt services.
i. The provisions of the N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.3 through 17.5 shall apply to all transactions
§ 2-85.7 ADMINISTRATION § 2-85.8
2:73
§ 2-85.9. Pay-to-Play. [Ord. No. 2012-02]
authorized hereby.
a. Definitions. As used in this subsection:
1. Campaign Committee shall mean (i) every candidate for Township of
Springfield elective municipal office; (ii) every candidate committee
established by or for the benefit of a candidate for Township of Springfield
elective municipal office; (iii) every joint candidate committee established in
whole or in part by or for the benefit of a candidate for Township of
Springfield elective municipal office; (iv) every political party committee of
the Township of Springfield; and (v) every political committee, continuing
political committee, or other form of association or organization that regularly
engages in the support of candidates for the Township of Springfield
municipal elective offices or Township of Springfield municipal political
parties or political party committees. The terms in the foregoing paragraph
have the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7.
2. Contribution has the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7. By way of
illustration, and not limitation, this definition includes pledges, loans, and inkind
contributions.
3. A contract for professional or extraordinary services shall mean all contracts
for "professional services" and "extraordinary unspecifiable services" as such
term is used in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5.
4. For purposes of this subsection, a "Business Entity" whose contributions are
regulated by this subsection means: (i) an individual including the individual's
spouse, and any child/children; (ii) a firm; corporation; professional
corporation; partnership; limited liability company; organization; association;
and any other manner and kind of business entity; (iii) any person who owns
10% or more of the equity or ownership or income interests in a person or
entity as defined in sections (i) and (ii) above and their spouses and child/
children; (iv) all partners or officers of such an entity, in the aggregate, and
their spouses and child/children; (v) any person, subcontractor, subsidiary,
corporation, firm, partnership, limited liability company, organization or
association who has received or indefeasibly acquired the right to receive,
from a person described in subparagraph (i) above, more than $100,000 in
compensation or income of any kind (including, by way of illustration, and not
limitation: wages, salaries, sums paid to independent contractors, benefits,
dividends, profit-sharing, pension contributions, deferred contributions, stock,
stock options or gifts), in any twelve-month period prior to the award of, or
during the term of, a contract subject to this subsection; and (vi) all persons
who are an "affiliate" of a Business Entity as defined in sections (i), (ii) and
(v) above, as such term is used in 11 U.S.C. 101(2).
b. Prohibition on Awarding Public Contracts to Certain Contributors.
1. To the extent that it is not inconsistent with State or Federal law, the Township
of Springfield and any of its departments, instrumentalities or purchasing
§ 2-85.8 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-85.9
2:74
agents shall not enter into any agreement or otherwise contract to procure
"professional services" as such term is defined at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(6) and
used at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(i) and/or banking, insurance or other
consulting service (hereinafter "Professional Services"), nor "extraordinary
unspecified services" as such term is defined at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(7) and
used at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(ii) and/or media, public relations, lobbying,
parking garage management or other consulting and/or management service
(hereinafter "extraordinary unspecified services") from any business entity if
such business entity has solicited or made any contribution to (i) a candidate,
candidate committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for
elective municipal office in the Township of Springfield or a holder of public
office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, or (ii) to
any Township of Springfield political committee or political party committee,
or (iii) to any continuing political committee or political action committee
that regularly engages in the support of Township of Springfield municipal
elections and/or Township of Springfield municipal candidates, candidate
committees, joint candidate committees, political committees, political parties,
political party committees, (hereinafter "PAC"), in excess of the thresholds
specified in Subsection g within one calendar year immediately preceding the
date of the contract or agreement.
2. No business entity who submits a proposal for, enters into negotiations for, or
agrees to any contract or agreement with the Township of Springfield or any
of its departments or instrumentalities, for the rendition of professional
services or extraordinary unspecified services shall knowingly solicit or make
any contribution, to (i) a candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates
committee of any candidate for elective municipal office in the Township of
Springfield, or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for the
award of a contract, or (ii) to any Township of Springfield political committee
or political party committee, or (iii) any Township of Springfield municipal
PAC between the time of first communication between that business entity and
the municipality regarding a specific agreement for professional services or
extraordinary unspecified services, and the later of the termination of
negotiations or rejection of any proposal, or the completion of the performance
or specified time period of that contract or agreement.
3. The monetary thresholds of this subsection are: (i) a maximum of $300 per
calendar year each for any purpose to any candidate or candidate committee
for mayor or Governing Body, or $500 per calendar year to any joint
candidates committee for mayor or governing body, or $300 per calendar year
to a political committee or political party committee of the Township of
Springfield; and (ii) $500 maximum per calendar year to any Township of
Springfield municipal PAC. However, for each business entity party to a
contract for professional or extraordinary unspecified services as defined in
Subsection b1, or engaged in negotiations for a contract defined in
subparagraph (a), when such business entity's contribution is aggregated with
all "persons" defined in Subsection a4 of "Definitions" above, by virtue of
their affiliation to that Business Entity party, a maximum of $2,500 to all
Township of Springfield candidates, candidate committees, joint candidate
committees, and holders of public office having ultimate responsibility for the
§ 2-85.9 ADMINISTRATION § 2-85.9
2:75
award of a contract, all Township of Springfield political committee and
political party committee as described herein combined, without violating
Subsection b1 of this subsection.
4. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have ultimate
responsibility for the award of the contract shall be the Township Committee
of the Township of Springfield.
5. Rules regarding subcontractors. No person may be awarded a subcontract to
perform under a contract subject to this subsection, if the subcontractor would
be disqualified by Subsection b1 from receiving the contract at the time that
the subcontract is awarded. Nor may any person who would be disqualified by
Subsection b1 from receiving the contract perform substantially all of
obligations described in a contract for professional or extraordinary services
that is subject to this subsection.
c. Contributions Made Prior to the Effective Date. No contribution or solicitation of
contributions made prior to the effective date of this subsection shall be deemed to
give rise to a violation of this subsection.16
d. Contract Renewal. No contract subject to this subsection may be renewed,
extended, or materially modified unless the resulting renewal, extension, or
modification would be allowable under the provisions of this subsection if it were
an initial contract.
e. Contribution Statement by Business Entity.
1. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure professional services
or extraordinary unspecified services from any business entity, the Township
of Springfield or its purchasing agents and departments, as the case may be,
shall receive a sworn statement from said business entity which is the intended
recipient of said contract that he/she/it has not made a contribution in violation
of Subsection b of this subsection. The Township of Springfield, its purchasing
agents and departments shall be responsible for informing the Township
Committee that the aforementioned sworn statement has been received and
that the business entity is not in violation of this subsection, prior to awarding
the contract or agreement.
2. A business entity shall have a continuing duty to report to the Township of
Springfield any contributions that constitute a violation of this act that are
made during the negotiation, proposal process or the duration of a contract.
The Township of Springfield, its purchasing agents and departments shall be
responsible for informing the Governing Body within 10 business days after
receipt of said report from the business entity, or at the next Township
Committee meeting following receipt of said report from the business entity,
or whichever comes first.
3. The certification required under this Subsection e shall be made prior to entry
into the contract or agreement with the Township of Springfield, or prior to the
provision of services or goods, as the case may be, and shall be in addition to
16. Editor's Note: Ordinance 2012-02, codified herein was adopted March 27, 2012.
§ 2-85.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-85.9
2:76
any other certifications that may be required by any other provision of law.
f. Return of Excess Contributions. A business entity that is a party to a contract for
professional services or extraordinary unspecified services may cure a violation of
Subsection b of this subsection, if, within 30 days after the date on which the
applicable ELEC report is published, said business entity notifies the municipality
in writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of the contribution from the
recipient of such contribution.
g. Exemptions. The contribution limitations prior to entering into a contract in
Subsection b2 do not apply to contracts which (i) are awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder after public advertising for bids and bidding therefor within the
meaning of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4, or (ii) are awarded in the case of emergency under
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6. There is no exemption for contracts awarded pursuant to a "Fair
and Open Process" under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20 et seq.
h. Penalty.
1. It shall be a material breach of the terms of a Township of Springfield
agreement or contract for professional services or extraordinary unspecified
services when a business entity that is a party to such agreement or contract
has: (i) made or solicited a contribution in violation of this subsection; (ii)
knowingly concealed or misrepresented a contribution given or received; (iii)
made or solicited contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of
concealing or misrepresenting the source of the contribution; (iv) made or
solicited any contribution on the condition or with the agreement that it will be
recontributed to a candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates
committee of any candidate for elective municipal office in Township of
Springfield, or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for the
award of a contract, or any Township of Springfield political committee or
political party committee, or any Township of Springfield municipal PAC; (v)
engaged or employed a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or understanding
that such lobbyist or consultant would make or solicit any contribution, which
if made or solicited by the professional business entity itself, would subject
that entity to the restrictions of this subsection; (vi) funded contributions made
by third parties, including consultants, attorneys, family members, and
employees; (vii) engaged in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the
intent of this subsection; or (viii) directly or indirectly, through or by any other
person or means, done any act which if done directly would subject that entity
to the restrictions of this subsection.
2. Furthermore, any business entity that violates Subsection 2-85.7(a)(i)-(viii)
shall be disqualified from eligibility for future Township of Springfield
contracts for a period of four calendar years from the date of the violation.
3. Any person who knowingly, purposely, or recklessly violates any provision of
this subsection, or who conspires with another person to violate any provision
of this subsection, or who, with the purpose of promoting or facilitating a
violation of this subsection, solicits another person to commit it, or aids or
agrees, or attempts to aid another person in planning or committing it, shall be
subject to punishment including fines and/or imprisonment as fixed by law for
§ 2-85.9 ADMINISTRATION § 2-85.9
2:77
§ 2-86. EMPLOYEE ATTENDANCE AT CONFERENCES.
§ 2-86.1. Attendance at Out-of-State Conferences. [Ord. No. 98-32 § 73-16]
No employee of the Township of Springfield may attend any conference, educational
seminar or other convention which is being held outside the State of New Jersey without
prior specific approval of the Township Committee if any of the cost or expense for
same including, but not limited to, registration, travel and food or lodging will be paid or
reimbursed by the Township of Springfield, or if any time spent at such conference will
be considered as work time for the Township of Springfield.
§ 2-86.2. Request for Approval. [Ord. No. 98-32 § 73-17]
Any employee of the Township of Springfield who desires to obtain such permission
from the Township Committee shall make prior request by submitting all pertinent
information including, but not limited to, the actual cost; the time the employee will be
away from their regular duties and the benefit to the Township of Springfield by the
employee attending.
§ 2-86.3. Exception. [Ord. No. 98-32 § 73-18]
This section shall not limit the rights granted to any labor union official or member,
either by contract or State law, concerning attendance at official union functions.
§ 2-87. ENERGY AND NATURAL GAS AGGREGATION PROGRAM. [Ord.
No. 2013-15]
violations of the ordinances of the Township of Springfield.
i. Citizens Private Right of Action. In addition to any rights that were heretofore
available, or which may hereafter be available, to citizens, taxpayers, or
associations, to challenge violations of this subsection, every person aggrieved by a
violation of the subsection, or any taxpayer or resident of the Township of
Springfield has the right, consistent with the Rules of Court, to file charges in a
court of competent jurisdiction, and/or to pursue a civil action for a violation of this
subsection in a court of competent jurisdiction, and to seek and obtain declaratory,
injunctive, or other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to, attorneys'
fees and costs, arising from or related to a violation of this subsection.
j. Indexing. The monetary thresholds of "Definitions" Subsections d4 and b3 of this
subsection shall be increased effective March 1 of each calendar year by the
percentage increase, in the prior calendar year, of the consumer price index for all
urban consumers (CPI-U) for the New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island
region, rounded to the nearest $10. The Clerk of the Township of Springfield shall,
by no later than April 1 of each calendar year, prepare and publish the revised
thresholds on the official municipal website and in an official municipal newspaper.
a. Findings and Purpose. The State of New Jersey has been engaged in a process to
establish a competitive market place through deregulation and restructuring the
electric utility market and natural gas market.
§ 2-85.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-87
2:78
§ 2-88. through § 2-89 (RESERVED)
§ 2-90. TAX ATLAS.
§ 2-90.1. Adoption. [1991 Code § 108-1]
The revised Tax Atlas, as the same now appears of record and as revised by the
Township Engineer, shall be and is hereby approved and adopted as the Official Tax
Atlas of the Township.
§ 2-90.2. Use. [1991 Code § 108-2]
The Tax Atlas shall be used by the Tax Assessor, Tax Collector, Board of Assessments
and all other taxing officials of the Township for the purpose of assessing, levying and
collecting taxes, assessments and other municipal charges hereinafter assessed, levied
and collected.
§ 2-91. ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
The establishment of a government aggregator and an energy aggregation program
to purchase electric generation service and natural gas pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:3-93.1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:4-6.1 et seq. will increase competition for the
provision of electric power and natural gas to residential and nonresidential users,
thereby increasing the likelihood of lower electric rates and natural gas rates for
these users without causing any interruption in service; and
Under the aggregation process the residential and nonresidential ratepayers may
likely receive a direct reduction in their electric bills and gas bills.
The realization of energy costs savings is in the interests of the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Township of Springfield.
The Township hereby finds that it is in the best interests of residential and
nonresidential electric and gas ratepayers for the Township to create the opportunity
for them to enter into an aggregation agreement in order to seek substantial savings
on electric and gas rates.
b. Declaration of Intent. The Township publicly declares its intent to become an
aggregator of electric power and natural gas on behalf of its residential and
nonresidential users of electricity and natural gas pursuant to the Government
Energy Act of 2003, N.J.S.A. 48:3-91.3 to -98, and implementing regulations.
c. The Township will utilize SIMEC, LLCs (d/b/a Jersey Energy Group) Reverse
Energy Auction Platform pursuant to the NJ E-PROCUREMENT Pilot program
(P.L. 2001, c.30) under the NJ Department of Community Affairs. The Reverse
Energy Auction will seek bids from licensed and appropriate third party suppliers.
If such winning bid is selected and agreement executed, individual residential
consumers would retain the option not to participate and to choose any alternatives
they desire, while nonresidential ratepayers would also have the right to participate.
d. Authorization. The Mayor and Township Clerk are hereby authorized and directed
to execute any documents necessary to carry out the purpose of the section.
§ 2-87 ADMINISTRATION § 2-91.1
2:79
§ 2-91.1. Various Fees for Services. [1991 Code § 165-3; Ord. No. 95-19A; Ord.
No. 98-5 § 1; Ord. No. 98-16 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-20; Ord. No. 2002-22 § I(B); Ord.
No. 2002-26; Ord. No. 2003-16 § I; Ord. No. 2005-20 § I; Ord. No. 2005-28 § I;
Ord. No. 06-24 § I(A); Ord. No. 2009-18 § I; Ord. No. 2010-3; Ord. No. 2011-16
§ 1B]
Description Fee
a. Letter sized paper (8 1/2" x 11") or smaller $0.05 per page
b. Legal sized paper (8 1/2" x 14") $0.07 per page
c. CDR (rewritable CD) $2 per item
d. Floppy discs $1 per item
e. Audio tapes $2 per item
f. Tax bill (duplicate)
First copy $5
Subsequent copy $25
g. Tax sale certificate (duplicate) $100
Third or subsequent tax sale certificate
calculation
$25
h. Copy of engineering map (24" x 36") $3
i. Tax map reproduction
Paper sized 11" x 17" (per sheet) $1
Paper sized 24" x 36" (per sheet) $3
j. Flood zone certification (per report) $10
k. Blasting permit $25
l. Township Clerk; Fee for return of a check
unpaid, for any reason
$35
m. Bound copy of Land Use Ordinance $50
n. Zoning review for financing of commercial
properties
Initial letter $75
Per revision $25
o. Sewer Utility Bill (duplicate)
First copy $5
Subsequent copy $25
§ 2-91.2. Additional Fees. [Ord. No. 02-22 § I(C); Ord. No. 2012-27 § 2]
Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation, or volume of a Township record
requested to be inspected, examined or copied is such that the request cannot be
complied with without an extraordinary expenditure of time or effort, or if such a request
§ 2-91.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 2-91.2
2:80
is for a copy in a medium not routinely used for such record, in addition to the actual
cost of duplicating such record, there shall be special service charges, if applicable, as
follows:
Description Fee
Additional labor cost (per half hour) $25
Information technology use cost (per half hour) $25
§ 2-92. DIRECT DEPOSIT FOR ALL MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES. [Ord. No.
2014-09]
The Township Committee of the Township of Springfield in the County of Union, State
of New Jersey authorizes direct deposit after July 1, 2014 for all municipal employees of
the Township of Springfield pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f.
§ 2-91.2 ADMINISTRATION § 2-92
2:81

Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2009-02 created the Department of Public Safety and
redesignated the Police Department as the Police Division under the Department
of Public Safety. All references throughout the Code to Police Department shall be
deemed to mean Police Division.
§ 3-1. LITTERING.
§ 3-1.1. Definitions. [1991 Code § 200-1; Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(B)]
As used in this section:
GARBAGE — Shall mean animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Shall mean any unused or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper or other
natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including but not limited to,
any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any
unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material, or any garbage,
trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging or construction
material, but does not include the waste of the primary processes of mining or other
extraction processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
PARK — Shall mean a park, playground, recreation center or any other public area
owned or used by the Township or local authorized governmental agencies and devoted
to active or passive recreation.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Shall mean any dwelling house, building or other structure
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds,
walk, driveway, porch, steps or vestibule belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling
house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE—Shall mean any or all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — Shall mean all solid waste, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean solid waste consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigars, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, scrap metals, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
VEHICLE—Shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway.
§ 3-1.2. Litter. [1991 Code § 200-2; Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(B)]
No person shall throw, drop, discard or otherwise place any litter of any nature upon
§ 2-92 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-1.2
3:1
public or private property other than in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow
such litter to remain.
§ 3-1.3. Sweeping Litter into Gutters. [1991 Code § 200-3]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the
accumulation of any litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk
or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of
the property free of Utter. This provision shall not apply to those periods of time fixed
by the Township for the collection of litter.
§ 3-1.4. Litter Thrown from Vehicles. [1991 Code § 200-4; Ord. No. 2006-18
§ I(B)]
No person in a vehicle or boat shall throw, discard or allow to fall, any litter from such
vehicle. In such case, the operator and owner of the vehicle or boat shall be deemed to
also be in violation of this section.
§ 3-1.5. Transporting Litter. [1991 Code § 200-5]
No person shall load, drive or move any truck or other vehicle unless the vehicle is
so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or
deposited upon any street or other public place.
§ 3-1.6. Litter in Parks, Lakes or Streams. [1991 Code § 200-6]
No person shall throw or deposit any litter in any fountain, stream, river, skating rink or
any other body of water in a park or recreation area or elsewhere in the Township.
§ 3-1.7. Litter on Private Property. [1991 Code § 200-7]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or vacant private property,
whether owned by such person or not, provided that the owner or person in control of
the property may maintain private receptacles for the collection of litter.
§ 3-1.8. Litter in Quasi-Public Places. [1991 Code § 200-8]
The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person who manages or controls
a building or lot shall be jointly or severally responsible for keeping the sidewalk,
flagging, curbstone and the air shafts, areaways, backyards, courts, parking lots and
alleys free from litter.
§ 3-2. HANDBILL DISTRIBUTION AND BILLPOSTING.
§ 3-2.1. Distribution of Handbills in Public Places Prohibited. [1991 Code
§ 200-9A]
No person shall deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbills or litter in or upon
any public place within the Township. No person shall hand out or distribute handbills
in any public place.
§ 3-1.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 3-2.2
3:2
§ 3-2.2. Distribution of Handbills in Private Places Prohibited. [1991 Code
§ 200-9B]
No person shall deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbills or litter in or upon
any private premises within the Township.
§ 3-2.3. Billposting and the Like Prohibited in Certain Places. [1991 Code
§ 200-9C]
No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be
done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, advertisement or other paper
or device calculated to attract the attention of the public, to or upon any sidewalk,
crosswalk, curb or curbstone, flagstone or any other portion or part of any public way
or public place, or any lamppost, electric light, telegraph, telephone or trolley line pole
or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, or upon the piers, columns, trusses,
girders, railings, gates or other parts of any public bridge or viaduct or other public
structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture of the fire alarm or police telegraph
system, except such as may be authorized or required by the laws of the United States or
State and Township ordinances.
§ 3-2.4. Placing Handbills in Vehicles Prohibited. [1991 Code § 200-9D]
No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon
any automobile or other vehicle.
§ 3-2.5. Discarding Handbills Prohibited. [1991 Code § 200-9E]
No person receiving a handbill shall discard same upon any public place or private
premises.
§ 3-2.6. Exemptions. [1991 Code § 200-9F]
Newspapers, United States mail and nonprofit, public-service, political and religious
noncommercial handbills shall be exempted from the regulations in this section.
§ 3-3. through § 3-4 (RESERVED)
§ 3-5. DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONE.
§ 3-5.1. Adoption of Official Map. [1991 Code § 43-1; Ord. No. 88-18]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, the Drug-Free
School Zone Map produced on or about November 16, 1987, by Leo J. Eckmann,
Municipal Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record
of the location and areas within the municipality of property which is used for school
purposes and which is owned by or leased to an elementary or secondary school or
school board and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school property.
§ 3-5.2. Effect of Map. [1991 Code § 43-2; Ord. No. 88-18]
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 3-5.1
§ 3-2.2 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-5.2
3:3
shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the location and
boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board which is used for school purposes until
such time, if any, as this section shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of school property and drug-free school
zones.
§ 3-5.3. Changes in Boundaries of Property. [1991 Code § 43-3; Ord. No. 88-18]
The school board or the chief administrative officer in the case of any private or
parochial school is hereby directed and shall have the continuing obligation to promptly
notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Attorney of any changes or
contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any property owned by or leased
to any elementary or secondary school or school board and which is used for school
purposes.
§ 3-5.4. Filing of Map; Copy. [1991 Code § 43-4; Ord. No. 88-18]
The Township Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the original of the
map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 3-5.1 and to provide at a reasonable
cost a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which may request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and adopted
herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true copy of such map and of
this section shall be provided without cost to the County Clerk and to the office of the
Union County Prosecutor.
§ 3-5.5. Additional Matters. [1991 Code § 43-5; Ord. No. 88-18]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited and stated:
a. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 3-5.1
was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions arising under
the criminal laws of this State, and that pursuant to State law, such map shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools in the municipality.
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to such
schools or school board.
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school purposes.
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000 feet of such
school property.
b. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as school
property was owned by or leased to a school or school board and was being used
for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the effective date of N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7.
c. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, a prosecutor is not precluded from
introducing or relying upon any other evidence or testimony to establish a violation
§ 3-5.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 3-5.5
3:4
§ 3-6. HUNTING AND FIREARMS.
§ 3-6.1. Prohibited Conduct. [1991 Code § 187-1]
§ 3-6.2. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 187-2; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-7. through § 3-9 (RESERVED)
§ 3-10. ABANDONED VEHICLES.17
§ 3-10.1. Abandonment Prohibited. [1991 Code § 270-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or abandon a motor vehicle or motor-drawn
vehicle on off-street lands in the Township.
§ 3-10.2. Open Storage Prohibited. [1991 Code § 270-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, possessor or occupant to permit, store or place
on off-street lands in the Township any motor vehicle or motor-drawn vehicle which is
of the offense defined in that statute, including use of a map or diagram other than
the one approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 3-5.1. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property which is, in
fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary
or secondary school or school board, whether the absence of such depiction is
the result of inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in the location and
boundaries of such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised
approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board or that such property
is not used for school purposes.
d. All of the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 concerning the preparation,
approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map have been complied with.
a. No person shall, within the limits of the Township, discharge, use or carry a gun,
pistol, revolver or firearm, BB gun, air rifle, pellet gun, crossbow, hunting bow or
cannon for the purpose of hunting, shooting, recreation or amusement. The
Township Committee, however, shall have the right and authority in its discretion
to grant a permit or permits to members of gun clubs or shooting clubs within the
Township to carry or discharge such gun or guns, pistol or pistols, revolver or
revolvers, firearm or firearms for such purpose, under such conditions and at such
times and places as the Committee may designate, by resolution. The permit or
permits so issued shall be revocable at will by the Committee.
b. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to be in conflict with State laws regulating
hunting.
17. Editor's Note: See also subsection 15-5.1, Maintenance of Exterior Premises, paragraph i.
§ 3-5.5 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-10.2
3:5
unregistered, not licensed or in such a state of disrepair as to be incapable of operation,
unless stored in a garage.
§ 3-10.3. Certain Rights Unaffected. [1991 Code § 270-3]
This section does not counteract any rights flowing from any regulation of the Township
or variance of the Board of Adjustment.
§ 3-11. TRAILERS AND BOATS.
§ 3-11.1. Definitions. [1991 Code § 265-1]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this section, the meaning respectively
ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be
deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.18
§ 3-11.2. Illegal Parking or Storage. [1991 Code § 265-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store a trailer or boat on property used
for residential purposes, except as otherwise permitted in Section 3-10, Abandoned
Vehicles.
§ 3-11.3. Exceptions; Permitted Parking or Storage. [1991 Code § 265-3]
§ 3-12. DUMPSTERS AND STORAGE CONTAINERS. [Prior ordinance history
includes portions of Ordinance No. 94-18]
§ 3-12.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2011-12]
DUMPSTER — Shall mean any waste or refuse container, commonly known as a rolloff
dumpster or roll-off container.
a. The temporary standing or parking for unloading and loading is not prohibited by
this section.
b. The parking or storing of trailers or boats which are owned by the occupant, in a
fully enclosed garage, is not prohibited by this section.
c. The parking or storing of boats on trailers owned by the occupant, not in dead
storage for a period of one year or more, less than 21 feet in length from the stem to
the stern and less than seven feet in overall height, without cabins or overhead
structures in the rear yard of the property, is not prohibited by this section.
d. The parking or storing of travel and camping trailers owned by the occupant, not in
dead storage for a period of one year or more, less than 21 feet in length and less
than 10 feet in overall height, in the rear yard of the property, is not prohibited by
this section.
e. The parking of boats or trailers on any corner lot, alongside the garage, in
compliance with all setback lines, is not prohibited by this section.
18. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
§ 3-10.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 3-12.1
3:6
STORAGE CONTAINER — Shall mean any temporary freestanding open or closed
container, used to store or move non-waste items, whether movable or fixed.
§ 3-12.2. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2011-21]
No person shall park, leave, place or be in control of any dumpster or storage container
on any street or highway, public property or private property within the Township
without first obtaining a permit as set forth herein.
§ 3-12.3. Permit Requirements. [Ord. No. 2011-21]
§ 3-12.4. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2011-21]
a. No person will be issued for a dumpster on a State or County highway, or for a
dumpster or storage container on State or County property, without the prior written
consent of the appropriate County or State authority having jurisdiction over the
highway or public property.
b. A complete permit application shall be filed with the Zoning Official.
c. A permit for a dumpster on public or private property shall be issued for a period of
up to 30 days, and may thereafter be renewed for up to two additional thirty-day
periods.
d. An extended permit for a dumpster on private property only, may be issued for no
more than a third additional 30 days, upon a showing of extenuating circumstances
as authorized by the Zoning Official.
e. A permit for a dumpster on a public street shall be for 30 days, and may not be
extended.
f. A permit for a storage container on public or private property shall be issued for a
period of up to 30 days, and may thereafter be renewed for up to one additional
thirty-day period.
g. No dumpster permit shall exceed a total of 120 days. No storage container permit
shall exceed a total of 60 days.
h. All permit fees must be paid in advance before issuance or extension of any permit.
a. Any dumpster or storage container parked on any public street or anywhere within
the public right-of-way, shall be equipped with and display markers consisting of
all yellow reflective diamond-shaped panels having a minimum size of 18 inches
by 18 inches. These panels shall be mounted at the edge of the dumpster or
container at both ends nearest the path of passing vehicles and facing the direction
of oncoming traffic. These markers shall have a minimum mounting height of three
feet from the bottom of the panels to the surface of the roadway.
b. Any dumpster parked on any public street shall be placed so as to avoid damage to
the street. The repair of any such damage shall be the responsibility of the permit
holder and shall be done upon notice to and approval of the Township Engineer or
a designate.
§ 3-12.1 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-12.4
3:7
§ 3-12.5. Permit Fees. [Ord. No. 2011-21]
Dumpster application for permit first 30 days No fee
Dumpster permit renewal second 30 days $100
Dumpster permit renewal third 30 days $200
Dumpster permit renewal fourth 30 days $300
Storage container application for permit first 30 days No fee
Storage container permit renewal second 30 days $100
§ 3-13. (RESERVED)19
§ 3-14. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL IN PUBLIC.
§ 3-14.1. Definition. [Ord. No. 2001-02]
As used in this section.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any outdoor area to which the public has access
and shall include, but not be limited to, any street, highway, road, alley, sidewalk or
gathering place for public transportation.
§ 3-14.2. Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2001-02]
It shall be a violation of this section for any person to consume, from any container,
whether concealed or not, including but not limited to bottles, cans, cups or plastic
containers, any alcoholic beverage as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1, while in or upon
any public place within the Township of Springfield, except within a designated area
pursuant to an outdoor cafe license issued pursuant hereto.
c. Any dumpster or storage container on private property shall be placed no less than
five feet from the public right-of-way.
d. No dumpster or storage container shall be placed so as to interfere with or be within
any sight triangle.
e. All dumpsters shall be appropriately maintained and covered so as to ensure that
the contents will not spill out, overflow, be blown out by the wind, or in any other
way be removed from the container.
f. All dumpsters shall be maintained so as to ensure no liquid of any kind, other than
clean water, shall leak or otherwise discharge from the container.
g. All dumpsters and storage containers shall comply with any applicable State,
County or local law, including but not limited to zoning, health and building codes.
19. Editor's Note: Former Section 3-13, Loitering; Failure to Obey Order of Police Officer, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1974 Code §§ 3-2.1 through 3-2.3 and 3-2.4 and Ordinance No. 02-28 was repealed in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 03-04.
§ 3-12.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 3-14.3
3:8
§ 3-14.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2001-02]
Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be liable for each offense for a
fine not less than $25 and not to exceed $100.
§ 3-15. POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
BY UNDERAGE PERSONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.20
§ 3-15.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2001-03]
As used in this section:
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian of an underage
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean an underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling, or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 3-15.2. Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2001-03]
It shall be a violation of this section for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage on private
property within the Township of Springfield.
§ 3-15.3. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2001-03; Ord. No. 2010-24 § I]
This section shall not prohibit:
§ 3-15.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2001-03]
a. An underage person from consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in
connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite or consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a
parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume
alcoholic beverages.
b. Possession of alcoholic beverages by an underage person while actually engaged in
the performance of employment by a person who is licensed under N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq., or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a
culinary arts or hotel management program at a county vocational school or
postsecondary educational institution; however, this exception shall not be
construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any
other section of law against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic
beverage activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
a. Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be liable for a fine of $250
for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
b. In addition to the fine authorized herein, upon conviction, the court may suspend or
postpone for six months, the driving privileges for such person, and the courts shall
forward a report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of
20. Editor's Note: For additional regulations regarding minors, see Section 6-9, Persons Under Legal Age.
§ 3-14.3 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-15.4
3:9
§ 3-16. PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR JUVENILE OFFENSES.
§ 3-16.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-24 § II]
As used in this section:
DELINQUENCY — Shall mean:
JUVENILE — Shall mean any person who has not yet attained his or her eighteenth
birthday.
the suspension or the postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to this
section. If a person at the time of the imposition of such sentence is less than
17 years of age, the period of license postponement, including a suspension or
postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on
the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years.
c. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence hereunder has a valid driver's
license issued by this State, the court shall immediately collect the license and
forward it to the Division along with the report. If for any reason the license cannot
be collected, the court shall include in the report the complete name, address, date
of birth, eye color, and sex of the person convicted, as well as the first and last date
of the license suspension imposed by the court.
d. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if a person is convicted
of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license suspension or
postponement, the person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A.
39:3-40. A person shall be required to acknowledge receipt of the written notice in
writing. Failure to receive a written notice or failure to acknowledge receipt of the
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a violation of
N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
e. If a person convicted hereunder is not a New Jersey resident, the court shall suspend
or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident driving privilege based on the age of
the person and submit to the Division the required report. The court shall not collect
the license of a nonresident convicted hereunder. Upon receipt of a report by the
court, the Division shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction
of the suspension or postponement.
The commission of an act by a juvenile which, if committed by an adult, would
constitute:
1. A crime;
2. A disorderly person's offense or petty disorderly offense under State law; or
3. A violation of any other penal statute, ordinance or regulation.
a.
The commission of an act which constitutes a violation of Chapters 3, 4, 6 or 8 of
Title 39, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey, or of any amended supplement thereof, by a juvenile of or over the age of
17 years, shall not constitute delinquency as defined in this section.
b.
§ 3-15.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 3-16.1
3:10
PARENT — Shall mean natural father or mother or any adult who has a juvenile in his
or her charge by virtue of an order of the court.
§ 3-16.2. Notice of Violations; Liability of Parent. [Ord. No. 2010-24 § II]
§ 3-16.3. Remedies and Penalties Not Exclusive. [Ord. No. 2010-24 § II]
The remedies and penalties provided elsewhere in this section shall not be exclusive, nor
shall they conflict with any of the laws of the State of New Jersey, it being the express
intention of this section that the penalty and remedies set forth shall be cumulative and
in addition to any other penalties and remedies set forth in the statutory laws of the State
of New Jersey.
§ 3-16.4. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-24 § II]
Any parent who shall be convicted of violating the terms of this section in the Municipal
Court of the Township shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-17. LIBRARY PROPERTY.
§ 3-17.1. Failure to Return Books. [1991 Code § 194-1]
No person shall retain or fail to return any book or article borrowed from the Springfield
Public Library contrary to the rules and regulations of the library.
§ 3-17.2. Failure to Pay Fine. [1991 Code § 194-2]
a. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his/her designee of the Township, or an
appropriate member of the Department of Police, to notify the parent of every child
convicted of a juvenile offense which offense shall have been committed within the
jurisdiction of the Township, placing that parent upon notice of the potential
liability of such parent for the further unlawful acts of his or her juvenile(s). The
notice shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a copy of this section.
b. Upon a second conviction of any juvenile or minor and after due notice as
prescribed herein, there shall arise a rebuttable presumption that the juvenile's
parent(s) has failed to exercise parental responsibility, control and supervision of
such juvenile delinquent, and for such conduct the parent(s) shall be charged with a
violation of this section within the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court of the
Township.
a. Times and Charges. No person shall fail to pay to the library any fine or change
contrary to the rules and regulations of the library for failure to return books or other
property of the library.
b. Any fine or charge to a person under the age of 18 may also be charged to any
parent or guardian of such person, provided that the parent or guardian of such
person is first notified in person or in writing by ordinary mail of the amount of the
fine or charge.
§ 3-16.1 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-17.3
3:11
§ 3-17.3. Notice to Return Items. [1991 Code § 194-3]
If any person retains or fails to return any book or article or fails to pay any fine or
charge, such person shall be notified in person or in writing by ordinary mail of the
failure to return the book or article or failure to pay the fine or charge as per rules and
regulations of the library.
§ 3-17.4. Damage to Books or Property. [1991 Code § 194-4]
No person shall damage or destroy or permit to be damaged or destroyed any book or
other article or any part thereof which is owned by or is in the custody of the library.
§ 3-17.5. Library Cards. [1991 Code § 194-5]
No person shall register or furnish a false name or address or use any card other than the
one issued to the person for the purpose of borrowing any book or other article from the
library.
§ 3-17.6. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code 194-6; Ord. No. 93-6]
Every person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall be liable for
each offense by a fine not to exceed $100.
§ 3-18. HOURS OF BUSINESS OPERATIONS IN CERTAIN AREAS. [Ord. No.
77-6 § 1]
No retail establishment of any nature, other than pharmacies or restaurants, shall conduct
business between the hours of 9:00 p.m. of each day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day
in any N-C Neighborhood Commercial zone.
§ 3-19. FIRE HYDRANTS.
§ 3-19.1. Piling of Snow. [Ord. No. 2002-01]
No property owner, tenant, employee, agent, or other person, shall shovel, plow, blow,
or in any other manner place snow, ice, or other similar precipitation on or around any
fire hydrant within the Township, either before, during or after same has been cleared of
such precipitation for access by or on behalf of the Township.
§ 3-19.2. Blocking of Access. [Ord. No. 2002-01]
No property owner, tenant, employee, agent, or other person shall place, or allow to be
placed, on or around any fire hydrant within the Township, any garbage, refuse, or other
item which would block or interfere with prompt, free and lawful access to such fire
hydrant.
§ 3-20. THEFT OF WATER.
§ 3-20.1. Taking of Water from Hydrant. [Ord. No. 2005-26 § I]
No person shall take water from any fire hydrant within the Township unless that person
§ 3-17.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 3-20.1
3:12
has written permission from the water purveyor and the flow of water from such hydrant
is metered at all times.
§ 3-20.2. Taking of Water from Service Connection. [Ord. No. 2005-26 § I]
No person shall take water from any service connection unless that person is the
customer of record for such service connection, or has express permission from the
customer of record. No person shall use water from any service connection except on the
property served by such service connection.
§ 3-20.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2005-26 § I]
This section shall be enforceable by the Police Department and the Fire Department of
the Township.
§ 3-20.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2005-26 § I]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, as well as for restitution as concerns
any damage done to any municipal fire hydrant.
§ 3-21. WILDLIFE FEEDING.
§ 3-21.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(D)]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife on Township
owned property, so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 3-21.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(D)]
As used in this section:
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife, but does not include
baiting in the legal taking of fish or game.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 3-21.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(D)]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by
the Township, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined
in a zoo, park or rehabilitation center).
§ 3-21.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(D)]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Health
Department.
§ 3-22. PEACE AND GOOD ORDER.
§ 3-20.1 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-22.1
3:13
§ 3-22.1. Unlawful Acts. [Ord. No. 2012-25]
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following offenses within the
Township:
a. Disturbing the quiet of the Township or of any lawful assembly of person, or of any
neighborhood, family or person within the Township by using any profane,
indecent or obscene language or any indecent conduct whatever or by quarrelling,
assaulting, fighting or otherwise disturbing the public peace.
b. Intentionally obstructing, molesting, hindering, annoying, frightening or interfering
with any other person upon the streets, parks, public or private place, or in any
automobile, bus, or other means of transportation or conveyance, public or private.
c. Engaging in any conduct the purpose of which is to defraud or cheat any individual
or entity within the Township.
d. Keeping or casing or permitting to be kept a house, shop, room or place of any
description in which any kind of disorder is made or permitted, to the alarm,
annoyance or disturbance of the neighborhood, or in which persons assemble, or
which place is injurious to the public health, public quiet or public morals, or which
is used for the purpose of prostitution, or in which is kept any table or device of any
kind upon or by which any game of chance or hazard shall be played.
e. Engaging in any riotous conduct, indecent conduct, breaches of peace, vagrancy,
begging, prostitution in any street or alley or other public place in the Township.
f. Knowingly causing a false alarm of fire or intentionally breaking or injuring or
causing to be broken or injured any fire alarm box owned by the Township or any
street lamp used or lighted by or rented to the Township.
g. Fleeing or attempting to elude, on foot or by any other means, any Police or Law
Enforcement Officer after having received any signal from such officer to halt or
bring his or her vehicle to a full stop.
h. Resisting, obstructing or interfering with any Township officer or official, including
a member of an emergency services organization, in the performance of his or her
duty, disobeying the lawful order or instructions of any such officer or official or,
without good reason, refusing or neglecting to assist him or her in the performance
of his or her duty when requested to do so.
i. Trespassing on private property and surreptitiously or sneakingly invading the
privacy of another by peering into windows or other openings of dwelling places
located thereon for no lawful purpose.
j. Willfully or maliciously torturing, tormenting, beating, kicking, striking,
mutilating, injuring, disabling or killing any dog used by the Police Department of
the Township of Springfield in which performance or duties of such Department or
interfering with or meddling with any such dog while being used by said
Department, or any member thereof, in the performance of any of the functions or
duties of said Department or of any officer or member of said Department.
k. 1. Individually or as agent or representative of another person, or as an officer or
§ 3-22.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 3-22.1
3:14
agent of any corporation, or as members of partnership, with intent to defraud,
making, drawing, uttering or delivering any check, draft or order for the
payment of money in a sum not in excess of $100 upon any bank or other
depository, knowing at the time of so doing that the maker or drawer has no
funds or insufficient funds in, or credit with, such bank or other depository
for the payment in full of such instrument upon its presentation although no
express representation is made in reference thereto.
2. The making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order as stated
in the preceding paragraph shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud,
and the certificate of protest of nonpayment of same shall be presumptive
evidence that there were no funds or insufficient funds in or credit with such
bank or other depository and that the person making, drawing, uttering or
delivering the instrument knew that there were no funds or insufficient funds
in or credit with the bank or other depository.
§ 3-22.1 POLICE REGULATIONS § 3-22.1
3:15

Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 4-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 4-1.1. Purpose. [1991 Code § 197-1]
The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform set of procedures for administering
the issuance, renewal and revocation of all licenses issued by the Township, except
alcoholic beverage licenses, dog licenses and taxicab licenses and except as may be
specified otherwise or provided elsewhere in the Code.
§ 4-1.2. Application for License. [1991 Code § 197-2; Ord. No. 02-28 §§ I(A), (C)]
a. All applications for licenses shall be accompanied by the required fee and shall be
made to or through the Township Clerk upon forms provided by the Clerk.
Applications shall contain the information specified by resolution of the Township
Committee and may include the following along with any other information
deemed necessary or specifically called for:
1. Name and permanent and local address and telephone number of the applicant.
If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address and telephone number
of its registered agent.
2. If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address and
description of the premises.
3. If a vehicle is to be used, its description, including the license number and
serial number.
4. If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the employer,
together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
5. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
6. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property or services
to be sold or supplied.
7. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or the
violation of any municipal ordinance, including traffic offenses, and, if so, the
date and place of conviction, the nature of the offense and the punishment or
penalty imposed.
8. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of
the applicant so that an investigator may properly evaluate his character and
responsibility.
b. Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners, with the information
required by this section supplied in detail as to each partner, and applications of
corporations shall have attached individual statements containing all of the
§ 3-22.1 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-1.2
4:1
§ 4-1.3. Investigation. [1991 Code § 197-3; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police or a designee, who shall
immediately institute whatever investigation of the applicant's business responsibility,
moral character and ability to properly conduct the licensed activity is considered
necessary for the protection of the public. The findings shall be communicated in writing
to the Township Clerk within a reasonable time after the application has been filed. If
the investigator decides that the applicant's character, ability or business responsibility
is unsatisfactory or the products, services or activity are not free from fraud, the
investigator shall disapprove the application and the Clerk shall refuse to issue the
license and shall so notify the applicant. Otherwise, the Township Clerk shall issue
the license, provided that the required license fees have been paid, except in cases
where approval of the Township Committee is required. In the case of an application
for a solicitor's, peddler's or canvasser's license, the license may be issued subject to
investigation. In the event of the refusal of the issuance of a license, the applicant may
appeal to the Township Committee for hearing. The appeal shall be filed, in writing,
with the Township Clerk within 14 days after notification of the refusal. The Township
Committee's decision shall be final.
§ 4-1.4. Contents of License. [1991 Code § 197-4; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(C)]
Licenses shall be in a form which the Township Committee shall prescribe by resolution
and shall contain the following information:
§ 4-1.5. Record of Licenses. [1991 Code § 197-5]
The Township Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued by the Clerk. The record
shall be in a form prescribed by resolution of the Township Committee and shall contain
the same information as is required in Subsection 4-1.4. It shall also indicate the amount
of the fee paid for the license, the date upon which payment was received, the date
of the issuance of the license, whether the license is new or a renewal and any other
information which the Township Committee may require by resolution.
information required by this section relating to each employee or agent who shall
engage in the licensed activity, and shall be signed by each employee or agent.
a. The name, address and telephone number of the licensee.
b. The number and type of the license and the nature of the licensed activity.
c. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted if the activity is carried on
at a fixed location.
d. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and license
number and serial number of the vehicle.
e. The expiration date of the license.
f. Any other appropriate information which the Chief of Police may request and the
Township Committee may require by resolution.
§ 4-1.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-1.6
4:2
§ 4-1.6. Display of License. [1991 Code § 197-6; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
When the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location or from a vehicle, the license
shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle. In all other cases the
licensee shall have the license in the licensee's possession at all times and shall display
it upon the request of any Police Officer or any person with whom the licensee is doing
business.
§ 4-1.7. Transferability. [1991 Code § 197-7]
Except as otherwise provided, a license shall apply only to the person to whom it
was issued and shall not be transferable to another person. In cases where the licensed
activity is conducted at a fixed location, licenses may be transferred from place to place
but only with the approval of the Township Committee by resolution. The fee for the
transfer of license from place to place shall be as provided in Chapter 165.
§ 4-1.8. Expiration and Renewal; Proration of Fee. [1991 Code § 197-8]
§ 4-1.9. Revocation of License. [1991 Code § 197-9; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
§ 4-1.10. Notice of Hearing. [1991 Code § 197-10; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be given in writing by
a. Except where expressly provided otherwise, all licenses shall expire on December
31 of the year of issue at 12:00 midnight. Applications for the renewal of licenses
shall be made not later than December 1 of the year of issue.
b. When an application for a license is made during the course of any calendar year,
the fee shall be prorated to the nearest month. Any period of time greater than 1/2 a
month shall be considered as a full month for this purpose.
a. Any license or permit issued by the Township may be revoked by the Township
Committee after notice and a hearing for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or license.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the licensed
activity.
3. A violation of any provision of this Code.
4. Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor or disorderly person's offense involving moral turpitude.
5. Conduct of the licensed activity, whether by the licensee, or licensee's agents
or employees, in an unlawful manner or in a manner that constitutes a breach
of the peace or a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.
b. Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon an application pending the
results of the investigation provided for by this section, such license may be
summarily revoked if the result of the investigation is such as would have resulted
in denial of the application.
§ 4-1.6 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-1.10
4:3
the Township Clerk. The notice shall specifically set forth the grounds upon which the
proposed revocation is based and the time and place of the hearing. It shall be served
by mailing a copy to the licensee at the licensee's last known address by certified mail,
return receipt requested, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 4-1.11. Hearing and Determination. [1991 Code § 197-11; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to be represented
by an attorney, to present witnesses, to cross-examine opposing witnesses and to have a
permanent record made of the proceedings at the licensee's own expense. The Township
Committee shall revoke or suspend the license if it is satisfied by a preponderance of the
evidence that the licensee is guilty of the acts charged.
§ 4-1.12. Reinstatement of Revoked License. [1991 Code § 197-12; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(A)]
The Township Committee may issue another license to a person whose license has been
revoked or denied as provided in this section if after a hearing it is satisfied by clear and
convincing evidence that the acts which led to the revocation or denial will not occur
again; otherwise, no person whose license has been revoked or denied, nor any person
acting for the licensee, directly or indirectly, shall be issued another license to carry on
the same activity.
§ 4-1.13. Power to Make Rules and Regulations. [1991 Code § 197-13]
The Township Committee may by resolution make rules and regulations which interpret
or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of administering the
provisions of this chapter or making them more effective. No regulation shall be
inconsistent with or alter or amend any provision of this chapter, and no regulation shall
impose any requirement which is in addition to or greater than the requirements that are
expressly or by implication imposed by any provision of this chapter.
§ 4-2. DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS, COIN-OPERATED.
§ 4-2.1. Definitions. [1991 Code § 160-1]
As used in this section:
CODE — Shall mean printed code regulations or set of regulations, standards or set of
standards concerning, affecting or relating to the subject matter of this section which are
approved by the State Department of Health and adopted by reference and become part
of this section, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 26:3-69.1 to 3-69.6.21
COIN-OPERATED OR SELF-SERVICE DRY-CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT —
Shall mean those premises wherein devices for the cleaning of textiles, fabrics, garments
or other articles by the use of any solvent, other than water, are installed for and used by
the general public.
CUSTOMER AREA — Shall mean that portion of the establishment to which the
general public is permitted access.
21. Editor's Note: This reference is in the Coin-Operated Dry-Cleaning Establishment Code of New Jersey (1962).
§ 4-1.10 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-2.1
4:4
HEALTH AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Board of Health as prescribed by N.J.S.
26:3-1.
MAINTENANCE AREA — Shall mean that portion of the establishment to which the
customer is not permitted access and used for general maintenance and storage purposes.
SOLVENT — Shall mean any cleaning fluid which is free of additives to mask the
odor, classified by the National Board of Fire Underwriters as nonflammable at ordinary
temperatures and not more toxic than the generally accepted threshold limit value
for perchlorethylene as promulgated by the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists.
§ 4-2.2. License Required. [1991 Code § 160-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct or operate a coinoperated
dry-cleaning establishment in any premises in the Township without a license.
§ 4-2.3. Application for License. [1991 Code § 160-3]
§ 4-2.4. Compliance Required. [1991 Code § 160-4; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
a. In addition to information required in Subsection 4-1.2, the application shall specify
the name and address of the owner of the premises if other than the applicant, the
number of machines and the type to be installed and maintained in the licensed
premises, the manner in which the machines are to be installed and the name of the
manufacturer of the machines.
b. The application shall be filed with the Township Clerk, in triplicate, and except in
the case of an application for the renewal of an existing license, shall be
accompanied by five copies of a sketch showing the lot lines, the outline of the
building, the floor plan of the premises to be licensed and the location of the
machines and equipment to be installed therein, all drawn to scale. A copy of the
application shall be forwarded immediately to the Board of Health and Fire
Department.
a. Investigations. The Township Committee shall thereupon cause all necessary
investigations to be made of the premises described in the application for the
purpose of determining whether the provisions of this section and of all other
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations are fully complied with. If the
Township Committee shall be satisfied, after such investigation, that the premises
in question conform to the provisions of this section and other applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations, it shall so certify to the Township Clerk, who shall
thereupon issue a license authorizing the applicant to establish, maintain, conduct
or operate a coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment at the place and with the
number of machines as designated and specified in the application for and during
the period of the license.
b. Conformance With Other Municipal Regulations. Health, building, fire and other
municipal regulations pertaining to dry-cleaning stores generally shall be applied to
those establishments in which coin-operated dry cleaning will be offered.
c. Inspections. The Health Authority, Fire Department and other municipal authorities
§ 4-2.1 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-2.4
4:5
§ 4-2.5. License Fee; Expiration; Transfer. [1991 Code §§ 160-5, 165-3; Ord. No.
93-2]
§ 4-2.6. Revocation or Suspension of License. [1991 Code § 160-6]
The Township Committee may, at any time, for violation of this section or of any
applicable law, regulation or ordinance, or such other cause as the Township Committee,
upon investigation and after a hearing, deems sufficient, suspend or revoke any license
granted under the provisions of this section. Notice in writing of the proposed suspension
or revocation and the reason or reasons therefor and of the time and place of a hearing
to be held thereon by the Township Committee shall be served upon the licensee either
personally or by mail to the business address given in the application at least 10 days
prior to the hearing. Whenever any license shall be revoked, no refund of any unearned
portion of the license fee shall be made. No license shall be granted to any person whose
license has been revoked within a period of two years from the date of such revocation,
except in the discretion of the Township Committee.
§ 4-2.7. Hours of Operation. [1991 Code § 160-7]
No coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment shall be open for business between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day nor at any time during Sunday.
§ 4-2.8. Operating Restrictions. [1991 Code § 160-8]
shall inspect establishments as often as they deem it necessary. The permit holder
or a representative shall permit access to any portion of the establishment for the
purpose of making such an inspection. Regular inspection by an appropriate agency
of all safety devices on coin-operated dry-cleaning machines is also required.
a. Before any license shall be issued, the applicant shall pay to the Township an
annual license fee of $10 for each machine installed or to be installed in the licensed
premises.
b. Each license shall expire on December 31 following the date of its issuance, unless
sooner suspended or revoked as hereinafter provided. Such license shall not be
transferable from person to person or from the location for which it was originally
issued to another location.
a. All coin-operated dry-cleaning establishments shall have an attendant on the
licensed premises at all times when the premises are open for business or public
use. No coin-operated dry-cleaning machine shall be used by the general public
except under the continuous, direct supervision of an employee or the owner of the
coin-operated dry-cleaning establishment, who shall not be less than 21 years of age
and who has previously been examined and certified in writing by the Fire
Department as competent to handle such machines.
b. No licensee shall permit or allow such machines to be used by any person who is
less than 17 years of age. A suitable sign indicating such age restriction must be
prominently posted and maintained on the premises.
c. All machines shall be fitted with a device which will prevent the opening of the
§ 4-2.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-2.8
4:6
door of any such machine while the machine is in operation and until all solvent
vapors have been removed from any textile, fabric, garment or other article and
from the drum in which the same shall be placed.
d. In the event that any chlorinated or fluorinated hydrocarbon is a component part of
any solvent used in a coin-operated dry-cleaning machine, then such machine shall
not be used if the odor of any chlorinated or fluorinated hydrocarbon is masked or
watered in any fashion or if the concentrations of solvent vapor of such chlorinated
or fluorinated hydrocarbon are greater than 40 parts of such vapor to 1,000,000
parts of air at any time and anywhere from the machines or appurtenant equipment.
e. In any establishment, solvent storage tanks, power boxes and other sources of
danger shall be so situated as to be inaccessible to the general public and patrons of
the establishment and shall be kept in a place that is properly ventilated.
f. Spotting operations utilizing flammable liquids shall not be permitted in this type
of occupancy.
g. Only the front or customer side of dry-cleaning machines shall be exposed in the
customer area. The working or maintenance portion of the equipment shall be
separated from the front of the machines by a solid partition. Access doors to the
enclosure back of the machines shall be kept closed and locked. The enclosure for
the dry-cleaning machines shall not be a part of or interconnected with those areas
that contain heating devices requiring air for combustion, such as dryers, water
heaters and boilers.
h. An exhaust system shall be provided for the removal of toxic vapors. Such exhaust
system shall consist of the individual exhaust on each dry-cleaning machine,
scavenger ducts strategically located, exhaust fans for the enclosure behind such
machines and the front grill of loading door air intakes on each machine.
i. The central exhaust ventilating system for dry-cleaning machines as described
above shall be operated continuously while the premises are open to the public. The
vapor removal system shall be interlocked with the dry-cleaning machines so that
the latter cannot be operated without actuating the exhaust system. The manifolded
exhaust system shall exhaust to the outside, not terminate within 25 feet of any
building opening, not expose the passing public and be located as remotely as
possible from applicant air intakes. In addition to the individual exhaust for the
vapor from each machine, a scavenger duct shall be provided for each two machines
to pick up vapors surrounding the equipment near the floor. The suction of these
scavenger pipes shall be located two inches to four inches above the floor. A
general ventilation fan shall also be installed within the rear enclosure of such
machines to be used in case of serious solvent spill. Each machine shall be designed
so that when the machine is not in operation, air is drawn through the front door or
grill of the machine at a face velocity of at least 100 feet per minute.
j. Provisions must be made for makeup air to compensate for that which is exhausted
to the outside.
k. The machines shall be provided with some satisfactory means to limit vapor
accumulation and to salvage the solvent resulting from a spill due to an accident or
failure of equipment, such as by diking the entire system with a four inch cement
§ 4-2.8 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-2.8
4:7
curb along with a lead pan on the floor which will contain the solvent and drain it to
an underground tank where it can be recovered. When an underground tank is not
feasible, the curbed area shall be provided with a sump pump that will pump the
solvent to an aboveground tank.
l. All establishments shall have two exits which shall be at least 25 feet apart from
each other and shall lead directly to the outside.
m. Filter residue and other residues containing solvent shall be disposed of so as not to
create a health hazard or nuisance. A locked, covered metal container shall be used
for temporary storage outside the building.
n. All direct equipment exhausts or vents shall be provided with mesh lint arrestors
which shall be kept clean unless lint traps are provided on the dry-cleaning unit. All
exhausts shall be under static pressure by reason of mechanical fan.
o. The customer area shall be equipped with fire extinguishers approved for use
against electrical or oil fires by the National Board of Fire Underwriters and the
Fire Department.
p. Each day or after the specified number of cycles recommended by the
manufacturer, dry-cleaning machines shall be serviced, including but not limited to:
1. Adding "charged" solvent to restore the main supply.
2. Cleaning the button trap and the lint bag, trap or screen.
3. Cleaning the tank sump and removing the sludge.
4. Adding filter aids to dispersers.
5. Resetting the cycle counter, if one is provided.
6. Emptying the water from the separator.
q. All installations shall be equipped with a water-conserving device for recirculating
the water used in the dry-cleaning operation. No water shall be discharged into the
sanitary sewerage system of the Township.
r. Separate rooms or compartments for the sexes, devoted exclusively to toilet
facilities, shall be provided within the licensed premises.
s. All machines shall be checked daily and kept in good repair by the licensee. All
maintenance personnel shall be familiar with all necessary machinery repairs and
instructed as to the solvent hazards.
t. Dry-cleaning filter sludge may not be disposed of in leaching fields.
u. Coin-operated dry-cleaning plants shall utilize only solvents classified as
nonflammable or as nonflammable at ordinary temperatures and uses.
v. No gas flame heater or gas flame may be used near the cleaning solvent.
w. The exhaust system must make eight complete changes of air every hour.
§ 4-2.8 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-2.8
4:8
§ 4-2.9. Instructions to Public. [1991 Code § 160-9]
§ 4-2.10. Personnel and Customer Safety. [1991 Code § 160-10]
A respirator approved by the United States Bureau of Mines and the Fire Department
as affording protection against organic solvent vapors shall be provided for and used by
maintenance personnel during correction of leakages, cleaning of the system, removal of
lint and muck bags and at all times when the odor of solvent is noticeable.
§ 4-3. GASOLINE TANKS AND PUMPS.
§ 4-3.1. License Required. [1991 Code § 179-1]
No person shall install or maintain any gasoline tank or pump for the purpose of selling
or exposing for sale any gasoline or similar motor fuel without first obtaining a license
from the Township Committee.
§ 4-3.2. Application for License. [1991 Code §§ 179-2, 165-3; Ord. No. 93-2; Ord.
No. 02-28 § I(C)]
x. The total exhaust capability of all exhaust devices used shall have a minimum
capacity of 400 cubic feet per minute per machine for normal use and 1,000 cubic
feet per minute for emergency use, unless the manufacturer of the dry-cleaning
machines requires a higher minimum capacity. The rated capacities of the exhaust
fans shall appear on the equipment or its nameplate.
y. Only the solvent specified by the equipment manufacturer shall be used. All
solvents shall be stored in closed containers.
a. All establishments shall prominently display lighted indoor signs warning the
general public of the danger of excessive solvent vapor inhalation and skin irritation
from unevaporated dry-cleaning solvent.
b. A step-by-step, readily legible instruction list for operation of machines shall be
posted in a conspicuous location near the machine in the customer area. These
instructions shall include a list of items not to be dry-cleaned in coin-operated or
self-service dry-cleaning machines, such as those made in part or completely of
plastic, rubber, leather, paper, fur, angora or urethane. Each establishment shall post
in a conspicuous location readily visible from the outside of premises the telephone
number or numbers to be called in the event of an emergency.
a. All persons who now operate or maintain any gasoline pump and appurtenances as
described in the foregoing section or who may hereafter desire to erect, install or
maintain any such gasoline pump or pumps shall make application in writing to the
Township Clerk for a license so to do. The application shall set forth the name and
address of the applicant and a description of the premises upon which the applicant
proposes to maintain such pump or pumps and shall be accompanied by a sketch
showing the proposed location of the tanks supplying the pumps. Each application
shall be accompanied by the license fee.
b. The Township Clerk shall turn over all of the applications to the Township
§ 4-2.8 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-3.2
4:9
§ 4-3.3. Investigation and Report. [1991 Code § 179-3; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(C)]
The applications shall be referred to the Public Safety Committee for investigation
and report, and it shall be the duty of such Committee to ascertain whether or not
the application, if granted, will increase the fire hazard or unduly interfere with traffic
movements or otherwise tend to injuriously affect the public health and safety of the
Township in the neighborhood wherein the pumps are proposed to be erected and
maintained.
§ 4-3.4. Inspection of Underground Tanks. [1991 Code § 179-4; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(A)]
Wherever it is proposed to supply the gasoline pumps by underground tanks, the tanks
shall be located within the property lines of the premises owned or occupied by the
applicant and shall be placed at a safe distance and at a safe depth from the buildings
located on the premises or on the adjacent premises. To this end, no tank shall be covered
until the same has been inspected by the Construction Official and approval obtained.
§ 4-3.5. Fees. [1991 Code §§ 179-5, 165-3; Ord. No. 93-2]
The fee for a license or any renewal thereof shall be $20 per pump.
§ 4-3.6. Issuance of License. [1991 Code § 179-6; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(C)]
Upon approval by the Township Committee of any application made hereunder, the
Township Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license to erect, install or maintain such
gasoline pumps and shall thereupon turn over to the Township Treasurer the license fee.
§ 4-3.7. Operations. [1991 Code § 179-7]
§ 4-3.8. (Reserved)
§ 4-3.9. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 179-8; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
Committee at the next meeting for its consideration.
a. All operations of the licensee shall be confined wholly to the licensed premises. For
the purpose of this section, operations of the applicant shall be construed to include
not only the sale or dispensing of gas, oil, fuels or other services customarily
dispensed or furnished by the licensee, but also shall include and extend to those
vehicles, unaccompanied by a licensed driver, which are waiting to receive any
service from the licensee, and to the vehicles which have received such services
from the licensee but have not yet returned to the custody of the customer.
b. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit or make unlawful
the rendering of road service by the licensee to vehicles which, because of a
mechanical breakdown or other condition of such vehicle, are rendered unfit for
self-propulsion.
§ 4-3.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-4
4:10
§ 4-4. HOTELS, MOTELS AND MOTOR COURTS. [1991 Code §§ 165-3, 206-1
through 206-4; New; amended 4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-05]
§ 4-4.1. License Required.
No person shall own, operate or maintain a hotel, tourist camp, motel or motor lodge
or any other establishment, by whatsoever name designated, for the accommodation
and lodging of transients, without first having obtained license from the Township
Committee.
§ 4-4.2. Application for License. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
Application for such license, to be known as a "motor court license," shall be made to
the Township Committee in writing and shall specify the location and number of units to
be included therein and shall be accompanied by evidence that approval of the Board of
Health and Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code Enforcement,
including the Construction Bureau, of the Township has first been obtained.
§ 4-4.3. Fee.
The fees for the issuance of a motor court license shall be $40 per unit.
§ 4-4.4. Violations and Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 4-5. COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.22
§ 4-5.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
Definitions used in this section:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Shall mean, regardless of weight, any bus, step van,
cargo van, tow truck, dump truck, box truck, bulldozer, back-hoe, taxi, limousine, or
motor home; or any vehicle or trailer used for commercial purposes, regardless of
registration; or any vehicle displaying commercial advertising or external equipment.
§ 4-5.2. Application. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
Any resident seeking to park a commercial vehicle in a residential zone or on any
residential property located in any zone, and not in his or her private garage, must obtain
a commercial vehicle permit from the Township. The applicant shall be required to
complete a Township-approved application on file with the Township Clerk's office. The
application shall be accompanied by an application fee of $100. The application shall
be supported by the following documentation: (i) proof that the vehicle is registered in
a State of the United States; (ii) a photograph of the commercial vehicle; and (iii) proof
that the resident either owns or has the legal right to drive/utilize the commercial vehicle.
22. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 2010-21, 2011-27, 2014-13.
§ 4-4 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-5.3
4:11
§ 4-5.3. Notice. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
Upon receipt by the Township Clerk of a properly completed application, the Township
shall serve a form on each property owner located within 200 feet in all directions from
the applicant's property inquiring as to whether said property owner consents or objects
to grant of the application. All responses shall be considered personal information of the
respondent and remain confidential and not subject to disclosure.
§ 4-5.4. Review and Issuance of Application. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
Upon submission of the completed application and upon receiving all surrounding
property owner responses, and provided that all property owners consent, the applicant
shall be granted a commercial vehicle permit as discussed in Subsection 4-5.5 below.
If the Township Clerk finds that the applicant has failed to submit the documentation
required with the permit application, the Township Clerk shall deny such commercial
vehicle permit.
§ 4-5.5. Issuance of Permit. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
§ 4-5.6. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-20]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section or shall fail to comply with
any of the requirements hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty
stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 4-6. through § 4-7 (RESERVED)
§ 4-8. PEDDLING AND SOLICITING; NO KNOCK LIST.
§ 4-8.1. Regulation. [1991 Code §§ 165-3, 225-1; Ord. No. 2002-14; Ord. No.
02-23; Ord. No. 2010-12]
No person except as provided herein shall: canvas, solicit, peddle or hawk on the public
streets or highways or upon other public lands; call from house to house or from door
a. Upon approval of the applicant's permit by either the Township Clerk or Township
Committee, the applicant shall be required to pay a permit fee of $75 for the
issuance of a permit sticker. Each permit sticker is valid for a period of one year.
The permit may be renewed annually, no later than September 1, with a payment of
a fee of $75. The permit fee will be pro-rated for applicants that apply for a permit
after March 1. Said sticker must be permanently affixed to the front windshield of
the commercial vehicle and is not transferable to another vehicle or property. A new
permit application must be filed every five years and such application must meet
the requirements of all sections of this ordinance.
b. Only one commercial vehicle permit shall be issued for any property.
c. The enforcing entity of this section shall be the Township Zoning Officer or the
Director of the Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code
Enforcement. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
§ 4-5.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-8.1
4:12
to door soliciting money, selling, causing to be sold, offering for sale or taking orders
for present or future delivery of merchandise of any description whatsoever; or go from
door to door for the purpose of obtaining contributions, orders, subscriptions, making
canvasses or surveys, or other solicitation.
§ 4-8.2. Identification Card Required. [1991 Code §§ 165-3, 225-1, 225-2; Ord. No.
2002-14; Ord. No. 2010-12]
Except as hereafter provided, no person shall engage in any of the herein regulated
activities within the Township unless such person shall first obtain a license and
identification card.
§ 4-8.3. Application for Identification Card. [1991 Code §§ 165-3, 225-1; Ord. No.
2002-14; Ord. No. 2010-12]
Application for an identification card shall be made to the Township Clerk and shall
include sufficient information to establish each applicant's identification, including, but
not limited to driver's license number, social security number, current address and
telephone number. Such applicants shall also set forth the purpose of the solicitation,
any motor vehicle to be used in the solicitation, including license numbers, as well as
the hours of solicitation, duration of solicitation, including the date same shall begin and
end, and the complete name of the organization represented if any. The Township Clerk
shall issue an identification card for each person whose identity has been appropriately
established. The identification card shall be prominently displayed on front of the
outermost garment of the individual at all times when such person is engaging in any of
the herein regulated activities.
§ 4-8.4. Fees. [1991 Code §§ 165-3, 225-1; Ord. No. 2002-14; Ord. No. 2010-12]
If the organization for which the individual is soliciting is a nonprofit, civic, charitable,
religious or other such organization, the fee shall be $5 for each application, payable at
the time of application. Proof of nonprofit status may be required. For all other persons,
the fee shall be $25 for each application, payable at the time of application.
§ 4-8.5. Exemptions. [1991 Code § 225-2; Ord. No. 2002-14; Ord. No. 2002-20;
Ord. No. 2010-12]
Any persons representing organizations sponsored by the Township of Springfield;
candidates for election to any municipal, County, State or national office, candidates for
election to any board of election, and persons assisting such individuals for election;
and, any civic organization, while soliciting in uniform, are exempted from this section.
Also exempt are all persons engaged in religious proselytizing, political speech or the
distribution of political pamphlets.
§ 4-8.6. Waiver. [Ord. No. 2002-14; Ord. No. 2010-12]
Upon written request to the Township Committee, a waiver of the requirements and fees
set forth herein may be granted to any organization or person eligible for the $5 fee level,
if none of the organization's activities will take place door-to-door or house-to-house,
and all persons participating will wear identification badges from the organization.
Any such waiver request must include a comprehensive list of all persons who will be
§ 4-8.1 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-8.6
4:13
participating in the activity, a complete listing of all dates, times and locations for all
activities, and a statement that permission has been received by the organization from
any private business upon which the activities will be located.
§ 4-8.7. No Knock List. [Ord. No. 2010-12]
The Township Clerk shall maintain a "No Knock List," a copy of which shall be
provided to all persons or organizations required to register pursuant to this section.
All residents of the Township may register their name, address and/or unit/apartment
number with the Township Clerk to be placed on the "No Knock List," indicating that
they do not want persons so registered to approach their homes and/or seek personal
contact with the occupants of the registered home. Except for those persons,
organizations or entities exempted under Subsection 4-8.5 of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any peddler, panhandler or solicitor to approach or seek personal contact
with the occupants there if that residence is registered on the "No Knock List."
Registration on the "No Knock List" shall expire five calendar years following the end
of the calendar year of registration, unless renewed by notifying the Township Clerk
accordingly.
§ 4-8.8. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2002-14; Ord. No. 2010-12]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 4-9. USED MOTOR VEHICLES.
§ 4-9.1. Definitions. [1991 Code § 279-1]
As used in this section:
USED MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean every motor vehicle, title to or possession of
which has been transferred from the person who first acquired it from the manufacturer
or the manufacturer's dealer.
USED MOTOR VEHICLE DEALER — Shall mean a person engaged in the business
of selling, buying or dealing in used motor vehicles.
§ 4-9.2. License Required. [1991 Code § 279-2; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
No person shall engage in the business of selling, buying or dealing in used motor
vehicles within the Township unless such person shall first obtain a license to engage in
such business upon the premises described in such license.
§ 4-9.3. Application for License. [1991 Code § 279-3]
Application for a license shall be made in writing, addressed to the Township
Committee, on forms approved by it. It shall be signed by the applicant if an individual;
by a partner if a partnership; or if a corporation, by a duly authorized officer thereof.
The application shall contain the name of the applicant and the premises from which
the business is to be conducted, identifying the same by street number and by a specific
description, giving the dimensions thereof. The application shall be accompanied by the
licensee fee hereinafter prescribed and by a motor vehicle dealer's license issued by the
§ 4-8.6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-9.3
4:14
Motor Vehicles Commission.
§ 4-9.4. License Fee. [1991 Code §§ 279-4, 165-3; Ord. No. 93-2]
The annual fee, imposed for revenue purposes, shall be as follows:
Used car lot fee set by lot size
Less than 5,000 square feet $225
5,000 to 7,500 square feet $325
7,501 to 10,000 square feet $425
10,000 square feet and over $525
§ 4-9.5. Regulations. [1991 Code § 279-5; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(C)]
The license shall abide by and comply with the following regulations:
a. All the requirements of N.J.S.A. Title 39, as amended and supplemented, and all
statutory requirements with respect to the purchase, sale and transfer of motor
vehicles and the business of buying, selling or dealing in motor vehicles in this
State.
b. Establish and maintain, either upon the premises on which the licensed business is
conducted or upon premises adjacent thereto owned or controlled by such licensee,
a permanent building equipped with toilet facilities installed therein complying with
the provisions of the Sanitary and Plumbing Codes of the Township.
c. The surface of the premises on which the licensed business is conducted shall be
completely covered by a hard-surfaced pavement with adequate drainage facilities
to the street.
d. No motor vehicle shall be parked on such premises nearer than four feet to any
frame building.
e. No business shall be conducted on such premises between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m., and such premises shall be closed during such hours.
f. At all times maintain order within such premises; refrain from creating or allowing
undue noise therein; prevent smoke or dust from escaping from the premises so as
to constitute a public or private nuisance; and keep such premises in as neat and
orderly a condition as the nature of the business will allow.
g. Keep the license posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business maintained
as herein required.
h. All cars shall be parked wholly within the boundaries of the licensed premises. No
car shall be parked on a street frontage not declared in the application for which the
license is issued. No car shall be parked so as to encroach on or over the line of the
street. The boundaries of the licensed premises, other than the boundaries on the
declared street frontage, shall, where not otherwise clearly indicated, be marked
with a white line at least four inches in width or other appropriate indication, placed
in front of the setback or building line established by the ordinances of the
§ 4-9.3 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-9.5
4:15
§ 4-10. through § 4-11 (RESERVED)
§ 4-12. FIRE AND GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES.
§ 4-12.1. Definitions. [1991 Code § 238-1; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(C)]
As used in this section:
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALE — Shall mean a sale held out in such
manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods
damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.
GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE — Shall mean a sale held out in such manner
as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock or
goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited
to the following sales: adjuster's, adjustment, alteration, assignee's, bankrupt, benefit of
administrator's, benefit of creditor's, benefit of trustees, building coming down, closing,
creditor's committee, creditor's end, executor's final days, forced out, forced out of
business, insolvents, last days, lease expires, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale,
receivers, trustees, quitting business.
GOODS — Shall mean any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of
being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
REMOVAL-OF-BUSINESS SALE — Shall mean a sale held out in such manner as
to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease
and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock or the goods on
hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location or will then continue
business from other existing locations.
§ 4-12.2. License Required. [1991 Code § 238-2; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(C)]
Township.
a. A license issued by the Township Clerk, bearing a license number and the date on
which the license was issued, must be obtained by any person before selling or
offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be
one of the following kinds, as herein defined:
1. Going-out-of-business sale.
2. Removal-of-business sale.
3. Fire and other altered goods sale.
b. Established Business Requisite. Any person who has not been the owner of a
business advertised or described in the application for a license hereunder for a
period of at least six months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be
granted a license, provided that upon the death of a person doing business in the
Township, his or her heirs, devisees, legatees or representatives shall have the right
to apply at any time for a license hereunder.
c. Restricted Location. Where a person applying for a license hereunder operates more
§ 4-9.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-12.2
4:16
§ 4-12.3. Application for License; Fee. [1991 Code §§ 238-3, 165-3; Ord. No. 93-2;
Ord. No. 02-28 §§ I(A), (C)]
than one place of business, the license shall apply only to the one store or branch
specified in the application and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent
that it is cooperating with it or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall
the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other
store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed
sale.
a. Written Information. A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this section
shall make a written application under oath to the Township Clerk, setting forth and
containing the following information:
1. The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be sold.
2. A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
3. The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective
date of termination of such occupancy.
4. The dates of the period of time, not in excess of 30 days, in which the sale is
to be conducted.
5. A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the
reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the
manner in which the sale will be conducted.
6. The means to be employed in advertising such sale, together with the proposed
content of any advertisement.
7. A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale as
disclosed by applicant's records. The inventory shall contain a clear
description of each item to be sold, with the brand name, if any, total number
of each item to be sold and the date each item was purchased, with invoice
numbers for each item, the name of the person from whom purchased or, if not
purchased, the manner of such acquisition. The inventory shall be attached to
and become a part of the application required under this section. The inventory
shall be signed by the person applying for the license or by an authorized
agent, and by affidavit at the foot thereof the applicant or such agent shall
swear or affirm that the information therein given is full, complete and true
and is known by such affiant to be full, complete and true. No goods other than
those listed in the inventory herein provided for shall be advertised or sold at
any sale for which a license is hereby required, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to sell, offer or expose for sale or advertise for such sale or to list on
such inventory any goods which are not the regular stock on hand at the store,
the goods of which are to be closed out or disposed of through such sale, or to
supplement or to make any replenishments or additions from any
manufacturer, jobber, wholesaler, warehouse, storage building or from any
other premises or from any source whatsoever and, during the time thereof, to
advertise or represent the sale as being of the character for which a license is
hereby required. All goods included in the inventory shall have been
§ 4-12.2 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-12.3
4:17
§ 4-12.4. License Restrictions. [1991 Code § 238-4; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(C)]
§ 4-12.5. Surrender of License. [1991 Code § 238-5; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(C)]
Upon being issued a license hereunder for a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall
surrender to the Township Clerk all other business licenses he may hold at that time
applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this
section.
§ 4-12.6. Nontransferability. [1991 Code § 238-6]
No license herein provided for shall be assignable or transferable.
§ 4-12.7. Inspection by Township Clerk. [1991 Code § 238-7; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(A), (C)]
The Township Clerk, or a designee, may verify the details of any inventory filed, for
purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation
privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. The
inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of or for the
purpose of conducting any sale regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase or
additions to the stock of goods of the applicant made within 60 days before the
filing of an application hereunder shall be deemed to be of such character.
b. Record of Applications and Licenses. All applications for license shall be kept on
file by the Township Clerk and a record shall be kept by him of all licenses issued
upon such applications.
c. License Fee. Any applicant for a license hereunder shall submit to the Township
Clerk, with the application for license, a license, fee of $50, or a renewal fee of $25.
a. License Period and Renewal Procedure. The license shall authorize the sale
described in the application for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days,
Sundays and legal holidays excepted, following the issuance thereof. The Township
Clerk may renew a license for one period of time only, such period to be in addition
to the 30 days permitted in the original license and not to exceed 30 consecutive
days, Sundays and holidays excepted, when the Township Clerk finds that facts
exist justifying the license renewal; that the licensee has filed a written application
for the renewal; that the licensee has submitted, with the application for renewal, a
revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining
unsold and not listing any goods not included in the original application and
inventory. For the purposes of this section, any application for a license under the
provisions of this section covering goods previously inventoried as required
hereunder shall be deemed to be an application for renewal, whether presented by
the original applicant or by any other person.
b. Nature of Sale. The license shall authorize only one type of sale described in the
application at the location named herein.
c. Salable Goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the
inventory attached to the application.
§ 4-12.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-12.7
4:18
the purpose of determining the correctness of the same, before issuing a going-out-ofbusiness
sale license or such person may check and verify the items of merchandise sold
during the sale, and it shall be unlawful for any person to whom such license has been
issued to fail or refuse to give the Township Clerk or such designee for that purpose
all the facts connected with the stock on hand or the proper information respecting
goods sold or any other information that may be required in order to make a thorough
investigation of all phases connected with the sale.
§ 4-12.8. (Reserved)
§ 4-12.9. Duties of Licensee. [1991 Code § 238-8; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(C)]
A licensee hereunder shall:
§ 4-12.10. Persons Exempted. [1991 Code § 238-9]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect persons acting pursuant to
an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; persons acting in accordance
with their powers and duties as public officials; duly licensed auctioneers selling at
auction; any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who in good
faith publishes any advertisement without actual knowledge of its false, deceptive or
misleading character or without actual knowledge that the provisions of this section have
not been complied with.
§ 4-13. GARAGE SALES.
a. Adhere to inventory; make no additions whatsoever during the period of the
licensed sale to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the
application for license.
b. Advertise properly; refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading
advertising; and in any advertisement by handbills, circulars, placards, signs,
notices, newspapers or publications or other advertising, include therein the number
and date of the license issued by the Township Clerk.
c. Adhere to advertising; conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any
advertising or holding out incident thereto.
d. Keep a duplicate inventory; keep available at the place of sale a duplicate of the
inventory submitted with the application and present the same to inspecting
officials upon request.
e. Segregate non-inventoried goods; keep any other goods separate and apart from the
goods for sale and make such distinction clear to the public.
f. Cease Business at the Conclusion of the Sale. The licensee of a going-out-ofbusiness
sale shall not continue the business beyond the date specified for the sale
and shall not, upon conclusion of the sale, continue the business under the same
name or under a different name in the same location or elsewhere in the Township.
§ 4-12.7 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-13.1
4:19
§ 4-13.1. Definitions. [1991 Code § 238-10]
As used in this section:
GARAGE SALE — Shall mean the casual sale of items of tangible personal property
from premises used principally for residential purposes and located in a residential zone
as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Springfield, and shall include
sales commonly known as "garage sales," "attic sales," "rummage sales" and any similar
casual sale of tangible personal property.
§ 4-13.2. Compliance Required. [1991 Code § 238-11]
Except as may be provided herein, no person shall conduct, operate or allow operation
of a garage sale at or on premises owned, rented by or under the control of such persons.
§ 4-13.3. Application for Permit; Fee. [1991 Code §§ 238-12, 165-3; Ord. No. 93-2;
Ord. No. 95-19A; Ord. No. 2007-25 § I(D)]
Any person desiring to conduct a garage sale in the Township must file with the
Township Clerk an application for a garage sale permit. The fee for such permit shall be
$10.
§ 4-13.4. Permits Available Per Year. [1991 Code § 238-13]
The permit shall be issued for any residence only twice within a twelve-month period.
§ 4-13.5. Display of Permit. [1991 Code § 238-14]
Each permit issued under this section must be prominently displayed on the premises
upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the sale.
§ 4-13.6. Contents of Application. [1991 Code § 238-15]
§ 4-13.7. Days and Hours of Sale. [1991 Code § 238-16]
All garage sales shall be limited to two days' duration, and all garage sales shall be
conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. only.
a. The application for the permit shall include the following:
1. Name of the person conducting the sale.
2. Name of the owner of the property on which the sale is to be conducted.
3. Street address and apartment number, if any, of the location at which the
garage sale is to be conducted.
4. Date or dates of sale.
5. Date of any past garage sales, if any.
b. Intentional misstatements in the application shall be a violation of this section.
§ 4-13.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-13.8
4:20
§ 4-13.8. Signs. [1991 Code §§ 238-17, 165-3; Ord. No. 93-2]
All persons are prohibited from erecting signs other than those signs provided by the
Township. The signs shall be made available by the Township and shall be uniform in
size and form 12 inches by 12 inches, and must be purchased from the Township for a
fee of $1. The signs shall have a space allotted thereon upon which shall be placed the
name and address of the person running the sale, and the signs shall be removed within
24 hours after completion of the sale.
§ 4-13.9. Exceptions. [1991 Code § 238-18]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following persons, parties
or sales:
§ 4-13.10. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 238-19]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 4-14. CHRISTMAS TREE SALES.
§ 4-14.1. Purpose. [1991 Code § 147-1; Ord. No. 91-25]
It is the purpose of this section to provide a procedure by which persons may be
allowed to sell and store Christmas and other cut evergreens on a temporary basis
during the pre-Christmas season and to provide for adequate control over such temporary
establishments in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to make
provision for proper cleanup after the cessation of such temporary operation.
§ 4-14.2. License Required. [1991 Code § 147-2; Ord. No. 91-25]
No individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity shall engage in or carry
on the business of sale or storage of cut evergreens on a temporary basis without first
obtaining a license for that purpose from the Zoning Officer. This section shall not
apply to nursery and commercial greenhouse uses. It is the intention of this section that
licenses shall only be required for the sale or storage of cut evergreens on a temporary
basis on premises which are not normally devoted to that use or a related-type use.
The obtaining of a license pursuant to this section shall not relieve the applicant of its
obligation to obtain any other required permits, including electrical, from the appropriate
governmental agency.
a. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
b. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.
c. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal property
which are specifically named or described in the advertisement and which separate
items do not exceed five in number.
§ 4-13.8 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-14.3
4:21
§ 4-14.3. Applications for Licenses. [1991 Code § 147-3; Ord. No. 91-25]
All applicants shall provide the Zoning Officer with a survey of the property showing
the area from which the trees are to be sold, shall state the full name and address of the
applicant and, if a partnership, corporation or other legal entity, the names and addresses
of all partners, officers, directors or shareholders as may be applicable to the particular
legal entity, the maximum number of trees proposed to be stored at any one time and
a description of any and all articles proposed to be sold at the location. Each applicant
shall provide a written consent from the owner of the property.
§ 4-14.4. Grounds for Denial of Application. [1991 Code § 148-4; Ord. No. 91-25]
§ 4-14.5. Fees. [1991 Code § 147-5; Ord. No. 91-25]
The applicant shall, at the time of the filing of the application, pay a permit fee of $100.
In addition, upon issuance of a permit, the applicant shall deposit with the Zoning Officer
the sum of $150 to guarantee the removal and cleanup of any rubbish, including signs,
trash and debris left on the property or in the vicinity thereof, after termination of the
license. In the event that cleanup by the applicant or the owner is not completed by
January 1 of the year following the year the license is issued, the applicant/licensee shall
forfeit the deposit of $150, and the applicant/licensee, as well as the property owner,
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this section. However, notwithstanding
anything to the contrary herein, if the applicant has a nonprofit, charitable organization
designation by the Internal Revenue Service, the permit fee shall be waived.
§ 4-14.6. Term and Expiration of License. [1991 Code § 147-6; Ord. No. 91-25]
No license shall be issued for a period longer than 61 days, and all licenses shall expire
on December 31 of the year in which issued.
§ 4-14.7. Location Restrictions. [1991 Code § 147-7; Ord. No. 91-25]
a. The Zoning Officer may deny the application or cause the revocation of any license
for any of the following reasons:
1. That the location and use of the property covered by the application does not
conform to all applicable ordinances of the Township, including this section.
2. That the applicant or property owner has failed to comply with the provisions
of this section in prior years.
3. That the operation of the enterprise is likely to adversely affect the public
health, safety or welfare.
4. That the proposed use on the property in question is likely to create a nuisance
to nearby property owners and tenants.
b. Temporary structures or occupiable and habitable trailers shall be required to be
provided with suitable protection and fire-suppression devices as deemed necessary
by the Fire Department. Sleeping in trailers is not allowed.
a. No trees or cut evergreens shall be stored within 50 feet of any frame structure
§ 4-14.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-14.7
4:22
§ 4-14.8. Appeals. [1991 Code § 147-8; Ord. No. 91-25]
§ 4-14.9. Enforcement. [1991 Code § 147-9; Ord. No. 91-25]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer.
§ 4-14.10. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 147-10; Ord. No. 91-25]
Any applicant or property owner who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 4-15. through § 4-18 (RESERVED)
located on adjoining property not owned by the licensee or property owner on
which sale or storage is being conducted. No trees shall be sold from a residential
zone.
b. No trees or cut evergreens shall be placed upon any sidewalk or area designated as
a fire lane.
c. No trees or cut evergreens more than two feet high are to be placed upon that
portion of a corner lot which is closest to the intersection of the bounding street
lines to a straight line drawn between the two points measured 15 feet along each
such street line from the intersection of those two street lines.
d. No trees or cut evergreens shall be stored or sold on which there is residential use
as a principal, mixed accessory use.
e. The sale and storage of poinsettias, as well as plant trees or shrubs other than
evergreens and cut evergreens, are not governed by this section.
f. Off-street parking for at least five vehicles shall be maintained.
g. Only one sign shall be permitted on the site, and the sign shall not exceed 10 square
feet in area. No sign shall be of a type that flashes, rotates or moves or which
incorporates moving components. Such signs and their supports shall be at least 10
feet from the building or structure and 10 feet from any side rear lot line and shall
be located back from the side line a distance equal to not less than the height of the
sign above the ground. No sign shall be on the State or County right-of-way.
Electrical permits shall be obtained and inspections requested.
a. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Officer in reference to the
issuance, nonissuance or revocation of a license may appeal such decision to the
Township Committee by notifying the Township Clerk of the intent to appeal
within 10 days of the applicant's receipt of the Zoning Officer's decision.
b. However, any sales during the appeal period shall be expressly prohibited. The
Township Committee will then schedule a hearing on such appeal, at which time
the applicant may present evidence to establish the ground for the appeal. The
appeal shall be decided by a majority vote of the Township Committee, and the
decision shall be final.
§ 4-14.7 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-19
4:23
§ 4-19. BINGO AND RAFFLES.
§ 4-19.1. Purpose; Administration. [1991 Code § 138-1; Ord. No. 2012-03;
amended 4-24-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
§ 4-19.2. Regulations. [1991 Code § 138-2; Ord. No. 99-21 § 1[A]; Ord. No. 02-19;
Ord. No. 2012-03]
§ 4-19.3. Bingo and Raffle License Fees. [Ord. No. 95-19A; Ord. No. 99-21 § 1[B];
Ord. No. 06-24 § I(B); Ord. No. 2012-03]
The following local fees shall be paid, in addition to State fees collected pursuant to
statute and administrative rule.
Bingo (per occasion) $20
On-premises draw raffle (total prize value
exceeding $400)
$20
Off-premises draw raffle (per $1,000 or
part)(awarding merchandise prize)
$20
a. The provisions of the Statutes known as the "Bingo Licensing Law," N.J.S.A.
5:8-24 et seq., and the "Raffles Licensing Law," N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq., and the
amendments thereof and supplements thereto, are hereby adopted and are operative
within the Township and shall govern the licensing, holding, conduct and operation
of specific kinds of games of chance as are defined and restricted in such Statutes.
b. The Municipal Clerk is authorized to approve and deny bingo and raffle license
applications, and to approve or deny amendments to such issued licenses. All other
duties and responsibilities vested in the Township Committee and the Municipal
Clerk shall remain as set forth in the Bingo Licensing Law, Raffles Licensing Law
and applicable regulations.
a. Organizations Eligible for License. No license to conduct a game of chance as
authorized by law shall be issued to any organization not having a bona fide situs
established in good faith within the State of New Jersey and actively engaged in
serving one or more of the authorized purposes as defined by the Rules and
Regulations of the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
b. Games of Chance During Elections Prohibited. No game of chance shall be
conducted under any license at any time during which a general, municipal, primary
or special election or board of education election is being held, while the polls are
open for voting at the election.
c. Compliance With Statute. Licenses shall at all times be governed by and comply
with the Statutes, rules and regulations referred to in Subsection 14-19.1.
d. Sunday Games of Chance. Any organization duly licensed to hold and operate
legalized games of chance under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq. is authorized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-31 and N.J.S.A.
5:8-58 to hold, conduct and operate games of chance in the Township on Sundays.
§ 4-19 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-19.3
4:24
Off-premises cash raffle
Application fee $20
Prize fee (per $1,000 or part) $20
All other licenses In an amount equal to the fees payable to
New Jersey
Fingerprinting (local administrative fee) $20
§ 4-20. AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
§ 4-20.1. Definitions. [1991 Code § 130-1]
As used in this section:
AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT MACHINE OR DEVICE — Shall mean any
machine, contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate,
disk or key into a slot, crevice or other opening, may be operated by the public generally
for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score, and
shall include, without limitation, such devices as marble machines, pinball machines,
skill ball, mechanical games or video games, bagatelle, mack tables, Ballyho devices,
high score tables and any and all operations, transactions or mechanical devices similar
thereto by whatever name they may be called.
LICENSED PREMISES — Shall mean the entire premises, including, without
limitation, all buildings, auxiliary buildings, structures, appurtenant structures, walks,
alleys, drives and parking facilities, owned or controlled by the operator or owneroperator.
NET FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the gross floor area of the licensee's premises less
deductions for counter space areas, storage areas, shelving areas, aisle areas, bathrooms,
areas of ingress or egress, office space and other areas which are not intended or held out
for public use. The Construction Code Official shall determine the maximum number of
square feet in each prospective licensed premises subject to this section.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or any other business entity which owns or controls a premises or a location
within the Township in which any amusement or entertainment machine or device is
displayed for public patronage or is placed or kept for operation by the public.
§ 4-20.2. Additional Machines. [1991 Code § 130-2]
a. No additional machine is to be placed on any premises, other than the numbered
licensed machines, until such additional machine has been approved and licensed
in the office of the Township Clerk.
b. Any person, firm, association, club or corporation violating the provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 for
each machine not licensed.
c. If a second offense occurs in the same establishment, the license of that
establishment shall be revoked for a period of one year.
§ 4-19.3 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-20.3
4:25
§ 4-20.3. License Fee. [1991 Code §§ 130-3, 165-3; Ord. No. 93-2]
An annual license fee of $250 shall be charged for each coin-operated amusement device
or game of similar nature as defined in Subsection 4-20.1. The license, when issued, is
to be displayed under glass in a visible place in the establishment.
§ 4-20.4. Payment of Fee; Licensing Period. [1991 Code § 130-4]
The license fee shall be paid at the time when the application is made to the Township
Clerk. All licenses shall run for a period of one year from January 1 through December
31.
§ 4-20.5. Ownership of Licensed Devices. [1991 Code § 130-5]
Upon making application for the license, each applicant shall give in writing to the
Township Clerk the name and address of the person, firm or corporation who owns the
coin-operated amusement device set forth in this section, and if during the term of the
license the ownership of such licensed device is changed, the licensee shall forthwith
furnish the Township Clerk with the name and address of the new owner.
§ 4-20.6. Operation by Certain Minors. [1991 Code § 130-6]
Any person who shall knowingly permit a person under the age of 16 years to play or
operate any of the machines or devices licensed under this section during the school
hours on any weekday that the Township public schools are in session shall be guilty of
a violation of this section and punishable therefor as herein provided.
§ 4-20.7. Number of Machines Limited by Floor Area. [1991 Code § 130-7]
There shall be permitted not more than one amusement or entertainment machine or
device as defined in this section for each 100 square feet of net floor area as the same
is defined herein, provided that under no circumstances shall a number of machines be
permitted that shall exceed 30% of the net floor area of the licensed premises as defined
herein. The Construction Code Official shall determine the maximum number of square
feet in each prospective licensed premises which is subject to this section.
§ 4-20.8. License Required; Application. [1991 Code § 130-8]
No licensee of amusement or entertainment machines or devices shall operate or cause
to be operated any such machine or device within the Township without first having
obtained from the Township Clerk a license so to operate.
a. Application for the license shall state the following:
1. The name, date and place of birth, home address and business address, home
telephone number and business address and telephone number of the applicant
and each of its stockholders, officers and directors holding in excess of 10%
of its stock.
2. The name and address of the registered agent of the applicant or person upon
whom service of process is authorized to be made.
§ 4-20.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-20.8
4:26
§ 4-20.9. (Reserved)
§ 4-20.10. Revocation of License. [1991 Code § 130-9]
Every license issued hereunder is subject to revocation by the Township Clerk should
the licensed operator distribute or operate any amusement or entertainment machine
or device contrary to the provisions of this section or any other law, ordinance, rule
or regulation or fail to cooperate fully with any enforcement officer or agency. Any
material misstatements or omission in the license application or in any information
submitted therewith or the failure to notify in writing the Township Clerk of any changes
by addition or deletion or amendment to the application or information during the term
of any license or renewal shall constitute sufficient ground for revocation of the license
by the Township Clerk.
§ 4-20.11. Impoundment of Machine. [1991 Code § 130-10]
If the Chief of the Township of Springfield Police Department shall have probable
cause to believe any amusement or entertainment machine or device is being used for
gambling, such machine or device may be temporarily seized by the Police Department
and impounded and may be considered as contraband by law.
§ 4-20.12. Purpose. [1991 Code § 130-11]
This section is enacted for the purpose of raising revenue and for the regulation and
3. The name, date and place of birth, home address and home telephone number
of the manager or other authorized agent of the applicant who shall be in
charge of or conduct the business of the applicant within the Township.
4. The type, manufacturer, serial number and precise location of each amusement
or entertainment machine or device sought to be operated.
5. If the applicant is a corporation, there shall be included a corporate resolution
in proper form authorizing the execution of the license application on behalf
of the corporation.
b. The application shall contain a certification under oath, made by the applicant or its
authorized representative, that the information contained in the application and all
attachments thereto is complete, accurate and truthful to the best of his knowledge
and belief.
c. The application must contain the total number of square feet to which the applicant
customarily invites or permits the public to occupy and use, but shall not include
any area used for storage, office, kitchen, counter space, walks, alleys, drives,
parking facilities or such other areas to which the public has no access.
d. A sketch or plan of the proposed licensed premises shall be attached to the
application.
e. The application must be accompanied by a certification from the Fire Department
that the premises occupancy load has been calculated and posted in accord with the
State Uniform Construction Code.
§ 4-20.8 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-20.12
4:27
control of coin-operated amusement devices to promote safety by preventing
overcrowding and ensuring conformity with fire regulations and to prevent truancy
among school-aged minors.
§ 4-20.13. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 130-12; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, other than Subsection 4-20.2,
shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 4-21. NEWSRACKS.
§ 4-21.1. Findings and Declaration. [1991 Code § 209-1]
The Governing Body of the Township hereby finds and declares that:
§ 4-21.2. Purpose. [1991 Code § 209-2]
The purpose of this section is to provide definite and narrowly drawn regulations
governing newsracks placed on the public sidewalks, rights-of-way or in other public
areas, which regulations further the Township's interest in protecting the health, safety,
welfare and convenience of pedestrians, motorists, residents and businesses and in
ensuring the proper cleaning and maintenance of sidewalks, curbs, streets and various
signs and utilities and in preserving the aesthetic beauty of the Township.
§ 4-21.3. Definitions. [1991 Code § 209-3]
As used in this section:
a. Coin-operated newsracks have been installed by various newspaper distribution
businesses at locations throughout the Township on public sidewalks or in the rightof-
way of public roadways, and in recent years the number of such newsracks has
increased significantly.
b. While such newsracks do provide residents of the Township and others with
convenient access to local, regional and national newspapers, the manner in which
newsracks are constructed, maintained, operated, located and attached or fastened
has interfered and can interfere with the health, safety, welfare and convenience of
pedestrians, motorists, residents and businesses and with the proper cleaning,
servicing and maintenance of sidewalks, curbs, streets and various signs and
utilities and with the aesthetic beauty of the Township.
c. Unless regulations are adopted governing the construction, maintenance, operation
and location of newsracks and the manner in which newsracks are attached or
fastened, such newsracks will interfere with the health, safety, welfare and
convenience of pedestrians, motorists, residents and businesses and with the proper
cleaning, servicing and maintenance of sidewalks, curbs, streets and various signs
and utilities and will detract from the aesthetic beauty of the Township.
d. The public interest, therefore, requires the enactment of reasonable regulations
governing the construction, placement and maintenance of newsracks which
provide ample alternative channels for communication and appropriate procedural
safeguards.
§ 4-20.12 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-21.3
4:28
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Shall mean the Township Code Official.
EXISTING NEWSRACK — Shall mean any newsrack located in a public area on the
effective date of this section.
NEWSRACK—Shall mean any machine, box or vending device into which newspapers
or news periodicals are placed for distribution or sale, and includes coin-operated
machines as well as machines or boxes which permit removal of newspapers or news
periodicals without charge.
PERMIT REVIEW COMMITTEE — Shall mean a committee composed of the
Township Engineer, the Township Administrator and the Chief of Police, established
pursuant to Subsection 4-21.4.
PUBLIC AREA — Shall mean:
ROADWAY—Shall mean that portion of the public street upon which vehicular traffic
passes or parks.
§ 4-21.4. Creation of Permit Review Committee. [1991 Code § 209-4]
There is hereby established a Permit Review Committee to hear appeals from decisions
of the Administrative Officer as provided in Subsection 4-21.11. The Permit Review
Committee shall consist of the Township Engineer, the Township Administrator and the
Chief of Police, all of whom shall be voting members of the Committee.
§ 4-21.5. Regulation of Newsracks. [1991 Code § 209-5]
a. The public sidewalk;
b. The right-of-way for any public street or highway;
c. Any public park, playground, trail, path or other recreational area;
d. The site of a public school or other public building and structure; or
e. Other public open spaces.
a. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which projects onto, into or
over any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests, wholly or in part,
upon or over any portion of a roadway.
b. No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests
upon, in or over any sidewalk or public area when such installation, use or
maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, unreasonably interferes
with or impedes the flow or visibility of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the ingress
into or egress from any residence, place of business or any legally parked or stopped
vehicle or unreasonably interferes with the removal of snow, ice, leaves or debris.
c. Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public area shall
comply with the following standards:
1. No newsrack shall exceed five feet in height, 30 inches in width and two feet
in depth.
§ 4-21.3 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-21.5
4:29
2. Newsracks located on sidewalks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent
to the wall of a building. If no building is located at the edge of the sidewalk
opposite the curb, then any newsrack not placed near a curb shall be placed
near the opposite edge of the sidewalk. Newsracks placed near the curb shall
be placed no less than 18 inches from the edge of the curb. Newsracks placed
adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not
more than six inches from the wall. No newsrack shall be placed or maintained
on a sidewalk opposite another newsrack unless such placement permits a
passageway for pedestrians of at least three feet.
3. Newsracks may be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property not
owned by the owner of the newsrack or to any permanently fixed object,
provided that the owner of the property or fixed object does not object to such
attachment.
4. Newsracks may be chained or otherwise attached to one another; however, no
more than three newsracks may be joined together in this manner along any
curb, and a space of no less than 18 inches shall separate each group of three
newsracks so attached.
5. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(a) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
(b) Within 15 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
(c) Within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.
(d) Within three feet of any public telephone, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
(e) Within five feet of any driveway.
(f) Along any curb immediately adjacent to any designated bus stop unless
such newsrack is located 15 feet or more to the rear of any sign marking
the designated bus stop or such newsrack is located adjacent to a bus
shelter located at any such bus stop; or along any curb immediately
adjacent to any place marked for handicapped parking.
(g) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than three feet.
(h) Within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the
sidewalk or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable
use of such window for display purpose.
6. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other
than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or news
periodicals sold therein.
7. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and shall be
in good repair and operational at all times.
d. Each person who places or maintains a newsrack in a public area in the Township
§ 4-21.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-21.5
4:30
§ 4-21.6. Permit for Placement of Newsracks. [1991 Code § 209-6]
§ 4-21.7. Application of Section to Existing Newsracks. [1991 Code § 209-7]
§ 4-21.8. Newsracks on Which Application for Permit is Pending. [1991 Code
§ 209-8]
Any newsrack for which an application for a permit has been made shall be allowed to
remain in its present location pending a decision by the Administrative Officer on the
permit application. If the Administrative Officer denies the application, the newsrack
shall be removed pursuant to Subsection 4-21.10a, unless an appeal is taken from that
decision. (See Subsection 4-21.10b.) In the event an appeal is taken and the Permit
Review Committee affirms the denial of the permit, the newsrack shall be removed
pursuant to Subsection 4-21.10b.
shall have his name, address and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where
such information may be easily seen.
a. No newsrack shall be placed in any public area unless an application for a permit
has been made to the Administrative Officer. The Administrative Officer shall issue
the permit, provided that the newsrack complies with the provisions of this section.
b. All applications for newsrack permits shall be made on forms provided by the
Administrative Officer. The application shall identify the owner of the newsrack,
the location at which and manner in which the newsrack will be or has been placed
and any other information necessary to evaluate the application against the
requirements of this section.
c. The application shall be filed with the Township Clerk, who shall forward the
application to the Administrative Officer, who shall issue or deny the permit within
10 days of the filing date of the application. If the Administrative Officer fails to
act within 10 days of the filing date of the application, the application shall be
deemed to have been approved and the permit issued. If the Administrative Officer
denies the permit, he shall so inform the applicant in writing, stating the reasons for
that denial. The applicant shall be entitled to a hearing pursuant to Subsection
4-21.10 if he so requests one in writing within seven days of mailing of the
notification of denial of the permit.
d. A permit for a particular newsrack shall terminate if the newsrack is removed by
the owner, except that the permit shall continue in effect if the newsrack is replaced
within five days by the owner with another conforming newsrack at the same
location.
a. This section shall apply to all existing newsracks located in any public area as of
the section's effective date. An application for a permit for each such existing
newsrack shall be made within 20 days of the effective date of the section and shall
be processed in the manner provided in Subsection 4-21.6b and c.
b. Any existing newsrack for which an application for a permit has not been made
within the time provided in Subsection a, above shall be removed pursuant to
Subsection 4-21.10a.
§ 4-21.5 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-21.9
4:31
§ 4-21.9. Revocation of Permits. [1991 Code § 209-9]
§ 4-21.10. Removal of Newsracks. [1991 Code § 209-10]
a. A permit for a newsrack may be revoked for one or more of the following causes:
1. Whenever the application submitted in obtaining the permit is found to be false
or intentionally misleading.
2. Whenever any of the provisions of this section are violated.
3. Whenever the permittee maintains the newsrack at a location other than that
specified in the application.
4. Whenever the newsrack has not been utilized by the permittee for a period of
20 consecutive days.
b. No permit shall be revoked without first providing the owner with written
notification of the intent to revoke the permit, which notification shall state the
specific violation and, if for the cause provided in Subsections a2 or 3, the
notification shall also state that the owner has five days in which to correct the
violation or, in the case of Subsection a4, to resume the use of the newsrack. The
written notification shall be served either personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. Any permittee shall be entitled to a hearing pursuant to
Subsection 4-21.11 if he so requests one in writing within five days of mailing of
the notification of intent to revoke the permit. A request for a hearing shall stay the
revocation of the permit, pending the outcome of the hearing.
a. Any existing newsrack located in or near a newsrack placed in a public area as of
or after the effective date of this section, for which an application for a permit has
not been made as required by Subsection 4-21.7a or for which such a permit has
been denied and no appeal has been taken therefrom, shall be promptly removed. If
an appeal has been taken and the decision of the Administrative Officer denying the
permit is affirmed by the Permit Review Committee, the newsrack shall be
promptly removed upon notification of the Committee's decision. If the owner of
the newsrack fails to remove the newsrack within 25 days from the effective date
of this section where no permit application has been filed, or within five days of
notification of denial of a permit or of notification of the Permit Review
Committee's affirmance of the denial of the permit, as the case may be, the
Administrative Officer shall cause the newsrack to be removed and stored at the
owner's expense. The newsrack will be returned to the owner only upon payment of
the cost of removal and storage.
b. In the event that a permit is revoked, the permittee shall promptly remove the
newsrack. If the permittee fails to remove the newsrack within five days from the
effective date of the revocation of the permit, the Administrative Officer shall cause
the newsrack to be returned to the permittee only upon payment of the cost of
removal and storage.
c. In the event that, in the determination of the Administrative Officer or any
Township official responsible for responding to an emergency situation, a newsrack
presents a clear danger of imminent harm to persons or property or interferes with
§ 4-21.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-21.10
4:32
§ 4-21.11. Appeal Procedures. [1991 Code § 209-11]
§ 4-21.12. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 209-12; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
the performance of his duties, the Administrative Officer or official shall
immediately cause the newsrack to be removed and shall inform the permittee of
the removal and the reason therefor. The newsrack may be returned to its location
as soon as the immediate danger has been eliminated. If the Administrative Officer
determines that the danger was created by the permittee or by a condition of the
newsrack, the permittee shall pay the costs of removal, storage and return of the
newsrack. The determination of the Administrative Officer shall be appealable
under the provisions of Subsection 4-21.11 by written request for a hearing within
five days of mailing by the Administrative Officer of a written demand for payment
of the costs of removal, storage and replacement, which demand shall be served by
personal service or certified mail.
a. An applicant for a permit or any permittee may appeal from any determination of
the Administrative Officer within the time provided in this section by filing with
the Administrative Officer a written request for a hearing. Failure to request a
hearing within the time permitted shall render the decision of the Administrative
Officer final.
b. An appeal shall stay all proceedings or actions in furtherance of the Administrative
Officer's decision from which the appeal arises.
c. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Administrative Officer shall promptly
forward to the Permit Review Committee the application, all documents or other
evidence upon which the Administrative Officer relied in making his determination
and a written explanation of the reasons for his decision. Within 15 days from the
date the request for a hearing was made, the Permit Review Committee shall hold a
hearing. The applicant or permittee shall be notified of the hearing date at least
seven days in advance. At least five days prior to the hearing date, the applicant or
permittee shall be provided with a copy of all documents and materials provided to
the Committee by the Administrative Officer upon payment of statutory copying
costs plus postage and fees.
d. At the hearing conducted by the Permit Review Committee, the applicant or
permittee shall have the right to call witnesses, present evidence and cross-examine
any witnesses who appear before the Committee, including the Administrative
Officer. The applicant or permittee shall have the burden of demonstrating that the
decision appealed from was incorrect. The Committee shall issue a written decision
affirming, reversing or modifying the decision of the Administrative Officer within
three days of the completion of the hearing.
e. An appeal from the decision of the Committee shall be to the Superior Court of
New Jersey, as provided by the rules of that Court. Such an appeal shall stay all
proceedings or actions in furtherance of the Committee's decision, unless the
Administrative Officer certifies that, by reason of facts stated in the certification, a
stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
§ 4-21.10 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-21.12
4:33
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 4-22. FARMER'S MARKET.
§ 4-22.1. License Required. [Ord. No. 2000-02 § 4-22.1; Ord. No. 2010-13]
Except as may be provided herein, no person shall conduct, operate or allow operation
of a Farmer's Market upon public property within the Township.
§ 4-22.2. Regulations. [Ord. No. 2000-02 § 4-22.2; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A); Ord. No.
03-09 § I; Ord. No. 2010-13]
a. The Township of Springfield Farmer's Market will begin on the first Sunday
following Independence Day and conclude on the last Sunday in October in each
year, on a day designated by resolution of the Township Committee.
b. The hours of operation shall be from 12:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m., or as designated by
resolution of the Township Committee.
c. Items to be sold include fruits and vegetables, fresh flowers, cut flowers, cheese and
other dairy product, jams and jellies, pickled products and baked goods. "Jersey
Fresh" fruits and vegetables are preferred.
d. The Township of Springfield Farmer's Market shall be located on a designated
portion of the parking lot at the Jonathan Dayton High School, or at such other
location as designated by resolution of the Township Committee.
e. All vendors in the Township of Springfield Farmer's Market must comply with all
local, County and State regulations, including but not limited to Health Code,
Building Code and Zoning Ordinance.
f. All vendors in the Township of Springfield Farmer's Market shall be jointly and
severally liable for appropriate collection, removal and disposal of all trash, garbage
and other items brought onto or generated at the site.
g. Should the Police Chief or a designee determine that public safety requires the
presence of a Police Officer for traffic or other duties, the vendors in the Township
of Springfield Farmer's Market shall be jointly and severally liable and responsible
for obtaining the services of a Township Police Officer pursuant to regulations
concerning outside jobs, and for the payment of the cost thereof.
h. Vendors, by accepting a license, agree to indemnify, defend, protect and hold
harmless the Township, its officers, agents and employees, and the Springfield
Board of Education, from and against any and all claims, demands, losses, damages,
liabilities, fines, charges, penalties and judgments, and all costs and expenses
incurred in connection therewith, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of
defense directly or proximately resulting from the actions of the participant.
i. Vendors shall obtain and maintain at all times during the term of the license
commercial general liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000 per
occurrence (combined single limit), including bodily injury and property damage,
which insurance shall not be canceled or reduced upon less than 30 days' advance
§ 4-21.12 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-22.2
4:34
§ 4-22.3. Application; Other Requirements. [Ord. No. 2000-02 § 4-22.3; Ord. No.
2010-13]
§ 4-22.4. Fees. [Ord. No. 2000-02 § 4-22.4; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B); Ord. No.
2010-13]
An application fee of $25 shall be submitted with the application, and upon granting of
a license, vendor shall pay a nonrefundable yearly fee of $150, upon payment of which
the license shall be issued.
§ 4-23. OUTDOOR CAFES.
§ 4-23.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 97-4 § 216-1]
The purpose of this section is to allow and regulate the establishment and maintenance
of outdoor cafes within the Township of Springfield.
§ 4-23.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 97-4 § 216-2; Ord. No. 2000-07 § 1; Ord. No. 03-25
§ I]
As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings indicated:
ADJACENT BUILDING — Shall mean the building which fronts on the sidewalk or
other area where the outdoor cafe is or is proposed to be located.
OUTDOOR CAFE OR CAFE — Shall mean a restaurant (as defined herein) serving
food to be consumed by the public at tables located within a designated area bounded
by the adjacent building, which designated area is in part or in full on public property,
within the public right-of-way, or upon public sidewalks.
PERMITTED ZONE — Shall mean the G-C (General Commercial), N-C
(Neighborhood Commercial) and H-C (Highway Commercial) as designated in the Land
Use Ordinance of the Township of Springfield, as amended, and shall also be applicable
to any restaurant (as defined herein) in existence on the effective date of the within
regulations.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean an establishment actually located within the adjacent
building, the primary activity of which is the preparation and serving of food for
consumption by the public either on or off premises.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean the paved surface provided for the exclusive use of
pedestrians and situated between and extending from any building to the curb of any
street (excluding therefrom any unpaved area).
notice in writing to the Township, upon which policy the Township of Springfield
shall be named as an additional insured.
a. All applicants shall submit an application pursuant to Subsection 4-1.2.
b. All other provisions of § 4-1, except Subsections 4-1.3 and 4-1.8b shall apply.
§ 4-22.2 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-23.3
4:35
§ 4-23.3. Application for and Granting of License. [Ord. No. 97-4 § 216-3; Ord.
No. 2000-07 § 1]
An application for license hereunder shall be submitted in conformity with the
requirements of Chapter 4, General Licensing, Subsection 4-1.2, Application for License
of the Code of the Township of Springfield, accompanied by the application fee for an
outdoor cafe of $50. Licenses issued pursuant to this section shall expire on December
31, of each year. No fee shall be pro-rated under this section. In addition thereto, each
applicant shall submit the following items as more fully set forth hereafter: layout plan;
certificate of insurance; indemnification agreement; maintenance agreement; written
acknowledgment of receipt of a copy of rules, regulations and specifications as set forth
hereafter.
Each application and supporting documentation shall be provided to and may be
commented on by the Township Engineer, Chief of Police, Fire Chief, Health Officer
or Sanitarian, and Design Review Committee, or their designates. Any such comments
shall be submitted within 14 days of receipt of the application. Upon an initial
application, the Township Committee may thereafter grant, deny or grant as modified
any such license. On renewal applications which do not contain a substantial change
in any aspect, the license may be granted by the Township Administrator, or at the
Administrator's discretion, referred to the Township Committee for further action.
§ 4-23.4. Layout Plan. [Ord. No. 97-4 § 216-4]
The layout plan shall include:
§ 4-23.5. Insurance. [Ord. No. 97-4 § 216-5]
No outdoor cafe license shall be issued unless the licensee shall have first filed a
certificate of insurance, issued by a company duly authorized to transact business under
the laws of the State of New Jersey, evidencing insurance which provides for the
payment of not less than $500,000 to satisfy all claims for damage by reason of bodily
injuries to or the death of any person as a direct or indirect result of the operation of
the outdoor cafe or for injury to any person occurring on the premises occupied by such
cafe, and further provides for the payment of not less than $10,000 to satisfy all claims
a. A description of the proposed design and location of the outdoor cafe and all
temporary structures, equipment and apparatus to be used in connection with its
operation, including tables, chairs, planters, awnings, lighting and electrical outlets
(if any).
b. A statement of seating capacity of the proposed outdoor cafe and of the existing
restaurant actually operated by the applicant in the adjacent building.
c. A diagram demonstrating that pedestrian traffic along any sidewalk upon which the
outdoor cafe is proposed to be located will in no way be impeded, and that all rules,
regulations and specifications hereunder shall be satisfied.
d. A description of the proposed location of the outdoor cafe showing the actual
dimensions of the area to be utilized and the building, street and sidewalk upon
which it fronts and on which it is to be located, including the area of frontage and
distance from the facade to the curb.
§ 4-23.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-23.5
4:36
for property damage occurring as a direct or indirect result of the operation of such cafe.
Such certificate shall provide that the insurance company shall notify the Township of
Springfield 10 days prior to cancellation or substantial change in coverage, and shall
name the Township of Springfield as an additional insured thereunder.
§ 4-23.6. Indemnification Agreement. [Ord. No. 97-4 § 216-6]
No outdoor cafe license shall be issued unless the licensee shall have first executed
and filed an indemnification agreement in a form approved by the Township Attorney
of the Township of Springfield pursuant to which the licensee, in further consideration
of the issuance of the license, shall agree to forever defend, protect, indemnify and
save harmless the Township of Springfield, its officers, agents and employees from and
against any and all claims, causes of action, injuries, losses, damages, expenses, fees and
costs arising out of or which may arise out of the licensee's operation of such outdoor
cafe.
§ 4-23.7. Maintenance Agreement. [Ord. No. 97-4 § 216-7]
No outdoor cafe license shall be issued unless the licensee shall have first executed
and filed a maintenance agreement in a form approved by the Township Attorney of
the Township of Springfield pursuant to which the licensee shall agree, at the option of
the Township, to either repair at its sole cost and expense, any damage caused to the
sidewalk or other location by the operation of the cafe or to reimburse the Township in
full for all costs and expenses incurred by it in making any such repairs, with and if so
required by the Township Committee of the Township of Springfield.
§ 4-23.8. Rules, Regulations and Specifications. [Ord. No. 97-4 § 216-8]
An outdoor cafe authorized and operating pursuant to this section shall comply with all
of the following rules and regulations and such others as may be adopted from time to
time by resolution of the Township Committee of the Township of Springfield:
a. The cafe shall be operated and maintained in accordance with the layout plan as
finally approved.
b. No furniture, apparatus, decoration or appurtenance used in connection with the
operation of the outdoor cafe shall be located in such a way as to impede the safe
and speedy ingress and egress to or from any building or structure.
c. No furniture, apparatus, decoration or appurtenance used in connection with the
operation of the outdoor cafe shall be located in such a way that less than four feet
of paved sidewalk remains for the exclusive use of pedestrians, nor shall any such
furniture, apparatus, decoration or appurtenance project or protrude into, on or
above the required pedestrian passageway.
d. The sidewalk or other area utilized for the cafe shall be kept clean and free of litter.
Trash receptacles shall be provided as needed.
e. Noise shall be kept at such a level as to comply with the appropriate section of the
Code of the Township of Springfield.
f. Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to operate only within the permitted zones and
§ 4-23.5 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-23.8
4:37
§ 4-23.9. Alcoholic Beverages. [Ord. No. 97-4 § 216-9]
§ 4-23.10. Notice of Violation; Revocation of License. [Ord. No. 97-4 § 216-10]
§ 4-23.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 97-4 § 216-11]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of not more than $100 for the first offense, not less than $100 and not
more than $500 for the second offense, and not less than $100 and not more than $1,000
for each subsequent offense, or to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both,
as well as a revocation of a current license.
only during the hours that the principal business is permitted to operate.
g. Within 30 minutes after the closing of the outdoor cafe, the operator shall have all
furniture, apparatus, decoration and appurtenances and any other items used in
connection with the operation of such outdoor cafe appropriately covered or stored
so as to avoid a public hazard or nuisance.
h. The outdoor cafe shall be actually operated and maintained by the same person who
operates and maintains the related restaurant of which the cafe is a part and an
extension.
i. The operator shall comply with all other ordinances and requirements of the
Township of Springfield.
a. The sidewalk or other area upon which an outdoor cafe has been authorized to
operate pursuant to this section shall constitute premises duly licensed for the sale
and consumption of alcoholic beverages; provided, however, that the related
restaurant of which the cafe is a part and of which it is an extension is so licensed;
and provided further, however, that specific approval has been obtained from the
Township of Springfield for the extension of the alcoholic beverage consumption
license to the sidewalk area. Such approval shall be separate from, and must be
obtained in addition to, the license to operate an outdoor sidewalk cafe pursuant to
this section.
b. Patrons of an outdoor cafe that does not have a liquor license to sell alcoholic
beverages on the sidewalk or other area upon which the outdoor cafe has been
authorized to operate pursuant to this section shall not be permitted to carry onto or
consume any alcoholic beverages on such sidewalk or other area.
a. Upon a determination by any officer or employee of the Township of Springfield
that a licensee has violated any provision hereof, such officer or employee shall
give written notice to the licensee to correct such violation within 24 hours of the
receipt of such notice by the licensee. In the event that the licensee fails or refuses
to correct such violation within such period, the licensee's outdoor cafe license shall
thereupon automatically be revoked.
b. Upon the revocation of such license, the licensee, on written request, shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Township Committee of the Township of
Springfield within 14 days of the date of such request.
§ 4-23.8 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-24
4:38
§ 4-24. COMMERCIAL LANDSCAPING.
§ 4-24.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 96-12 § 191-1]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL LANDSCAPER — Shall mean a person or entity whose business
involves the placing, planting, arranging, trimming, cutting and removing of trees, the
maintenance of lawns, trees, bushes, shrubs, gardens and related appurtenances; and/or
the cleaning and/or collection of vegetative waste, including weeds, branches, clippings,
leaves, debris, grass or other items of yard waste, on or from the property of another
person or entity.
VEHICLE — Shall mean every device in, upon or by which a person or property is or
may be transported upon a public street or highway.
§ 4-24.2. License Required. [Ord. No. 96-12 § 191-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct or operate a
commercial landscaping business in or upon any premises or property within the
Township without a license therefor.
§ 4-24.3. Application for License. [Ord. No. 96-12 § 191-3; Ord. No. 2005-17 § II;
Ord. No. 2006-01 § I]
An application for license hereunder shall be submitted in conformity with the
requirements of Subsection 4-1.2, Application for License, accompanied by a $50
license fee for a commercial landscaping business. No fee shall be prorated on a
license renewal, or for new applications made subsequent to April 1 of a given year.
In addition to the requirements set forth therein, all such applications shall include the
following information: the character, nature and type of any and all substances that the
applicant will be disposing as a result of the commercial landscaping operation; the
location where any and all debris, garbage, waste or other materials removed as a result
of the commercial landscaping operation is to be taken and the name and telephone
number of the company or organization to receive such material; the year, make, model,
vehicle identification number and license plate number for all vehicles to be used within
Springfield. Upon issuance of a license, a window sticker permit shall be issued for each
vehicle listed on the application, at a fee of $10 per permit. Additional vehicles may be
added from time to time by written request, including the specification as to each vehicle
to be added, of the year, make, model, vehicle identification number and license plate
number, and payment of an additional $10 fee per each new permit. Vehicle permits are
not transferable from person to person or from vehicle to vehicle.
§ 4-24.4. Revocation or Suspension of License. [Ord. No. 96-12 § 191-4]
The Township Committee or its designee may, at any time, for violation of this section
or of any applicable law, regulation or ordinance, or such other cause as the Township
Committee or its designee upon investigation and after a hearing, deems sufficient,
suspend or revoke any license granted under the provisions of this section. Notice in
writing of the proposed suspension or revocation and the reason or reasons therefor and
of the time and place of a hearing to be held thereon by the Township Committee, or its
§ 4-24 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-24.4
4:39
designee, shall be served upon the licensee either personally or by mail to the business
address given in the application at least 10 days prior to the hearing. Whenever any
license shall be revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the license fee shall be
made. No license shall be granted to any person whose license has been revoked within
a period of two years from the date of such revocation except in the discretion of the
Township Committee.
§ 4-24.5. Requirements. [Ord. No. 96-12 § 191-5; Ord. No. 2005-17 § II]
Every commercial landscaper licensed by the Township shall be required while
operating within the Township to have the name, address and telephone number of the
licensee clearly indicated on both sides of any vehicle used in such operation, in letters
no less than three inches in height. Further, each such vehicle shall have a window
sticker permit affixed thereto on the rear window, on the inside surface at the lower left
corner, so as to be visible from outside the vehicle. On vehicles without a rear window,
such permit shall be affixed thereto on the rearmost left side window on the inside
surface at the lower right corner, so as to be visible from outside the vehicle.
§ 4-24.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 96-12 § 191-6]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of not more than $250 for the first offense, not less than $100 and not
more than $500 for the second offense and not less than $100 and not more than $1,000
for each subsequent offense, or to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both,
as well as a revocation of a current license or ineligibility to obtain a license for a period
of up to two years.
§ 4-24.7. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 96-12 § 191-7]
This section shall not be applicable to vehicles owned and operated by the Township
of Springfield or to those vehicles owned and operated pursuant to contract with the
Township for collection of garbage, recyclables or other waste.
§ 4-24.8. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2005-17 § II]
The Zoning Officer, Recycling Coordinator and Police Department are authorized to
enforce this section.
§ 4-25. (RESERVED)
§ 4-26. MISCELLANEOUS LICENSE FEES. [1991 Code § 165-3]
The license fees for the various uses are as follows:
Use Fee
Coin-operated washing machine (per machine) $10/per year
Junk dealer $50/per year
Transient merchants and itinerant vendors $300 for 180 days
§ 4-24.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-27
4:40
§ 4-27. TOWING.
§ 4-27.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 96-20 § 264-1]
The purpose of this section is to provide standards, regulations and rates for Policerequested
and non-preference towing and storage services. These services shall be
provided under the supervision of the Chief of Police of the Township of Springfield or
his designee.
§ 4-27.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 96-20 § 264-2; Ord. No. 2002-27 § I(A)]
As used in this section:
AUTHORIZED TOWING OPERATOR — Shall mean a towing operator who has been
licensed pursuant to this section.
AUTOMOBILE—Shall mean a private passenger automobile of a private passenger or
station wagon type that is neither used as a public or livery conveyance for passengers
nor rented to others with a driver, or a motor vehicle with a pickup body, a delivery
sedan, a van, or a panel truck or a camper type vehicle used for recreational purposes
owned by an individual, not customarily used in the occupation, profession or business
of the owner and shall exclude all vehicles of 6,000 pounds gross vehicular weight or
greater.
BASE OF SERVICE — Shall mean a towing operator's principal place of business
where tow vehicles are stationed when not in use.
CRUISING — Shall mean the operation of an unengaged tow truck along the public
streets in any fashion intended, likely or calculated to solicit business.
DAY — Shall mean from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, excepting
New Jersey State holidays.
NIGHT AND HOLIDAYS — Shall mean all times other than Day.
OUTSIDE SECURED — Shall mean a storage facility secured by a fence, wall or other
barrier that is at least six feet high, equipped with a passive alarm system or similar onsite
security measure, and is lighted at night.
OWNER — Shall mean a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity who
owns, leases and/or drives, operates, parks or abandons any vehicle on the roads or
highways within the Township of Springfield, which vehicle requires towing pursuant to
this section.
STORAGE CHARGE — Shall mean the maximum fee to be charged for storage of a
vehicle pursuant to the within section for a twenty-four-hour period or fraction thereof.
A new twenty-four-hour period begins at 12:01 a.m.
TOW VEHICLE (TOW TRUCK) — Shall mean any vehicle equipped with a boom
or booms, winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of vehicles, as well as any
vehicle so employed.
TOWING OPERATOR — Shall mean a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other
entity engaged in the business of providing tow truck services and storage services
for vehicles towed, which services are made available to the general public within the
§ 4-27 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-27.2
4:41
Township of Springfield.
§ 4-27.3. License Required. [Ord. No. 96-20 § 264-3]
No towing operator shall perform Police-requested or non-preference towing within and
for the Township of Springfield unless licensed to do so pursuant to this section.
§ 4-27.4. Licensing Standards. [Ord. No. 96-20 § 264-4; Ord. No. 2002-27 §§ I(B),
(C)]
a. Equipment Requirements. No license shall be issued to a towing operator who does
not own or lease, or can have available, at least the following equipment:
1. One heavy duty wrecker capable of handling a loaded tractor trailer, or other
large heavily loaded vehicles that travel U.S. Interstate Highways and/or
County or municipal roadways.
2. One flat bed or roll back truck classified no lighter than a one ton vehicle.
3. All vehicles must be equipped with two-way radios to a base of service.
4. Equipment available to remove disabled or abandoned motor vehicles,
motorcycles, and mopeds with or without wheels and totally inoperable motor
vehicles, motorcycles and mopeds.
5. Safety equipment to be carried on all trucks shall include: universal towing
sling, except flat beds or roll back trucks, hook and chains; one snatch block
for 3/8 to 1/2 inch cable; two high-test safety chains; auxiliary safety light kit
to place on rear of towed vehicle; four-lamp or three lamp revolving amber
light or lamp bars; toolbox with assortment of hand tools; rear working lights;
body-clearing lights located to clear towed vehicle; blocking choke for
wrecker while working; safety cones; shovel; broom; steering wheel lock or
tie down.
6. All tow trucks must be properly registered, insured and inspected, and carry
liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000 for any one
claimant, $2,000,000 for more than one claimant, and $1,000,000 coverage for
property damage for any one event. A certificate of insurance must be
provided yearly to the Township Clerk.
7. All tow trucks must be properly lettered on both sides as provided by law.
8. All trucks must be maintained and operated in accordance with all existing
traffic regulations and in a safe and prudent manner.
9. Tow truck drivers shall request Police assistance during the course of servicing
when they find it necessary to turn around, back-up, tow in the opposite
direction, etc., if any of the above maneuvers would constitute a hazard to the
motoring public.
b. Storage Facilities. No license shall be issued to a towing operator who does not
own, lease or have access to the following storage facilities:
§ 4-27.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-27.4
4:42
1. An outside secured storage area to accommodate at least seven vehicles which
have become disabled or otherwise removed by the towing operator.
2. An inside storage area to accommodate at least one vehicle that might require
such storage due to Police investigations.
3. All storage facilities shall have proper sign identification in a prominent
location and in the principal office of the towing company where the general
public is admitted, showing the hours when the vehicle may be released. Such
hours shall be subject to the approval of the Chief of Police, with a minimum
of 10 hours per day, and six days a week, excluding Sundays and holidays, as
well as the price for towing and daily storage rates. A business card shall be
supplied by the towing operator to the owner or driver at the scene stating the
business address and hours of operation.
4. A small lot plan must be submitted for review annually to the Township Clerk.
Such plans shall indicate the storage areas.
5. Disabled motor vehicles towed or otherwise removed from the place where
they are disabled shall not be stored or allowed to remain on public property,
on any street, or on any property in the Township of Springfield which is not
zoned for such storage.
6. No vehicle shall be towed into the Police Department's parking lot or
municipal parking lot, unless specifically requested by the Chief of Police or
his designed representative.
c. Personnel and Operation Requirements. All authorized towing operators, their
agents and employees shall comply with the following:
1. They shall be fully trained and knowledgeable in the operation of all required
equipment.
2. All drivers will relay information as soon as possible to the Police on all
crimes, disabled vehicles, accidents, disasters, etc.
3. Employees who drive vehicles shall have the proper valid New Jersey Drivers
License, they shall be of good moral character, mentally alert, and present a
neat appearance at all times.
4. They shall at all times have any and all equipment which may be required to
be available and on site to a call within 15 minutes of notification. The Chief
of Police shall be the sole arbitrator as to compliance with the required
response times.
5. They shall not respond to or stop at any accident scene unless directed to do so
by the Police, unless it is to notify the Police of an emergency. The stop shall
not give the tow truck operator the right to tow without Police permission.
6. They will be responsible for all vehicles and contents in their custody.
7. They will notify the Police on a weekly basis if they are in custody of any
previously towed vehicle.
§ 4-27.4 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-27.4
4:43
§ 4-27.5. Application for License. [Ord. No. 96-20 § 264-5; Ord. No. 99-4 § 1A;
Ord. No. 2002-27 § I(D)]
§ 4-27.6. Licensing; Rotation. [Ord. No. 96-20 § 264-6; Ord. No. 99-4 § 1B[2];
Ord. No. 2000-24 § 1[A]]
8. They will cooperate with other operators in the case of emergency services at
the scene of accidents and/or disasters.
9. No vehicles will be removed from the road or highways traversing the
Township without proper authorization from the Police at the scene, or owner/
driver as the case may be.
10. All vehicles which are impounded or confiscated will not be released without
proper authorization from the Police Department.
11. All disputes between towing operators and the public or owners at the scene,
or at any time thereafter, will be reported to the Chief of Police or his designee
who will act as a mediator and attempt to resolve their differences in a civil
and lawful manner. No driver of a towing operator will create a disturbance on
the highway.
12. The highest ranking Police Officer present shall be in complete charge of the
incident scene and all persons shall comply with the Officer's instructions.
13. It is understood and agreed that the Township of Springfield shall in no way
be liable to the towing operator for any services whatsoever which may be
rendered to a motor vehicle or owner.
a. An application for license hereunder shall be submitted in conformity with the
requirements of Subsection 4-1.2, Application for License of the Code of the
Township of Springfield, accompanied by an application fee of $150 for an
"authorized towing operator license." Licenses issued pursuant to this section shall
expire on December 31 of each even numbered year. No fee shall be pro-rated
under this section.
b. In addition to all other items required to be submitted with the towing license
application, each applicant shall include therewith copies of each and every State,
County or municipal towing contract which they currently have entered into, as well
as a listing of all municipalities for which they have been authorized or licensed to
perform towing on a rotating basis.
a. All authorized towing licenses shall be issued by the Township Committee of the
Township of Springfield or its designee. The license fee for an authorized towing
operator shall be $250.
b. The Township Committee, upon recommendation of the Chief of Police, shall issue
licenses to a sufficient number of authorized towing operators to insure public
safety, but in no case more than four towing operators shall be licensed at any one
time. In its discretion, the Township Committee may authorize one additional
licensee without issuing such license. Such additional authorized but unlicensed
towing operator may thereafter receive such license to replace a revoked or
§ 4-27.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-27.6
4:44
§ 4-27.7. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 96-20 § 264-7; Ord. No. 99-4 § 1; Ord.
No. 2000-24 § 1[B]; Ord. No. 2002-27 §§ I(C)(E); Ord. No. 2004-13 § I]
suspended licensee, or for other reasons at the discretion of the Township
Committee, upon payment of appropriate license fees.
c. All authorized towing operators, to the degree possible, shall be located within the
Township of Springfield or in municipalities immediately adjacent thereto. All
authorized towing operators must be able to respond and be on site to any call
within the Township of Springfield within 15 minutes.
d. It shall be the obligation of an authorized towing operator to immediately notify the
Chief of Police of the Township of Springfield in the event such authorized towing
operator is wholly or partially not operational due to mechanical failure or
personnel insufficiency, or if such authorized towing operator cannot fulfill any of
the requirements of this section at any time.
e. Upon approval of any licensing application and payment of the licensing fee, a
towing license shall be issued.
f. Upon submission of a towing operator application, such towing operator agrees that
upon receiving a license, such towing operator will indemnify and hold harmless
the Township of Springfield, its employees and agents, for any and all loss, claims
or damages, arising from personal injury or property damage as a result of the
actions of the authorized towing operator, and such authorized towing operator will
defend the Township of Springfield, its employees and agents, in connection with
any claim, demand, suit or action arising therefrom.
g. On or before November 1 of each even numbered year, any towing operator may
submit an application and application fee pursuant to this section for purposes of
consideration as an authorized towing operator for the following calendar year. As
part of the application process, or at any time after the granting of a license, the
towing operator will be subject to investigation and inspection by the Township of
Springfield and all its Departments for compliance with any and all requirements of
this chapter.
h. All authorized towing operators shall be placed on a rotational list to be maintained
by the Chief of Police of the Township of Springfield, and such authorized towing
operators shall be called upon to respond as needed on a rotational basis. The period
of such rotation shall be determined by the Chief of Police.
i. The Township Committee may, in addition to all other factors considered relevant,
consider the following in determining whether or not to issue a license; the
substance and number of complaints issued against an applicant and the disposition
of same; the prior performance of the applicant as to response time (including both
the number of violations of response time and the number of minutes late per
incident) and other requirements of Statute and ordinance.
a. No towing operator shall engage in cruising.
b. No towing operator shall solicit or attempt to divert patrons of another towing
operator, nor shall a towing operator solicit or divert prospective patrons of a given
§ 4-27.6 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-27.7
4:45
repair service to any other repair service.
c. No flashing lights or sirens shall be used by a towing operator except as granted by
the Chief of Police of the Township of Springfield pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 39:3-1 et seq.
d. Every authorized towing operator, prior to departure from the scene of towing
services, shall clean and clear the streets of any customary debris resulting from any
accident at such scene and shall at all times carry the necessary equipment to
perform such cleaning services. There shall be no cost to Springfield for this
service.
e. Every authorized towing operator shall be responsible for the on-scene changing of
flat tires on vehicles of the Police Department of the Township of Springfield.
There shall be no cost to Springfield for this service.
f. Every authorized operator who is called to respond shall arrive at the scene to which
dispatched within a reasonable time. Under normal circumstances such reasonable
time is defined as within 15 minutes. A five minute "grace period" shall be allowed
due to unusual traffic or other conditions. Such condition shall promptly be reported
by the responding operator to the Springfield Police Desk, prior to the 15 minutes
expiring. The Township reserves the right to obtain the services of another
authorized towing operator for failure to meet any provision of this section.
g. The authorized towing operator shall as promptly as possible, but in all cases prior
to towing any vehicle, inform the owner or operator that they have the right to
designate a location to which the vehicle will be towed. If no such storage
designation is made by the owner or the Police Department, the authorized towing
operator may remove the vehicle to the authorized towing operator's place of
business. The owner or operator shall be responsible for mileage charges for such
towing, as hereafter set forth.
h. The authorized towing operator, when so instructed, will tow a vehicle to a
premises controlled by the Police Department. Such vehicle will not be released to
the owner unless such owner furnishes a receipt that all authorized towing and other
service fees have been paid.
i. Every authorized towing operator shall submit a monthly report to the Chief of
Police of the Township of Springfield on a form so designated, stating the
disposition of vehicles taken to their facility and indicating all fees and charges for
every vehicle towed and repaired. The report will include the date when the owner
received each vehicle.
j. No authorized towing operator shall employ, directly or indirectly, any sworn or
volunteer Police Officer of the Township of Springfield.
k. Such additional rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Township
Committee of the Township of Springfield, by resolution, shall take effect after
notification of such rules and regulations upon all authorized towing operators.
Notice shall be made by personal delivery or by mail to the business address given
in the application of the authorized towing operator or his designee.
§ 4-27.7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-27.7
4:46
§ 4-27.8. Revocation or Suspension of License. [Ord. No. 96-20 § 264-8]
§ 4-27.9. Rates. [Ord. No. 96-20 § 264-9; Ord. No. 2002-27 § I(F); Ord. No.
2004-13 § I; Ord. No. 2006-15 § I; Ord. No. 2008-16 § I; Ord. No. 2009-016 § I;
amended 10-13-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-24]
l. The owner of a vehicle who is the victim of a crime shall not be responsible for
towing costs as a result of Police-requested towing for purposes of crime scene
analysis or other investigation. The cost for such towing shall be billed to the
Township of Springfield and shall be the standard towing charges as set forth
herein, to a maximum fee per vehicle of $150.
m. They shall, as promptly as possible, inform the owner or operator of each motor
vehicle, motorcycle or moped that they may choose another towing operator which
is not an authorized Police towing operator under the following conditions: the
vehicle is not a hazard or in a hazardous position as determined by the Police or
Fire Officer in charge at the scene; the vehicle does not disrupt the flow of normal
traffic and can be removed within a reasonable amount of time as determined by
the Officer in charge at the scene.
n. The authorized towing operator shall, as promptly as possible, but in all cases prior
to towing any vehicle, provide the owner or operator with a written copy of the
maximum rates chargeable hereunder.
o. The authorized towing operator shall accept in payment of all fees, cash or a valid
major credit or charge card, and may accept check, money order, or a valid debit
card.
a. The Chief of Police or the Township Committee of the Township of Springfield
may temporarily suspend without hearing any license to protect the public health,
safety and welfare. The authorized towing operator shall immediately be notified of
any such suspension and the reason or reasons therefor, and the authorized towing
operator may immediately request a hearing before the Township Committee, or its
designee, which hearing will be held as expeditiously as possible.
b. The Township Committee, or its designee, may, at any time, for violation of this
section or of any applicable law, regulation or ordinance, or such other cause as the
Township Committee, or its designee, upon investigation and after a hearing, deems
sufficient, suspend or revoke any license granted under the provisions of this
section. Notice in writing of the proposed suspension or revocation and the reason
or reasons therefor and of the time and place of a hearing to be held thereon by the
Township Committee, or its designee, shall be served upon the licensee either
personally or by mail to the business address given in the application at least 10
days prior to the hearing. Whenever any license shall be revoked, no refund of any
unearned portion of the license fee shall be made.
a. Maximum rates charged for all services to automobiles that are damaged in
accidents, disabled, abandoned, or recovered after being stolen, shall not exceed the
rates set forth in this Subsection 4-27.9.
b. Road Service.
§ 4-27.7 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-27.9
4:47
1. Cars (light): $125 per hour, plus parts.
2. Trucks (medium/heavy): $175 per hour, plus parts.
c. Towing, Basic.
1. Light duty (up to 10,000 pounds): hook-up $150.
2. Medium duty (10,001 to 16,000 pounds): $250 per hour.
3. Heavy duty (16,001 pounds and above): $500 per hour.
4. Decoupling fee (if tow is not performed): half of basic rate.
d. On-Hook Mileage.
1. Light duty: $6 per loaded mile.
2. Medium duty: N/A.
3. Heavy duty: N/A.
e. Recovery/Winching (in addition to towing: per truck, including driver).
1. Light/medium duty: $350 per hour (charged in increments of $175 per half
hour).
2. Heavy duty: $600 per hour.
f. Specialized Recovery Equipment.
1. Rotator/crane recovery unit: $1,200 per hour.
2. Tractor with landoll trailer or detach trailer: $450 per hour.
3. Tractor/transport hauler only: $250 per hour.
4. Refrigerated trailer with tractor: $450 per hour.
5. Box trailer with tractor: $400 per hour.
6. Air cushion unit: $1,000 per hour.
7. Light tower: $250 per hour.
8. Pallet jack: $200 flat rate.
9. Rollers: $200 flat rate.
10. Any other specialized equipment: $250 per hour.
11. Loader/backhoe/telescopic handler/bulldozer/bobcat: $300 each per hour.
12. Forklift: $300 per hour.
13. Dump truck/dump trailer with tractor: $350 per hour.
14. Roll-off with container: $350 per hour plus disposal.
§ 4-27.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-27.9
4:48
15. Scene safety equipment, communication equipment, traffic management
equipment, etc: $250 per hour for each type used.
16. Recovery support vehicle/trailer additional recovery equipment: $350 per
hour.
g. Labor (minimum of one hour).
1. Accident clean-up and debris: $75 per hour (one-hour minimum), plus
absorbent materials used.
2. Recovery Supervisor and/or Level III Recovery Specialist: $225 per hour
(charges limited to one per incident).
3. Certified towing operator: $125 per hour per person.
4. Manual laborers: $100 per hour per person.
h. Storage, billed per calendar day (inside rates two times outside rate).
1. Cars/light trucks (ten-foot-by-twenty-foot space): $45 per day.
2. Trucks (dual wheels)/single axle: $90 per day.
3. Tractor/dump truck/tractor and trailer combo/trailers: $125 per unit per day.
4. Buses: $150 per day.
5. Roll-off: $125 per day for each.
6. Cargo/accident debris/load storage/vehicle components (10 foot by 20 foot
space): $45 per space used per day.
7. Rental of any tow-company-supplied trailer post-incident: $500 per day.
i. Additional Services/Notes.
1. Fuel/haz-mat/cargo spills clean-up and disposal: Time and materials.
2. Haz-mat and trash recovery: 10% surcharge.
3. Subcontractor markup: 10%.
4. Administrative charge (only after third visit to vehicle): $50 (cars only).
5. Administrative charge (medium/heavy truck): $200.
6. After-hours release: $75.
7. Notification documentation fee: $50.
8. Tarping/wrapping vehicle: $90 per car; $250 per truck.
j. Miscellaneous Provisions.
1. After the first half hour, all hourly billable rates will be charged in half-hour
increments.
§ 4-27.9 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-27.9
4:49
§ 4-27.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 96-20 § 264-10]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a fine of not more than $250 for the first offense, not less than $100 and not
more than $500 for the second offense and not less than $100 and not more than $1,000
for each subsequent offense, or to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both,
as well as a revocation of a current license or ineligibility to obtain a license for a period
of up to two years.
§ 4-27.11. Police Department Requirements. [Ord. No. 99-4 § 1D; Ord. No.
2000-24 § 1[C]; Ord. No. 2002-27 § I(G); Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A); Ord. No. 03-24
§ I]
2. Charges for all trucks/recovery equipment are inclusive of the operator. You
may not separately charge for an operator that drives/operates the truck/
recovery equipment.
3. No authorized towing operator shall charge an additional fee when a towed
vehicle is being picked up by an owner or other towing operator for services
such as moving other vehicles to get at the towed vehicle, towing from the
authorized towing operator's property to the street, and the like.
4. The rates charged for services to all other vehicles shall be billed at reasonable
prevailing rates within the Union County area, and each authorized towing
operator shall submit such proposed fees to the Chief of Police by no later than
January 10 of each year, or upon any change in such rates, whereupon the
Chief of Police shall determine if such rates are reasonable. The authorized
towing operator shall have the right to appeal any adverse determination as to
the reasonableness of such fees to the Township Committee, which may rule
on such issue with or without hearing.
5. No authorized towing operator shall charge any fee set forth in Subsection
4-27.9e, above, unless such service is necessitated by the circumstances
surrounding the tow, is actually provided, and is beyond the normal services
provided. No additional fee may be charged for pulling a vehicle onto a flatbed
truck. A winching fee may only be charged to pull a vehicle back onto the
roadway so as to place the vehicle in proper position to tow the vehicle.
a. The Chief of Police, or a designee, shall file a report with the Township Committee
within the first 30 days of each year concerning the performance of all licensed
towing operators during the prior year, including but not limited to the following
information: name, address, number of total calls responded to, number of calls
responded to out of time; number of complaints filed against each licensed tower
by the Township of Springfield or individuals; the substance and determination as
to each such complaint. The Chief of Police or a designee shall also notify the
Township Committee within seven days should any licensed towing operator
violate the rules and regulations more than three times within any thirty-day period,
or more than 10 times during a calendar year.
b. Any Police Officer responding to, present at, or involved with any situation in
which an authorized towing operator is present, shall as promptly as possible
§ 4-27.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-27.11
4:50
§ 4-28. VALET PARKING.
§ 4-28.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2002-12]
It is the purpose of this section to provide a procedure whereby those persons intending
to operate an attendant (valet) parking service may be licensed so as to provide for
appropriate and adequate oversight concerning such business, in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
§ 4-28.2. License Required. [Ord. No. 2002-12]
No individual, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity shall engage in or carry on
the business of attendant (valet) parking within the Township without first obtaining a
license as set forth herein.
§ 4-28.3. Definition. [Ord. No. 2002-12]
ATTENDANT (VALET) PARKING—As used herein shall mean any service, whether
remunerated or not, and if so, regardless of who pays such remuneration, wherein any
person not the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall take possession, custody or
control of such motor vehicle for purposes of moving same from one location to another
solely for the purpose of storage or parking.
§ 4-28.4. Application. [Ord. No. 2002-12]
present the owner or operator with a statement/questionnaire as to the compliance
of the authorized towing operator with the specific notice requirements and other
provisions of this section, unless, in the discretion of the Police Officer to do so
would be impossible or a danger to public safety under the circumstances. Such
statement/questionnaire shall be in the form approved by the Chief of Police in
consultation with the Township Administrator.
c. The Chief of Police, or a designee, shall forward a monthly report to each licensed
towing operator, by regular mail, to the premises address set forth on the license
application. Such report shall include all information determined to be appropriate
by the Township Committee, upon recommendation of the Chief of Police, or a
designee, including, but not limited to, a listing of all alleged violations of the
within rules and regulations during the prior month by the operator.
d. These regulations and the approved fee schedule of all authorized towing operators
shall be made available to the public, upon request, pursuant to the currently
effective public records law.
a. In addition to information required in Subsection 4-1.2, the applicant shall specify
the name and address of the owner of the premises upon which any portion of the
service will operate, provide verification that the applicant has complied with any
and all statutes and regulations, as well as other ordinances of the Township, and
shall have annexed thereto proof of liability insurance in an amount not less than
$3,000,000 per occurrence/$1,000,000 per individual. There shall also be annexed
thereto an estimate of the maximum number of motor vehicles which will be
handled by the service at any given time, and a detailed explanation of the method
§ 4-27.11 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-28.4
4:51
§ 4-28.5. Denial of Application. [Ord. No. 2002-12]
A license shall not be issued if it is determined that an applicant has failed to provide
any required information, does not comply with any of the requirement set forth in this
section or any applicable law, regulation or ordinance, or that the proposed parking and
driving plan is likely to adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.
§ 4-28.6. Revocation. [Ord. No. 2002-12]
Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the Township at any time for violation
of this section or any applicable law, regulation or ordinance, or for such other cause,
including but not limited to, exceeding the maximum number other than as designated
in the application. Any such proposed revocation shall be pursuant to the procedure set
forth in Subsection 4-1.10.
§ 4-28.7. Exemption. [Ord. No. 2002-12]
No license hereunder shall be required for any attendant (valet) parking service which
shall operate solely upon private property, such that no motor vehicle while in custody
or possession of such service shall be parked upon, travel upon, or in any way affect the
public streets, thoroughfares or property.
§ 4-28.8. Enforcement; Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2002-12]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department, Zoning Officer and any other
appropriate municipal official. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 4-29. (RESERVED)
§ 4-30. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 4-30.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
As used in this section:
MASSAGE — Shall mean any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts
of determining such estimate. Additionally, the applicant will supply a detailed
listing including map if appropriate, of the intended location of storage or parking
of all motor vehicles, as well as the intended driving route between and among all
locations of the service.
b. The application shall be filed with the Township Clerk, and shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable fee in the amount of $50 for each location from which the
services will originate. Such application shall be referred to the Springfield Police
Department, Fire Department, Springfield Zoning Officer, Public Safety
Committee all of which shall make appropriate investigation and report to the
Township Clerk in a timely fashion, as to all appropriate issues, including, but not
limited to, the adequacy of the parking plan submitted with the application.
§ 4-28.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-30.1
4:52
of the human body with the hands or any other part of the body, with or without the
assistance of any object or mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or
without supplementary aids, such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, oils, powders or creams,
including the use of any process offered as supplementary or incidental thereto, such as
heat lamps, hot and cold packs, tubs and showers, and shall include but not be limited to
those practices commonly known as massage, bodywork and somatic therapy.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any establishment where any person
engaged in or is permitted to engage in the practice of massage.
MASSAGE PRACTITIONER—Shall mean any person who shall engage in or perform
a massage, for any consideration whatsoever.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL PARTS — Shall mean the genitals, pubic area, anus and
perineum of any person, and the vulva and breasts of a female.
§ 4-30.2. Permit Required; Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I; Ord. No. 06-17 § I]
Within the Township of Springfield, no individual, corporation, partnership or other
entity shall own, operate or participate in the operation of a massage establishment, or
perform services as a massage practitioner, unless granted a permit as provided herein.
This section shall not apply to any school, hospital, nursing home or assisted living
facility licensed by or operating in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey,
any health club registered pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:45A-25.1 et seq., or to any licensed
physician, osteopath, chiropractor or physical therapist, including services performed by
same at the home of a patient.
§ 4-30.3. Massage Establishment Application; Fee. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I; Ord.
No. 2007-13A § I]
a. An application for an establishment permit hereunder shall be made to the
Township Clerk of the Township of Springfield.
b. Such application shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the applicant, and shall
include the following information:
1. The name and address of each applicant that is an individual. For any
partnership, corporation or other business entity, the name and address of each
person owning an interest in the entity.
2. That the applicant or applicants are at least 18 years of age.
3. The exact nature of the massage to be administered.
4. Such other information as requested by the Township Clerk which may be
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this section.
5. Two portrait photographs of each applicant, no smaller than two inches by two
inches.
6. A complete set of each applicant's fingerprints, taken by the Springfield Police
Department, the cost of which shall be paid by the applicant, in addition to any
fees herein.
§ 4-30.1 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-30.3
4:53
§ 4-30.4. Massage Practitioner Application; Fee. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
§ 4-30.5. Application Review. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
Upon receipt of a complete application, the Township Clerk shall forward same for
review and comment to the Chief of Police, the Chief of Fire, the Health Officer,
the Township Attorney and such other officials as the Township Clerk shall deem
appropriate, or each of their designees. All such officials shall provide comments and
responses, if any, within 30 days of receipt of application.
§ 4-30.6. Issuance of Establishment Permit; Fee. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
The Township Clerk shall issue a massage establishment permit, upon receipt of a yearly
establishment permit fee of $250, and upon a finding that the applicant fulfills the
following requirements as of the date of issuance of the permit.
7. Authorization to the Springfield Police Department and Health Department, to
seek information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application, and consent to provide any additional
information requested by them in order to complete such investigation.
c. A nonrefundable yearly application fee of $250 shall be submitted with the
application.
a. An application for a practitioner permit hereunder shall be made to the Township
Clerk of the Township of Springfield.
b. Such application shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the applicant, and shall
include the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. That the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
3. Such other information as requested by the Township Clerk which may be
necessary to fulfill the purposes of this section.
4. Two portrait photographs of the applicant, no smaller than two inches by two
inches.
5. A complete set of the applicant's fingerprints, taken by the Springfield Police
Department, the cost of which shall be paid by the applicant, in addition to any
fees herein.
6. Authorization to the Springfield Police Department and Health Department, to
seek information and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application, and consent to provide any additional
information requested by them in order to complete such investigation.
c. A nonrefundable yearly application fee of $100 shall be submitted with the
application.
a. All requirements of this section are fulfilled.
§ 4-30.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-30.6
4:54
§ 4-30.7. Issuance of Practitioner Permit. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I; Ord. No. 2006-23
§ I]
The Township Clerk shall issue a massage practitioner permit, upon receipt of a yearly
practitioner permit fee of $100 and upon a finding that the applicant fulfills the following
requirements as of the date of issuance of the permit:
§ 4-30.8. Denial of Permit; Appeal. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
§ 4-30.9. Additional Requirements. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
b. Compliance with all other statutes, codes or ordinances, including health, zoning,
building and fire.
c. That the nature of the massage to be administered will not endanger the health or
safety of the patrons of the massage establishment.
d. That none of the applicants has been convicted of any first or second degree
criminal offense within the past five years, been convicted of a sex-related offense
at any time, or has had a massage permit or similar license suspended or revoked at
any time.
a. All requirements of this section are fulfilled.
b. That the applicant has not been convicted of any first or second degree criminal
offense within the past five years, been convicted of a sex-related offense at any
time, or has had a massage permit or similar license suspended or revoked at any
time.
c. That the applicant has submitted proof of certification by the New Jersey Board of
Nursing, Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapy Examining Committee,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 13:37-16.4 or 16.5.
a. If the Township Clerk determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements
hereof or that the issuance of a permit would create a danger to the public health,
safety or welfare, such permit shall not be issued.
b. Notice of a denial shall be served by the Township Clerk, upon the applicant, by
regular mail at the address set forth in the application, which notice shall include
the facts and the specific sections upon which the determination was made, and the
right to request a hearing. Such request for a hearing must be received by the office
of the Township Clerk by no later than 4:00 p.m. on the 10th calendar day after the
date of the notice, or if such day is a weekend or holiday, on the next regular
business day thereafter.
c. Upon such request, a hearing shall be held by the Township Committee, a
subcommittee thereof, or by a Hearing Officer designated thereby, within 30 days
after such request. A determination shall be made within 15 days of the hearing.
a. Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be nontransferable.
b. Any establishment operating pursuant to this section shall post and maintain the
original establishment permit as well as the permits of all practitioners employed
§ 4-30.6 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-30.9
4:55
§ 4-30.10. Operating Procedures. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
therein, in a conspicuous place upon the premises, at all times.
c. 1. The Springfield Police Department or Springfield Health Officer, or a
designee thereof, may from time to time make an inspection of any premises
which is the subject of an establishment permit. Any such inspection shall be
at a reasonable time and in a reasonable manner, but need not be upon notice.
It shall be a violation of this section for any permit holder to fail to allow
access to the premises for purposes of such inspection to hinder or delay such
inspection in any manner.
2. Should any such inspection provide reasonable cause to believe there exists a
violation of any applicable laws, rule, or regulation, additional inspections by
other appropriate officials may be held to determine if such violations exist.
a. Every portion of the massage establishment and all appliances, equipment, furniture
and linens, shall be clean, well maintained and operated in a sanitary manner, and
so as to preclude any danger to patrons or practitioners.
b. Each massage shall take place in an individual, private room, which shall be
equipped with a massage table adequate to support the full body length, width and
weight of each patron served.
c. Every practitioner and other employees, shall be clean and wear clean,
nontransparent outer garments, and shall at all times maintain cover over their
sexual and genital areas.
d. No practitioner shall work or be allowed to work when affected by any contagious
or communicable disease, and may be required to present a certification from a
licensed physician who has examined the person, so stating.
e. No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to enter or remain on
the premises of a massage establishment, unless such persons is accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian.
f. No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause or allow to be sold,
given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of a
massage establishment.
g. Each massage practitioner shall wash their hands with a bacteriostatic solution
immediately before and after rendering any massage services.
h. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section:
1. For any person in a massage establishment to place his or her hand or hands
upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner or to
massage a sexual or genital part of any other person.
2. For any person in a massage establishment to expose his or her sexual or
genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any other person, or to expose the
sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, of another person.
§ 4-30.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-30.10
4:56
§ 4-30.11. Revocation or Suspension of Permit; Hearing. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
§ 4-30.12. Expiration of Permit. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
All permits issued hereunder shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on December 31 of the year
issued, and shall be renewable upon submission of a new application and fee, no later
3. For any owner or operator of a massage establishment to knowingly cause,
permit or allow any agent, employee or person under their control or
supervision to perform any action prohibited by Subsection h1 or 2 herein.
a. The Township Clerk may revoke or suspend the permit of any massage
establishment upon a finding:
1. The applicant has made any false or misleading statements in the application.
2. Any provision of this section has been violated, or that any owner has become
ineligible for a permit.
3. Any practitioner at the establishment has been allowed to perform a massage
without obtaining or maintaining a practitioner permit, or after the permit
holder is aware, or should have been aware, that any employee has been
convicted of any offense which would disqualify such employee from
receiving a practitioner permit, fails to terminate the employment of such
employee.
b. The Township Clerk may revoke or suspend the permit of any massage practitioner
upon a finding:
1. The applicant has made any false or misleading statements in the application.
2. Any provision of this section has been violated, or that the practitioner has
become ineligible for a permit.
c. 1. Notice of a proposed suspension or revocation shall be served by the Township
Clerk, upon the permit holder, by regular mail at the address set forth in the
application, which notice shall include the facts and the specific sections upon
which the determination was made, and the right to request a hearing. Such
request for a hearing must be received by the office of the Township Clerk no
later than 4:00 p.m. on the 10th calendar day after the date of the notice, or if
such day is a weekend or holiday, on the next regular business day thereafter.
2. Upon such request, a hearing shall be held by the Township Committee, a
subcommittee thereof, or by a Hearing Officer designated thereby, within 30
days after such request. A determination shall be made within 15 days of the
hearing.
3. A request for a hearing shall stay any revocation or suspension until a hearing
is held and a determination made, unless the Township Clerk shall determine,
and set forth in the notice, that such a stay would cause imminent harm to the
public health, safety or welfare, in which case the permit shall be summarily
suspended pending a hearing and decision, which shall be promptly held and
made.
§ 4-30.10 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-30.12
4:57
than November 1, of the prior year.
§ 4-30.13. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2005-15 § I]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5. Each violation and each day any such
violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 4-31. DONATION CLOTHING BINS.
§ 4-31.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
This section is enacted to implement an Act Concerning Charitable Clothing Bins, P.L.
2007, c. 209, as amended (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.).
§ 4-31.2. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
No person shall place, use or employ a donation clothing bin, for solicitation purposes,
within the Township without first obtaining a permit from the appropriate municipal
agency, which agency shall be designated by resolution of the Township Committee of
the Township of Springfield.
§ 4-31.3. Application; Fee, Period of Permit. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
§ 4-31.4. Issuance of Permit. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
a. An application for an initial permit hereunder shall be made to the appropriate
municipal agency and shall include all information required by the general
provisions of this chapter and as required by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61(a)(1).
b. An application for a renewal permit hereunder shall be made to the appropriate
municipal agency and shall include all information required by the general
provisions of this chapter and as required by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61(a)(4).
c. All such applications shall be in writing, signed and sworn to by the applicant.
d. A nonrefundable yearly application fee of $25 per bin shall be submitted with each
application.
e. All permits shall run from the date issued to the last day of February, next. No
application fee shall be pro-rated.
a. No permit shall be issued if the proposed or continued placement of the bin could
constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the
placement of a donation clothing bin within 100 yards of any place which stores
large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases.
b. The provisions of P.L. 2007, c. 209, as amended (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) shall
be complied with at all times, including but not limited to the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61(b) requiring maintenance of a bona fide office, and of N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.61(c) requiring certain information to be conspicuously displayed on the
exterior of each bin.
§ 4-30.12 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-31.5
4:58
§ 4-31.5. Receipt and Investigation of Complaints. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
All complaints shall be received and investigated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.62.
§ 4-31.6. Additional Penalties; Remedies. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by law, any person who violates
the provisions of P.L. 2007, c. 209, as amended (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.), which
results in seizure of a donation clothing bin shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.63.
§ 4-31.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2009-07 § I]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5. Each violation and each day any such
violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 4-32. PAWN SHOPS.
§ 4-32.1. License Requirement. [Ord. No. 2010-18]
Any person, partnership or corporation in the full- or part-time business of purchasing
precious metals or jewels in the Township of Springfield must, prior to engaging in
such business, be duly licensed by the Township. The licensing procedure is to be
accomplished as follows.
§ 4-32.2. Registration Form. [Ord. No. 2010-18]
a. The business entity shall authorize a representative to complete a registration
application.
b. The registration application shall be made available to persons wishing to secure
same through the Township Clerk's office.
c. The registration shall thereafter be filed with the highest ranking officer within the
Division of Police, or his or her designee.
d. The registration form shall be executed by that person or persons who are
responsible for the day-to-day operation of the business. Where a corporation is
involved, the president of the corporation shall sign same, and, where partnerships
are involved, the managing partner shall sign same.
e. The registration form shall contain the following information:
1. The names and current addresses and telephone numbers of all principals of
the business. If the business is a corporation, then the information shall include
the names and current addresses and telephone numbers of all stockholders.
2. The place or places where the business entity shall operate from, as well as a
listing of the hours when the entity proposes to conduct business.
3. The names and addresses of three business references.
§ 4-31.5 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-32.2
4:59
§ 4-32.3. Effect on Existing Businesses. [Ord. No. 2010-18]
As to those business entities which are governed by this section and who are already
doing business in the Township prior to the effective date of this section (this section
was adopted June 22, 2010), then the businesses shall be licensed within 30 days of the
effective date of this section.
§ 4-32.4. Fee; Term. [Ord. No. 2010-18]
The annual fee for the license shall be $100. All such licenses shall be issued for a
period of one year commencing January 1 and expiring December 31 next following the
date of issuance, and there shall be no rebate for any lesser time. The license shall be
conspicuously exhibited upon the premises licensed thereunder.
§ 4-32.5. Record Required. [Ord. No. 2010-18]
Any person, partnership or corporation in the business buying precious metals or gems
who buys, attempts to buy or offers to buy precious metals or gems on the basis of bulk
value from any person who is not in the business of selling precious metals or gems in
the Township of Springfield shall maintain a written record of all purchases and shall be
subject to this section.
§ 4-32.6. Form of Record. [Ord. No. 2010-18]
The record shall be in a book, non-loose-leaf form, with all pages numbered in sequence.
All entries shall be made in pen or ink. There shall be no spaces between entries, and
each entry shall be numbered in sequence.
§ 4-32.7. Contents of Record. [Ord. No. 2010-18]
The record shall contain the following information:
4. A statement by the applicant that no principal of the business entity has any
arrests or convictions of any crimes. In cases of a corporation, the certification
shall apply to all stockholders. If there is an arrest or conviction record, same
must be disclosed.
5. A list of business and home addresses of all principals of the business for the
past five years.
6. The registration must also include a photograph of the person who will manage
the day-to-day operation of the business, and that individual must also agree to
be fingerprinted by the Division of Police.
a. Date of sale.
b. Name and address of seller.
c. Detailed description of items purchased.
d. Purchase price.
§ 4-32.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 4-32.8
4:60
§ 4-32.8. Identification of Seller. [Ord. No. 2010-18]
The purchaser shall require that the seller present current, reliable identification. The
record shall reflect the nature of the identification presented and the identification
number shall be recorded for that specific form of identification, (i.e. drivers license
number).
§ 4-32.9. Availability of Record for Inspection. [Ord. No. 2010-18]
The purchaser shall make the record available for inspection to any law enforcement
officer, upon demand, without the need for advance notice. The record shall be kept at
the purchaser's business premises.
§ 4-32.10. Inspections. [Ord. No. 2010-18]
Each dealer doing business in the Township of Springfield shall deliver to the highest
ranking office within the Division of Police, or his or her designee, the description of all
items purchased, received or sold, within 72 hours of the completion of the transaction,
on forms prescribed by the Springfield Township Division of Police.
§ 4-32.11. Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2010-18]
No dealer shall sell, melt, change the form of or dispose of any articles purchased or
received for a period of 20 days from the date the notification is made to the highest
ranking office within the Division of Police, or his or her designee. All such items shall
remain on the premises where the purchase was made until the expiration of the time
period set forth herein.
§ 4-32.12. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-18]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section or shall fail to comply with
any of the requirements thereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty
stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 4-32.8 GENERAL LICENSING § 4-32.12
4:61

Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 4-32.12 ANIMAL CONTROL § 4-32.12
5:1

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Regulation of Dogs
§ 5-1. DEFINITIONS. [1991 Code § 157-1]
As used in this article:
DOG — Shall mean any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE—Shall mean any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KEEPER — Shall mean any person exercising control over a dog or permitting a dog to
remain on premises under his control.
KENNEL—Shall mean any establishment wherein or whereon the business of boarding
or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, or any premises where more than
four dogs are kept, harbored or maintained, except a pet shop.
OWNER — Shall mean when applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall mean and
include every person having the right of property in such dog and every person who has
such dog in his keeping.
PET SHOP — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs are kept or displayed for sale.
POUND—Shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either under
the provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Shall mean any establishment where dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
VICIOUS DOG — Shall mean any dog which has been declared by a Municipal Judge
to be a vicious dog which has attacked or bitten any human being or which habitually
attacks other dogs or domestic animals.
§ 5-2. LICENSING PROVISIONS.
§ 5-2.1. License; When Required. [1991 Code § 157-2A]
Licenses shall be required for the following dogs of licensing age:
a. Any dog owned or kept within the Township by a resident of the Township on
January 1 of any calendar year.
b. Any dog acquired by any person during the course of any calendar year and kept
within the Township for more than 10 days after acquisition.
c. Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the calendar year.
d. Any unlicensed dog brought into the Township by any person and kept within the
Township for more than 10 days.
e. Any dog licensed by another state brought into the Township by any person and
kept within the Township for more than 90 days.
§ 5-1 ANIMAL CONTROL § 5-2.2
5:3
§ 5-2.2. Application for License. [1991 Code § 157-2B; Ord. No. 97-18 § 1]
§ 5-2.3. Application for License; When Made. [1991 Code § 157-2C]
Applications for licenses for dogs which are required to be licensed by the provisions
of Subsection 5-2.1a shall be made before February 1 of each calendar year. In all other
cases, the application for a license shall be made within 10 days of the day upon which
the dog in question first becomes subject to the provisions of this section.
§ 5-2.4. License Record. [1991 Code § 157-2D; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
The information on all applications under this article and the registration number issued
to each licensed dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Township
Clerk. In addition, the Township Clerk shall forward similar information to the State
Department of Health each month on forms furnished by the Department.
§ 5-2.5. Fees. [1991 Code §§ 157-2E, 165-3; Ord. No. 93-2; Ord. No. 95-19A; Ord.
No. 2007-25 § I(B)]
The person applying for a license shall pay a fee as provided below, for each dog, and
shall also pay $0.50 for the registration tag for each dog. The same fees shall be charged
for the annual renewal of each license and registration tag.
Dog license
Spayed or neutered dogs $10
All other dogs $15
Dog license late fee $1 per month or portion thereof
§ 5-2.6. Expiration Date. [1991 Code § 157-2F]
Each dog license and registration tag shall expire on January 31 of the calendar year
following the calendar year in which it was issued.
§ 5-2.7. Exceptions. [1991 Code § 157-2G]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dog licensed under § 5-16, Pet
Shops, Kennels, Shelters and Pounds. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and
a. Each application for a license under this article shall give the following
information:
1. A general description of the dog sought to be licensed, including breed, sex,
age, color and markings and whether such dog is of a long- or short-haired
variety.
2. Name, street and post office address of the owner of, and the person who shall
keep or harbor, such dog.
b. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order in which applications are received.
c. Proof of current rabies inoculation.
§ 5-2.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 5-2.7
5:4
commonly known as "Seeing Eye" dogs shall be licensed in the same manner as other
dogs, except that the owner or keeper shall not be required to pay any fee.
§ 5-3. DISPOSITION OF FEES.
§ 5-3.1. Local Fee. [1991 Code § 157-4; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions of this article,
except registration tag fees, shall be forwarded to the Township Treasurer within 30
days after collection or receipt and shall be placed in a special account separate from
any of the other accounts of the Township and shall be used for the following purposes
only: collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to seizure under this article; local
prevention and control of rabies; providing antirabies treatment under the direction of
the Health Department for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to
rabies; all other purposes prescribed by the Statutes of New Jersey governing the subject,
and for administering the provisions of this article. Any unexpended balance remaining
in such special account shall be retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year
following and may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of
the third fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall be
transferred from such special account to the general funds of the Township any amount
then in such account which is in excess of the total amount paid into the special account
during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
§ 5-3.2. State Fee. [1991 Code § 157-4; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
The registration tag fee of $0.50 for each dog shall be forwarded within 30 days after
collection by the Township Clerk to the State Department of Health.
§ 5-4. DOG CANVASS. [1991 Code § 157-5]
The Township shall annually cause a canvass to be made of all dogs owned, kept or
harbored within the limits of the Township and shall report to the Township Clerk, the
Health Department and to the State Department of Health the results thereof, setting
forth in separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or
harboring dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person,
together with the registration number of each dog; the number of unlicensed dogs owned,
kept or harbored by each person, together with a complete description of each unlicensed
dog.
§ 5-5. VICIOUS DOGS.
§ 5-5.1. Complaint; Investigation; Report. [1991 Code § 157-6A]
It shall be the duty of the Police Department and the Dog Warden to receive and
investigate complaints against dogs. If they deem any dog complained of to be a vicious
dog, as defined in § 5-1, they shall report their findings in writing to the Judge of the
Municipal Court.
§ 5-5.2. Notice; Hearing. [1991 Code § 157-6B; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
The Judge of the Municipal Court shall notify in writing the owner or keeper of an
§ 5-2.7 ANIMAL CONTROL § 5-5.2
5:5
allegedly vicious dog that a complaint has been made and require such person to appear
before the Judge at a stated time and place for a hearing. The Judge shall conduct the
hearing in the same manner as the Judge would conduct the trial of a criminal case. If
the Judge decides that the dog complained of is a vicious dog, the Judge shall so notify
the owner or keeper of the dog.
§ 5-5.3. Control of Vicious Dogs. [1991 Code § 157-6C]
No person owning or keeping a vicious dog shall permit such dog to be off the property
of the owner or keeper without being securely muzzled.
§ 5-6. IMPOUNDING AND DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN DOGS.
§ 5-6.1. Causes for Impounding. [1991 Code § 157-7A]
The Dog Warden shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody
and impounded any of the following dogs:
§ 5-6.2. Access to Premises. [1991 Code § 157-7B; Ord. No. 02-28 § [A]]
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article
is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for impounding any dog which
the officer or agent may lawfully seize and impound when such officer or agent is in
immediate pursuit of such dog, except upon the premises of the owner of the dog if the
owner is present and forbids same.
§ 5-6.3. Notice of Seizure. [1991 Code § 157-7C]
a. Any unlicensed dog running at large in violation of the provisions of this article.
b. Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or harboring such
dog which the Dog Warden or his agent has reason to believe is a stray dog.
c. Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or harboring such
dog without a current registration tag on its collar.
d. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring such dog.
e. Any dog which has been determined to be a vicious dog as provided in § 5-5,
provided that such dogs may also be seized by any Police Officer, and provided
further that if such dogs cannot be seized with safety, they may be killed.
a. If any dog so impounded or seized wears a registration tag, collar or harness having
inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or the
owner of or the person keeping or harboring the dog is known, the Dog Warden
shall immediately serve on the person whose address is given on the collar, or on
the person owning, keeping or harboring the dog, a notice in writing stating that the
dog has been seized and will be liable to be humanely disposed of or destroyed if
not claimed within seven days after service of the notice.
b. A notice under this Subsection may be served either by delivering it to the person
§ 5-5.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 5-6.3
5:6
§ 5-6.4. Disposition of Unclaimed Dogs. [1991 Code § 157-7C]
The Dog Warden is authorized and empowered to cause the destruction of any
unclaimed dog, in as humane a manner as possible, under any of the following
contingencies:
§ 5-7. REGULATIONS OF DOGS.23
§ 5-7.1. Wearing of Registration. [1991 Code § 157-8A]
All dogs which are required by the provisions of this article to be licensed shall wear a
collar or harness with the registration tag for such dog securely fastened thereto.
§ 5-7.2. Use of Registration Tags. [1991 Code § 157-8B]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a registration
tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person
attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not issued.
§ 5-7.3. Interference With Official Duties. [1991 Code § 157-8C]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to
perform any duty under this article.
§ 5-7.4. Disturbing the Peace. [1991 Code § 157-8D]
No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually barks or cries.
on whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known
place of abode or at the address given on the collar or by forwarding it by mail in a
prepaid letter addressed to that person at his usual or last known place of abode or
to the address given on the collar.
a. When any dog so seized has not been claimed by the person owning, keeping or
harboring such dog within seven days after notice or within seven days of the dog's
detention when notice has not been or cannot be given as set forth in the previous
subsection.
b. If the person owning, keeping or harboring any dog so seized has not claimed the
dog and has not paid all expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including
maintenance, not to exceed $5 for the first day and $1 per day for each additional
day.
c. If the seized dog is unlicensed at the time of its seizure and the person owning,
keeping or harboring such dog has not produced a license and registration tag as
provided in this article.
23. Editor's Note: The introductory paragraph of § 5-7, containing portions of 1991 Code § 157-8 was deleted by
Ordinance No. 02-28.
§ 5-6.3 ANIMAL CONTROL § 5-7.5
5:7
§ 5-7.5. Running at Large. [1991 Code § 157-8E]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to run at large
upon the public streets or in any public park, public building or other public place within
the Township.
§ 5-7.6. Leashing of Dogs. [1991 Code § 157-8F]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to be upon
the public streets or in any of the public places of the Township unless such dog is
accompanied by a person and is securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash
not more than six feet long.
§ 5-7.7. Property Damage. [1991 Code § 157-8G]
No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall permit or suffer it to do any injury
or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property.
§ 5-7.8. Number of Dogs Limited. [Ord. No. 97-18 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-18 § I]
In no event shall any person or household keep or harbor more than four dogs.24
§ 5-8. DOG BITES. [1991 Code § 157-9; Ord. No. 02-28 §§ I(A), (B)]
Where it has been determined by a physician that a person has been bitten by a dog,
such individual, or a parent or guardian if the person bitten is a minor, shall immediately
notify the police. When the owner or keeper of any dog shall be notified by the police
that the dog has bitten any individual or individuals, the owner or keeper of the dog must
comply with the following procedures:
Have the dog examined by a licensed veterinarian within 12 hours;
Have the dog kept in quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel for a period of 10
days;
At the end of 10 days have the dog reexamined by a veterinarian and a written report of
the dog's state of health sent to the Health Department.
§ 5-9. QUARANTINE. [1991 Code § 157-10]
The Township Committee may by proclamation require all dogs to be quarantined
during such period in each year as may seem advisable to the Township Committee.
§ 5-10. (RESERVED)
§ 5-11. ENFORCEMENT. [1991 Code § 157-11]
The Committee shall have the power to appoint a Dog Warden, whose duty it shall be to
enforce the provisions of this article. The Committee shall also have the power to appoint
24. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 5-7.9, Public Buildings, added 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-18, was repealed
2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01.
§ 5-7.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 5-11
5:8
one or more persons, to be known as "dog catchers," who may impound unlicensed
dogs running at large in violation of the provisions of this article and who shall make a
monthly and annual report to the Committee.
§ 5-12. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [1991 Code § 157-12; New]
Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with § 5-2 of this article shall
be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor more than $50 for each offense, except that
for the first offense, the penalty shall be not less than $1 nor more than $50. Any person
violating any other provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 5-13. through § 5-15 (RESERVED)
§ 5-11 ANIMAL CONTROL § 5-13
5:9

ARTICLE II
Pet Shops, Kennels, Shelters and Pounds
§ 5-16. PET SHOPS, KENNELS, SHELTERS AND POUNDS LICENSES.
§ 5-16.1. License Required. [1991 Code § 157-3A]
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, pet shop, shelter or
pound, as defined in this article, shall apply to the Township Clerk for a license entitling
such person to keep or operate said establishment.
§ 5-16.2. Application Information. [1991 Code § 157-3B]
The application shall contain the following information:
§ 5-16.3. License Term. [1991 Code § 157-3C; Ord. No. 2002-25 § I(A)]
All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state the purpose for
which the establishment is maintained and all such licenses shall expire on June 30 of
each year.
§ 5-16.4. License Fees. [1991 Code § 157-3D; Ord. No. 2002-25 § I(B)]
The annual license fee for a pet shop shall be $10. The annual license fee for a kennel
providing accommodations for 10 or less animals shall be $10 and for more than 10
animals $25. There shall be no fee for shelters or pounds.
§ 5-16.5. Compliance with State Regulations. [1991 Code § 157-3E; Ord. No.
2002-25 § I(C)]
a. The name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
b. The street address where the establishment is located or proposed to be located,
together with a general description of the premises.
c. The purposes for which it is to be maintained.
d. The maximum number of dogs to be accommodated by such establishment at any
one time.
a. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be subject to
revocation by the Township Committee on recommendation of the State
Department of Health or the Health Department for failure to comply with the rules
and regulations of the State Department of Health or the Health Department, after
the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State Department of Health or
the Health Department of the Township.
b. Any person holding a license to establish, keep or operate a kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound shall comply with all Township ordinances and the rules and regulations
promulgated by the State Department of Health governing the sanitary conduct and
operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, the preservation of sanitation
therein and the prevention of the spread of rabies and other diseases of dogs within
§ 5-16 ANIMAL CONTROL § 5-16.5
5:11
§ 5-16.6. Reports to State Health Department. [1991 Code § 157-3F]
The Director of Health and Welfare shall forward to the State Department of Health a list
of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed within 30 days after the license
therefor are issued, which list shall include the name and address of the licensee and the
kind of license issued.
§ 5-17. STRUCTURAL AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
§ 5-17.1. Location and Type Requirements. [1991 Code § 157-3G]
No kennel nor any part thereof shall be located or maintained at a distance less than
100 feet from adjacent property lines nor within 100 feet from a public highway, street,
thoroughfare or public building unless the building meets the requirements of Subsection
5-17.3 and is of the type that, by proper management, any noise or nuisance that would
be detrimental to adjacent property or to residents in adjacent property can be controlled.
§ 5-17.2. Structural and Other Requirements. [1991 Code § 157-3H]
and from such establishments.
c. Where the requirements of this section differ from those of State law (N.J.S.A.
4:15.1, et seq., N.J.S.A. 4:19A-11, N.J.A.C. 8:23A-1.1, et seq., as amended), the
more restrictive of such regulations shall apply, unless State regulation is
determined to preempt local regulation.
a. All buildings for commercial housing of dogs shall be of such size as to provide a
minimum of 25 square feet of enclosed ground floor area per dog of 20 pounds or
over, not including any passageways, food storage areas and like areas. In no case
shall more than four dogs of smaller size be enclosed in such unit area.
b. Interior areas may be subdivided, as the owner may desire, provided that no pen is
less than 25 square feet, and there is no reduction of the area specified above per
animal.
c. All buildings shall meet with all requirements of the Building Code and shall meet
the following specific requirements.
1. All buildings shall be dry.
2. All buildings shall be ventilated, allowing at least one square foot of
ventilation per animal, connected to outside air by means of wall grill, window
or duct.
3. All floors shall be of concrete.
4. Partitions may be of wire or boarding, as desired.
5. Floors shall be pitched to drain.
6. There shall be a separate adjacent outside exercise area of 40 square feet per
inside pen, enclosed by wire screening not less than five feet high.
§ 5-16.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 5-17.2
5:12
§ 5-17.3. Inspections; Certificates. [1991 Code § 157-3I]
§ 5-17.4. Confinement of Dogs; Exercise. [1991 Code § 157-3J]
All dogs, except house dogs kept on the premises of the owner, must be confined to
inside quarters from 10:30 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. unless it be deemed necessary to take them
out for exercise in charge of an attendant.
§ 5-17.5. Receptacles for Water. [1991 Code § 157-3K]
Each pen, runway, cage or other enclosure in which a dog may be housed in any kennel
licensed hereunder shall be supplied with a receptacle containing not less than one quart
of water per dog having access to such receptacle. This receptacle shall be filled at least
twice a day and shall be located in a shaded portion of the enclosure.
§ 5-17.6. Removal of Sick Dogs; Isolation. [1991 Code § 157-3L]
All dogs suffering from any disease or which shall become ill shall be removed from
the kennel in which well dogs are harbored and may be kept in a building not less than
25 feet therefrom. No dog suffering from a communicable disease shall be isolated in a
building which shall be located less than 25 feet from any other kennel building.
§ 5-17.7. Connection With Sanitary Sewer System. [1991 Code § 157-3M]
All facilities used or maintained in any kennel licensed hereunder for the purpose of
washing dogs shall be connected with the local sanitary sewer system, where the same is
available adjacent to the licensed premises, or with a septic tank installed in accordance
with the requirements of the Sanitary Code governing like connections with buildings.
§ 5-17.8. Maintenance of Kennel in Dwelling House Forbidden. [1991 Code
§ 157-3N]
No kennel licensed under the provisions of this section shall be maintained in any
dwelling house or basement thereof.
7. There shall be an opening between closed quarters and exercise area available
to the animal at all times and of such type as to permit closing at night.
a. The Construction Code Official shall, at the request of any applicant for a kennel or
pet shop license, inspect the premises described in the application and certify in
writing whether the buildings located on the premises or proposed to be built
thereon comply with the terms of this section and the provisions of the Township
Building Code. This certificate shall be furnished to the applicant without charge.
b. The sanitary inspector shall, at the request of any applicant for a kennel or pet shop
license, inspect the premises described in the application and certify in writing
whether the buildings and equipment located thereon or proposed to be erected
thereon comply with the provisions and regulations established by this section and
promulgated by the State Board of Health.
§ 5-17.2 ANIMAL CONTROL § 5-17.9
5:13
§ 5-17.9. Notice to Board of Health Secretary of Disease. [1991 Code § 157-30]
Every licensee hereunder shall notify the Secretary of the Board of Health in writing
within 12 hours of the occurrence of any case of rabies or other communicable disease
occurring among the dogs kept or harbored in the licensee's kennel, and the notification
shall contain a description of the dog, the registration tag number, including the name
of the Township in which it was issued, the name and the address of the owner and the
length of time during which the licensee proposes to keep the dog in the kennel and
under observation.
§ 5-17.10. Refuse or Cleanings; Removal; Burial. [1991 Code § 157-3P]
No refuse or cleanings from any kennel shall be burned on the licensed premises. The
refuse or cleanings shall be removed from the premises and taken beyond the Township
limits or shall be buried to a depth of not less than four feet, and before covering, the
surface shall be sprinkled with adequate disinfectant. For fertilizer purposes, cleanings
may be covered with pine sawdust and piled not less than 100 feet from any dwelling.
§ 5-17.11. Peace of Residents Not to Be Disturbed at Night. [1991 Code § 157-3Q]
No dog or dogs kept or harbored on the licensed premises shall be permitted to bark, yelp
or make a noise so as to disturb the peace and slumber of residents in the neighborhood
between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 5-17.12. Peace of Residents Not to Be Unreasonably Disturbed. [1991 Code
§ 157-3R]
No dog or dogs kept or harbored on the licensed premises shall be permitted to bark,
yelp or make a noise at any time so as to unreasonably disturb the peace of the residents
of the neighborhood of ordinary sensitivity.
§ 5-17.13. Permitting Dogs Off-Premises. [1991 Code § 157-3S]
No dog kept or harbored on the licensed premises shall be permitted off the premises,
except in a crate or other safe control, unless accompanied by a person who is capable of
controlling it and who has the dog securely fastened to a tether, leash or chain of six feet
or less.
§ 5-18. SALE OF DOGS AND CATS. [Added 9-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-12]
§ 5-18.1. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — An animal control center or animal shelter, maintained
by or under contract with any state, county, or municipality, whose mission and practice
is, in whole or significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes
or rescue organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any not-for-profit organization which has
tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code,
whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement
§ 5-17.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 5-18.1
5:14
of animals in permanent homes.
CAT — A member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG — A member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
OFFER FOR SALE—To sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for the sale of, barter,
auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat.
PET SHOP — A retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold, exchanged, bartered
or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public at retail. Such definition shall not
include an animal care facility or animal rescue organization, as defined.
§ 5-18.2. Restrictions on the Sale of Animals.
§ 5-18.3. Recordkeeping and Disclosure.
A pet shop shall maintain records stating the name and address of the animal care
facility or animal rescue organization that each cat or dog was obtained from for at
least two years following the date of acquisition. Such records shall be made available,
immediately upon request, to Township police and submitted annually, and no later than
May 1 of each year, to the Township. Each pet shop shall display on each cage a label
stating the name and address of the animal care facility or animal rescue organization of
each animal kept in the cage.
§ 5-19. and § 5-20. (RESERVED)
a. A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet shop has obtained
from or displays in cooperation with:
1. An animal care facility; or
2. An animal rescue organization.
b. A pet shop shall not offer for sale a dog or cat that is younger than eight weeks old.
§ 5-18.1 ANIMAL CONTROL § 5-19
5:15

ARTICLE III
Licensing and Regulation of Cats
§ 5-21. DEFINITIONS. [1991 Code § 157-13]
As used in this article:
AUTHORIZED AGENT — Shall mean the Chief of Police of the Township or Dog
Warden or any official, Police Officer or other person designated by the Chief of Police.
CAT — Shall mean any domesticated carnivorous mammal with retractile claws.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any cat which has attained an age of seven
months.
KENNEL—Shall mean any establishment wherein or whereon the business of boarding
or selling dogs or cats or breeding dogs or cats for sale is carried on, except a pet shop.
OWNER — Shall mean when applied to the proprietorship of a cat, a resident of the
Township of legal age and includes every person who has a cat in his keeping.
PET SHOP — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein dogs, cats or other animals for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — Shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs or cats seized
either under the provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER—Shall mean any establishment where dogs or cats are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
§ 5-22. LICENSING OF CATS.
§ 5-22.1. Licensing Requirement. [1991 Code § 157-14]
No person shall keep or harbor any cat within the Township without first obtaining a
license therefor, to be issued by the Township Clerk upon application by the owner
and payment of the prescribed fee, and no person shall keep or harbor any cat in the
Township except in compliance with the provisions of this article. In no event shall any
person or household keep or harbor more than four cats.
§ 5-22.2. Application for License. [1991 Code § 157-15]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for
and procure from the Township Clerk a license and official registration tag for each such
cat so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon such cat a collar with the registration
tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 5-22.3. License Fees. [1991 Code § 157-16; Ord. No. 95-19A; Ord. No. 96-11;
Ord. No. 2007-25 § I(C)]
The person applying for the license and registration tag shall, for each cat, upon
providing proof of rabies inoculation, pay a license and registration fee of $10 for
spayed or neutered cats and $15 for all other cats; and for each annual renewal, the fee
for the license and for the registration tag shall be as established above. The licenses,
registration tags and renewals thereof shall expire on the last day of each year. A late fee
§ 5-21 ANIMAL CONTROL § 5-22.3
5:17
of $1 per month or portion thereof shall be charged.
§ 5-22.4. Time for Making Application. [1991 Code § 157-17]
The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing age or of any cat which attains
licensing age shall make application for license and registration tag for such cat within
10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 5-22.5. Contents of Application. [1991 Code § 157-18]
The application shall state the sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which license
and registration are sought and the name, street and post office address of the owner and
of the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The application and registration number
issued for the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Township Clerk.
§ 5-22.6. Cats Brought Into Township. [1991 Code § 157-19]
§ 5-22.7. Registration Tag. [1991 Code § 157-20]
No person except an authorized agent shall remove a registration tag from the collar of
any cat without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to
a cat for which it is not owned.
§ 5-22.8. When License Not Required. [1991 Code § 157-21]
Licenses and registration tags shall not be required for cats under licensing age and cats
owned, kept or harbored by an owner or operator of a licensed kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound.
§ 5-23. IMPOUNDING AND DESTRUCTION.
§ 5-23.1. Seizure and Notice. [1991 Code § 157-22; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
a. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township any cat
licensed in another state for the current year and bearing a registration tag and shall
keep the cat or permit the cat to be kept within the Township for a period of more
than 90 days shall, within 10 days, apply for a license and registration tag for each
such cat, unless the cat shall be part of a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound.
b. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township any
unlicensed cat and shall keep the cat or permit the cat to be kept within the
Township for a period of more than 10 days shall immediately apply for a license
and registration tag for each such cat, unless the cat shall be part of a kennel, pet
shop or pound.
a. An authorized agent shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into
custody and impounded and thereafter destroyed or disposed of as provided in this
section any cat found in or about any street, thoroughfare, place, lot or premises
contrary to or not in conformance with the provisions of this article.
b. If any cat so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon or attached
§ 5-22.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 5-23.1
5:18
§ 5-23.2. Disposition of Unclaimed Cats. [1991 Code § 157-22; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(B)]
When any cat so seized has been detained for seven days after notice, when notice can be
given as above set forth, or has been detained for seven days after seizure, when notice
has not been and cannot be given as above set forth, and the owner or person keeping or
harboring the cat has not claimed the cat and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention, including maintenance costs as shall be established by Township Committee
resolution, or if the cat be unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or person
keeping or harboring the cat has not produced a license and registration tag for the cat,
the poundmaster may cause the cat to be destroyed in the manner causing as little pain
as possible, at a charge as shall be established by Township Committee resolution. At
any time during the seven-day period the poundmaster may permit the cat to be removed
from the pound by any Animal Welfare League Society without payment by it of the
expenses, provided that the Animal Welfare League Society agrees to retain the cat
for the remainder of the required seven-day period. The pound shall administer feline
vaccination shots to any cat removed from the pound by the Animal Welfare League
Society at a charge to the Township as shall be estimated by Committee resolution.
§ 5-24. (RESERVED)
§ 5-25. RIGHT OF ENTRY. [1991 Code § 157-23]
Any authorized agent empowered to perform the duty under this article is hereby
authorized to go upon any premises to seize for impounding any cat or cats which he
may lawfully seize and impound when such officer is in immediate pursuit of such cat or
cats, except upon the premises of the owner of the cat if the owner is present and forbids
the same.
§ 5-26. HINDERING ENFORCEMENT. [1991 Code § 157-24]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to
perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 5-27. NUISANCES. [1991 Code § 157-25]
No person owning, possessing, keeping, harboring or in charge of a cat (whether such
cat is licensed or unlicensed) shall allow, suffer or permit such cat to become a nuisance
on or about any public or private place or to any person within the Township.
thereto the name and address of any person or a registration tag, or the owner or the
person keeping or harboring the cat is known, an authorized agent shall forthwith
serve on the person or on the owner or the person keeping or harboring the cat, if
known, a notice in writing stating that the cat has been seized and will be liable to
be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the service of the
notice.
c. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the person on
whom it is to be served or by leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of
abode or by forwarding it by posting a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode.
§ 5-23.1 ANIMAL CONTROL § 5-28
5:19
§ 5-28. RIGHTS OF OTHERS. [1991 Code § 157-26]
No person owning, possessing, keeping, harboring or in charge of a cat shall allow,
suffer or permit such cat to do any injury to a person or an animal or to do any damage to
any other person's or any public lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property, including
but not limited to depositing any urine or feces thereon.
§ 5-29. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [1991 Code § 157-27; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 5-28 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 5-29
5:20
ARTICLE IV
Pet Waste Disposal
§ 5-30. PET WASTE DISPOSAL REGULATIONS.
§ 5-30.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(A)]
As used in this article:
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Shall mean any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the owner of such
pet.
PET—Shall mean a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal) kept
for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Shall mean any waste matter expelled from the bowels of the
animal; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL—Shall mean placement in a designated waste receptacle or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly emptied by the
municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey
domestic sewage for proper treatment and disposal.
§ 5-30.2. Requirements for Disposal. [Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(A)]
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly dispose of their
pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by
that person.
§ 5-30.3. Removal of Animal Waste. [Ord. No. 97-9 § 1H; Ord. No. 2003-10 § I;
Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(A)]
§ 5-30.4. Exemption. [Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(A)]
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal shall be
exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is being used for such
purpose.
a. No person shall allow a dog to soil, defile, urinate or defecate on any private
property without the permission of the owner of such property.
b. No person shall allow a dog to soil, defile, urinate or defecate on any public
property, but same shall be allowed upon any public street, and within the public
right-of-way between a sidewalk and the public street. Such person shall
immediately remove all feces deposited by such dog (but shall not be responsible
for removing urine), and shall properly dispose of same pursuant to law. Such
person shall, to the greatest extent possible, limit such dog to the public street and
the outermost portion of the right-of-way.
c. This section shall not apply to trained guide dogs during the actual performance of
other duties.
§ 5-30 ANIMAL CONTROL § 5-30.5
5:21
§ 5-30.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(A)]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Health
Department.
§ 5-30.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 5-30.5
5:22
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
Editor's Note: For consumption of alcohol in public, see § 3-14. For possession and
consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage persons on private property, see §
3-15.
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [1991 Code § 127-1; Ord. No. 02-28 (C)]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic beverages in
the Township of Springfield in accordance with the provisions of an Act of Legislature
of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages" Chapter
436 of the Laws of 1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A.
33:1-1, et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Director of the
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [1991 Code § 127-2]
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases herein shall have the same
meaning as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of the Director of the
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [1991 Code § 127-3A]
All applications for license, all licenses issued, and all proceedings under this chapter
shall be in accordance with the Act, rules and regulations referred to in § 6-1, and all
other applicable laws of the State of New Jersey or of the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [1991 Code § 127-3B]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Township Committee, which
shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [1991 Code § 127-3C; New]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township without
having obtained a license in accordance with the Act referred to in § 6-1 and the
provisions of this chapter, except in those cases provided by law where the licenses in
question are issued by the Director of the State Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3.4. Classes and Maximum Number of Licenses; License Fees. [1991 Code
§§ 127-3D, 165-3; Ord. No. 93-2; Ord. No. 95-19A; New; Ord. No. 2005-10 § I;
Ord. No. 2007-03 § I; Ord. No. 2007-25 § I(A); amended 5-23-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-07; 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
The classes and maximum number of licenses to be issued by the Township Committee
are hereby fixed as follows and the annual fees of licenses for the sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages in the Township shall be as follows:
§ 5-30.5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL § 6-3.4
6:1
Class of License
Annual License
Fees Number of Licenses25
a. Plenary Retail Consumption
Licenses
$2,500 9
b. Plenary Retail Distribution
Licenses
$1299 4
c. Club Licenses $188 2
d. Catering Permit $100 N/A
§ 6-3.5. License for Hotels or Motels Having 100 Sleeping Rooms. [1991 Code
§ 127-3E]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.20, the number of plenary retail consumption licenses to be
issued in the Township of Springfield shall not affect, be counted as part of, nor prevent
the issuance of a new plenary retail consumption license to a person who operates a hotel
or motel containing at least 100 guest sleeping rooms or who may hereafter construct and
establish a new hotel or motel containing at least 100 guest rooms; provided, however,
that there shall be no renewal or transfer of such a license except for or to premises
operated as a hotel or motel containing at least 100 guest sleeping rooms. The purpose
of this subsection is to create, pursuant to statutory law, an exclusive plenary retail
consumption license issued only and governed by this subsection and that statutory
criteria.
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS.
§ 6-4.1. Sales to Certain Persons. [New; Ord. No. 2009-25 § I]
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly or indirectly,
any alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person or persons under the legal age, or
permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any licensed premises by any of the
above-named persons.
§ 6-4.2. Closing of Premises During Prohibited Hours of Sale; Exceptions. [1991
Code § 127-4D; New; Ord. No. 2009-25 § I]
During the hours when sales of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, the entire licensed
premises shall be closed and no person shall be admitted or permitted to remain thereon
except the licensee or bona fide employees of the licensee; provided, however, that
such requirement for the closing of the premises shall not apply to bona fide hotels or
restaurants as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1(t) and to clubs eligible for a club license under
N.J.S.A. 33:1-12(5) and to other establishments where the principal business is other
than the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-4.3. Hours of Sale. [1999 Code §§ 127-4A, 127-4B, 127-4C; Ord. No. 2009-25
§ I]
25. Editor's Note: For State law authorizing the Township Committee to restrict number of licenses to sell alcoholic
beverages at retail, see N.J.S.A. 33:1-40.
§ 6-3.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 6-4.3
6:2
§ 6-5. PARKS OR PICNIC GROUNDS.
§ 6-5.1. Notice. [1991 Code § 127-6; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
Any licensee holding a plenary retail consumption license who shall operate, in
connection with the licensed premises, a park or picnic grove shall notify the Chief of
Police, in writing, 48 hours in advance whenever the premises are to be used by any club,
society, association or other organization for an outing or dance to be held in the park or
grove. The licensee shall also furnish the Chief of Police with the name of the chairman
of the organization in charge of the outing or dance.
§ 6-5.2. Police Supervision. [1991 Code § 127-6; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
The licensee shall maintain and pay for adequate police supervision of the premises at
all outings and dances held on the premises. The licensee shall pay for the services of the
special police used in the park, and also for the services of the police furnished by the
Township to direct and supervise traffic at the entrance to the park and at the intersection
of the streets as the Chief of Police shall deem necessary because of the outings and
dances.
§ 6-6. EMPLOYMENT PERMITS.
§ 6-6.1. Employment Permit Required. [1991 Code § 127-7; Ord. No. 02-28]
a. Weekdays. Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, alcoholic beverages shall not
be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in any licensed premises on any Monday
through Saturday, between the hours of 2:00 and 7:00 a.m.
b. Sundays. Except as hereinafter otherwise provided, alcoholic beverages shall not be
sold, served, delivered to or consumed in any licensed premises on any Sunday,
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. For plenary retail consumption
licensees, the prohibitions in this subsection shall only apply between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 9:30 a.m. [Amended 8-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-15]
c. New Year's Day. In addition, any licensee may open early for business on New
Years Day, from 9:30 a.m. to 12:00 noon.
d. Sunday Prior to Thanksgiving, Christmas and New Years. In addition, any Plenary
Retail Distribution licensee may open early for business on one or more of the
Sundays immediately prior to Thanksgiving, Christmas Day or New Years Day,
from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon.
e. Thanksgiving Eve and New Years Eve. In addition, any Plenary Retail
Consumption licensee may remain open for business on Thanksgiving Day or New
Years Day, from 2:00 until 3:00 a.m.
f. Notice. Any licensee intending to open extended hours pursuant to Subsections (c),
(d) or (e), herein, may only do so upon no less than 10 days' prior written notice to
the Township Clerk and the Office of the Chief of Police.
a. No licensee under this chapter shall employ in the conduct of his licensed business
any person in a permanent position who shall not have first obtained an
§ 6-4.3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL § 6-6.1
6:3
§ 6-6.2. Procedure. [1991 Code § 127-7; Ord. No. 02-28]
Each applicant for an employment permit shall be fingerprinted, without charge, under
the supervision of the Chief of Police, at such time and place as shall be designated by
the Chief. The fingerprints shall be marked "noncriminal" and shall be kept on file in the
Police Department.
§ 6-6.3. Issuance. [1991 Code § 127-7; Ord. No. 02-28 §§ I(A), (B)]
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to issue an employment permit to any other
person making the application therefor who is not otherwise disqualified from such
employment. The employment permit shall state: the name of the applicant, the
applicant's age and date of birth, the applicant's height, color and any distinguishing
marks or physical characteristics, and shall have attached thereto the applicant's
photograph.
§ 6-7. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [1991 Code § 127-8; New]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any applicable Statute or any of the
rules or regulations of the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of charges preferred against the licensee
and affording a reasonable opportunity for hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other penalty which may
be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 6-8. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [1991 Code § 127-9; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 6-9. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-9.1. Minors Excluded. [1991 Code § 127-5; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
No minor shall enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
the purpose of purchasing or having served or delivered to such minor any alcoholic
beverage.
employment permit from the Chief of Police and from the Director of the Division
of Alcoholic Beverage Control, if so required.
b. No person shall permit or suffer himself to be so employed without having first
obtained an employment permit from the Chief of Police and from the Director of
the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control, if so required.
§ 6-6.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 6-9.2
6:4
§ 6-9.2. Consumption or Purchase by Minor. [1991 Code § 127-5; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(A)]
No minor shall consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale
of alcoholic beverages, or purchase, attempt to purchase or have another purchase for
such minor any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-9.3. Misrepresenting or Misstating Age. [1991 Code § 127-5; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(A)]
No person shall misrepresent or misstate such person's age or the age of any other person
for the purpose of inducing any retail licensee or an employee of a retail licensee to sell,
serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a minor.
§ 6-9.4. Selling, Serving or Dispensing by Minors Prohibited. [1991 Code § 127-5]
No person shall cause, permit or suffer any alcoholic beverages to be sold, served or
dispensed by any minor.
§ 6-9.5. Offering or Selling Alcoholic Beverages to a Minor. [1991 Code § 127-5]
No person shall offer or serve an alcoholic beverage to a minor in any public or private
place within the Township, nor shall any person who has ownership or control of any
premises, public or private, or supervision of any event, permit, suffer or allow the
consumption of an alcoholic beverage by a minor in or upon any such premises or at
any such event within the Township. This subsection shall not apply to any person who
is related to this minor by blood, marriage or adoption and who has no more remote
relationship to such minor than first cousin. For the purposes of this subsection, "minor"
is defined as any person below the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-9.6. Violations and Penalty. [1991 Code § 127-5; New; Ord. #02-28 § I(A)]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed and
adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon conviction thereof, in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, as amended, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500. In
addition, the Court shall suspend the person's license to operate a motor vehicle for six
months or prohibit the person from obtaining a license to operate a motor vehicle in
this State for six months beginning on the date such person becomes eligible to obtain
a license or on the date of conviction, whichever is later. In addition to the general
penalty prescribed for an offense, the Court may require any person under the legal
age who violates this Act to participate in an alcohol education or treatment program
authorized by the Department of Health for a period not to exceed the maximum period
of confinement prescribed by law for the offense for which the individual has been
convicted.
§ 6-9.2 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL § 6-9.6
6:5

Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
Editor's Note: Chapter 7 Traffic of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Springfield, 1996, was approved by the State of New Jersey
Department of Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Engineering and Safety
Programs on March 29, 1999.
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Words and Phrases. [1974 Code § 8-1]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning respectively
ascribed to them in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 7-1.2. Official Time Standard. [1974 Code § 8-20]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either Eastern
Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time as may be in current use in the
Township.
§ 7-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET. [New]
§ 7-3. TOW-AWAY. [New]
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace
to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any Police Officer may provide for
the removal of that vehicle. The owner shall bear the reasonable costs of removal and
storage which may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 7-4. PENALTIES.26 [1974 Code § 8-7; Ord. No. 83-42; Ord. No. 88-13; Ord. No.
a. The Mayor or, in his/her absence, disability or inability to act, the Chief of Police
and, in the event of his/her absence, disability or inability to act, then the ranking
officer of the Police Department, is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for
the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or
days during specified hours on any day or days whenever he/she finds that such
closing is necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Mayor and in accordance with Subsection a
above, shall provide for the posting of proper warning signs of such closing on any
street or portion thereof during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $50.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a period greater
than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective unless and until it has been
submitted to and approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Transportation.
§ 6-9.6 TRAFFIC § 7-4
7:1
90-12; Ord. No. 94-5; Ord. No. 95-19]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute or a sub-chapter
herein (94-5), every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $100
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 days, or both.
§ 7-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [New]
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 7-6. REPEAL. [New]
As provided in the Adopting Ordinance for the Revision of the Township of Springfield
Ordinances, all former traffic ordinances of the Township are hereby repealed, and all
ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the
prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 7-7. PARKING.
§ 7-7.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [1974 Code § 8-3.1]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any
person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive, provisions prohibiting or limiting
the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any
other New Jersey Statute, or as hereinafter provided.
§ 7-7.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [1974 Code § 8-3.2; Ord.
No. 93-17; New]
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon streets or
sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are
displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his/her absence, the ranking Police Officer is
authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs when weather conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or
public celebrations dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions
which interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner
of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being erected as
required by law.
26. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 90-12 established handicapped fines at $100 for the first offense. Subsequent offenses
shall be $100 plus 90 days community service. Ordinance No. 83-42 established the fine for violation of §§ 7-13 Parking
Prohibited at All Times and 7-14 Overnight Parking shall be $10.
§ 7-4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-7.3
7:2
§ 7-7.3. Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and Removal. [1974
Code § 8-3.2d; New; Ord. No. 2002-01 § I(B); Ord. No. 2013-14]
As to all streets, roads and highways within the Township, whenever snow or other
precipitation has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers any such street, road
or highway, an emergency shall thereby exist, and no vehicle shall be parked on or so
as to cover such street, road, or highway, or any portion thereof. Such restriction shall
remain in effect after the snow has ceased until any such street, road or highway has
been plowed sufficiently, or in any other manner cleared, so that such parking will not
interfere with the normal flow of traffic or with the removal of snow. An unoccupied
vehicle parked or standing in violation hereof shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace
to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and in addition to all other fines and penalties,
such vehicle shall be subject to towing, the cost of which to be paid for by the owner or
operator of the vehicle before such vehicle shall be released, after reasonable attempts
have been made to contact the owner of such vehicle so it may voluntarily be moved.
§ 7-7.4. Springfield Free Public Library Patron/Springfield Township First Aid
Squad Parking Lot. [Ord. No. 83-25; Ord. No. 2012-26]
a. Location. Parking lot area located off of North Trivett, Center Street and Mountain
Avenue.
b. Designation of Spots. There shall be 14 designated parking spaces in the Springfield
Free Public Library Patron/Springfield Township First Aid Squad Parking Lot, of
which eight spots shall be reserved for patrons of the Springfield Free Public
Library and the remaining six spots to members of the Springfield Township First
Aid Squad.
c. Parking Limitations.
1. Patrons of the Township Library shall be subject to the following parking
restrictions for use of the lot spaces:
Hours Days Location
9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. *Overnight
parking is strictly
prohibited
Monday-
Sunday
8 designated Library patron spots
designated in Springfield Free
Library Patron/Springfield First Aid
Squad Lot located off of North
Trivett, Center Street and Mountain
Avenue
2. Springfield First Aid Squad Parking Lot:
Parking in the six designated First Aid Squad parking spots is strictly limited
to members of the Springfield Township First Aid Squad personnel on official
business.
d. Violations and Penalties: Any person parking a vehicle in violation of Subsection
7-7.4c shall be fined and vehicle may be towed in accordance to §(s) 7-3 and 7-4 of
the Township Code.
§ 7-7.3 TRAFFIC § 7-7.5
7:3
§ 7-7.5. Parking Spaces for Springfield Town Hall Business Only, During Set
Hours. [Ord. No. 2015-16 § 1A]
§ 7-7.6. Parking for Springfield Annex Building Business. [Added 3-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-02]
§ 7-8. CONSTRUCTION ZONE: TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREET AND
HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATION AND
ADOPTION OF MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
FOR STREETS AND HIGHWAYS (MUNICIPAL ROADS ONLY).
§ 7-8.1. Controls Established for Construction Zone. [New]
The Governing Body hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control occur and
traffic must be moved through or around street construction, maintenance operations,
and utility work, above and below ground which requires blocking the roadway and
obstructing the normal flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health,
a. Parking in any of the 14 angled spaces that are along the north side of South Trivett
Avenue and in any of the 15 angled spaces that are along the south side of North
Trivett Avenue are expressly restricted for persons tending to business in the
Springfield Town Hall and/or the Springfield Annex Buildings. The hours of this
restriction shall be from 8:00 a.m. through 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
b. Signage stating "Parking for Business at Town Hall/Annex Only 8:00 a.m. - 8:00
p.m. Mon - Fri", shall be placed at both ends and in the center of these parking areas
on both North and South Trivett Avenues.
c. Violations and Penalties: Any vehicle parked in violation of this Subsection 7-7.5
may be towed in accordance with § 7-3 of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Springfield, and any person parking a vehicle in violation of this
Subsection 7-7.5 shall be fined in accordance with § 7-4 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Springfield.
a. Parking along the northern side of North Trivett Avenue beginning from the
southwest corner of Center Street to a point 87 feet westerly along the northern
curbline shall be expressly restricted for persons tending to business at the
Springfield Annex Building. There shall be a limit of fifteen-minute parking, and
the hours of this restriction shall be from 8:00 a.m. through 4:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
b. Signage stating "Parking for Business at Annex Building Only, Limit 15 Minutes,
8:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m. Mon - Fri" shall be placed at the center and western end of
this area.
c. Violations and penalties. Any vehicle parked in violation of this Subsection 7-7.6
may be towed in accordance with § 7-3 of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Springfield, and any person parking a vehicle in violation of this
Subsection 7-7.6 shall be fined in accordance with § 7-4 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Springfield.
§ 7-7.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-8.1
7:4
safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and regulations directed
to the safety and expeditious movement of traffic through construction and maintenance
zones and to provide safety for the work force performing these operations.
The Township of Springfield, in the County of Union, State of New Jersey, does hereby
adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices hereafter known as
M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates
whenever construction maintenance operations of utility work obstructs the normal flow
of traffic. Any person, contractor, or utility, who fails to comply with the provisions of
M.U.T.C.D. while performing such work is in violation of this section.
§ 7-8.2. Pre-Construction Meetings. [New]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of a public utility
agreement, wishing to conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the
Police Department at least 96 hours in advance in order to arrange a preconstruction
meeting in order to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of
construction work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section
prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not approved by the Police Department
is in violation of this section.
§ 7-8.3. Hazardous Conditions. [New]
The person, contractor, or utility shall provide the Police Department with at least
two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at
the construction or maintenance site prior to the start of any work. If for any reason
emergency contact cannot be reached, or if the emergency contact person does not
respond to the call from the Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the
Township may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for
such emergency service by the Township shall be charged to the person, contractor, or
utility for such condition.
§ 7-8.4. Hours. [Ord. No. 92-23; New]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work on any roadway
except in an emergency and with the concurrence of the Police Department in the
Township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. This time limit may be adjusted
to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the
Police Department. If it is determined by the officer in charge that the construction
or maintenance operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially
delay traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only
between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. There shall be no construction, maintenance operation
utility work at the below listed times on the below listed streets within the Township
except in an emergency and with the concurrence of the Police Department between
6:30 a.m. and 9:30 a.m. and between 3:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m. on Mountain Avenue,
Springfield Avenue, U.S. Route 22, Morris Avenue (N.J. Routes 124 and 22) including
the one way section, So. Springfield Avenue, Shunpike Road, Milltown Road, Meisel
Avenue, Hillside Avenue, Maple Avenue and Summit Road and between 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. at any location unless the then current Township Noise Control Ordinance is
complied with.
§ 7-8.1 TRAFFIC § 7-8.5
7:5
§ 7-8.5. Road Closing and Detours. [New]
Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved by the Police
Department.
§ 7-8.6. Traffic Directors. [New]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites when determined
by the Police Department that same is necessary to provide for the safety and expeditious
movement of traffic.
§ 7-8.7. Stop Work. [New]
The Police Department shall have the authority to stop work, including the removal of
equipment and vehicles, stored material within the street right-of-way, back filling of
open excavations and/or other related work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety
hazard or for any violation of this section.
§ 7-8.8. Site Preparation. [New]
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicle or equipment are to be placed
in the roadway or sidewalk or until all construction, signs, lights devices and pavement
markings are installed.
§ 7-8.9. Violations and Penalties. [New]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof for a first offense pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500
and/or be imprisoned in the County jail for a term not exceeding 90 days. For a second
offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned
in the County jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-8.10. Inconsistent Regulations. [New]
All ordinance or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the provisions of this
section are hereby repealed to the extent of any such inconsistency.
§ 7-8.11. Approval by the Commissioner of Transportation. [New]
This section shall take effect after approval by the Commissioner of Transportation 20
days after passage and publication as prescribed by law.
§ 7-9. (RESERVED)
§ 7-10. STOPPING OR STANDING.
§ 7-8.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-10.1
7:6
§ 7-10.1. Stopping or Standing Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets. [1974 Code § 8-4.1]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any day (except
Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Days Location
Hillside
Avenue
North 4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
For a distance of 1,000
feet east of South
Springfield Avenue
Morris Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. 3:30 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Weekdays Between a point 220 feet
west of, and the westerly
curb of Baltusrol Way
§ 7-10.2. Stopping or Standing Prohibited on Certain Streets. [1974 Code § 8-4.2;
Ord. No. 89-28; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 98-3; Ord. No. 2006-03 § 1; Ord. No.
2010-32]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name Sides Location
All streets within the
Township
Both Any street, sidewalk, or other location which
falls within a sight triangle as defined in the
Land Use Ordinance of the Township
Caldwell Place East Between Morris Avenue and Mountain Avenue
Clinton Avenue Both From its intersection with Mountain Avenue
easterly for the entire length of the
Neighborhood Commercial Zone
Hannah Street Both Between Mountain Avenue and Center Street
Maple Avenue Both Between Meisel Avenue and Morris Avenue
Marcy Avenue East Between Morris Avenue and a point 50 feet
from Morris Avenue
Meisel Avenue East Between Morris Avenue and Maple Avenue
Morris Avenue South Between the most easterly point on the Route
24 exit ramp and the intersection with Morris
and Essex Turnpike
Mountain Avenue a. West Between Morris Avenue and the northerly
curbline of Hannah Street
b. East Between the southerly curbline of Henshaw
Avenue and a point 275 feet south therefrom
c. West Between the southerly curbline of Henshaw
Avenue and a point 265 feet south therefrom
§ 7-10.1 TRAFFIC § 7-10.2
7:7
Name Sides Location
d. Both From its intersection with Tooker Avenue
through its intersection with Henshaw Avenue,
except that, people actually depositing mail on
the westerly side of Mountain Avenue in the
outside mail receptacles for the Post Office may
stop their vehicles only while depositing mail in
those receptacles
e. Both Between points 800 feet north and 1,350 feet
north of the northerly curbline of Hillside
Avenue
f. West Between the northerly curbline of Shunpike
Road and a point 100 feet north thereof
g. East Between the southerly curbline of Shunpike
Road and a point 100 feet south thereof
Shunpike Road Both Between 100 feet west of the westerly curbline
of Mountain Avenue and 100 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Mountain Avenue
Shunpike Road and
Baltusrol Way
Both A distance of 100 feet in all directions from the
intersection of Shunpike Road and Baltusrol
Way
South Maple Avenue Both Between Morris Avenue and a point 360 feet
from Morris Avenue
South Springfield
Avenue
a. East Between Mountain Avenue and Milltown Road
b. West Between a point 100 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Shunpike Road and an elongation of
the southerly curbline of Milltown Road
c. East Between points 175 feet and 600 feet south of
Diven Street
d. West Between a point 175 feet south of Diven Street
and an elongation of the northerly curbline of
Beverly Road
Walnut Court Both A distance of 145 feet beginning at the curbline
of Morris Avenue and running easterly
therefrom
§ 7-11. PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS. [1974 Code
§§ 8-3.1, 8-3.5; Ord. No. 76-9; Ord. No. 83-24; Ord. No. 84-3; Ord. No. 88-16; Ord.
No. 90-30 § 1; Ord. No. 97-6 § 1; Ord. No. 99-30; Ord. No. 02-23 § 1(B); Ord. No.
2006-13 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-3 § 1(A); Ord. No. 2009-08 § 1A; Ord. No. 2011-07
§ 1C; Ord. No. 2011-12 § 1(A); Ord. No. 2011-29 § 1(A); Ord. No. 2012-01]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the hours listed on
§ 7-10.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-11
7:8
any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described.
Name of Street Sides Time Limit Hours Days Location
Alvin Terrace East 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Between a point 160 feet
of the northerly curbline
of Morris Avenue and the
northerly end of Alvin
Terrace
Caldwell Place West 1 hr. 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Beginning 35 feet from
the southerly curbline of
Morris Avenue to a point
350 feet south thereof
Church Mall Both 4 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Clinton Avenue a. North 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
School Days From the Neighborhood
Commercial Zone to the
easterly terminus of
Clinton Avenue
b. South 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From the Neighborhood
Commercial Zone along
the southerly curb to the
easterly terminus of
Clinton Avenue
Colonial Terrace West 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From a point 75 feet south
of the southern curb of
Morris Avenue to Cain
Street
Henshaw Avenue Both 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Beginning at Mountain
Avenue to a point 500
feet northwest thereof
Keeler Street Both 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
580 feet south of its
intersection with Morris
Avenue
Marion Avenue Both 2 hrs. 9:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From a point 100 feet
north of Morris Avenue
and Perry Place
§ 7-11 TRAFFIC § 7-11
7:9
Name of Street Sides Time Limit Hours Days Location
Meisel Avenue Both 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between a point 200 feet
south of the southerly
curbline of Morris
Avenue and a point 75
feet north of the northerly
curbline of Wabeno
Avenue
Mountain Avenue a. East 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Beginning 35 feet from
the northerly curbline of
Wabeno Avenue to a
point 675 feet north
thereof
b. West 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From a point 50 feet south
of the intersection with
Hannah Street, southerly
to a point 100 feet north
of the intersection with
North Trivett Avenue
c. West 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Beginning 35 feet from
the southerly curbline of
South Trivett Avenue to a
point 35 feet north of the
northerly curbline of
Caldwell Place
d. West 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Beginning 35 feet from
the southerly curbline of
Caldwell Place to a point
35 feet north of Tooker
Avenue
Oakland Avenue Both 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length
Rose Avenue Both 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From the intersection of
Caldwell Place along both
north and south curbs in a
westerly direction for a
distance of 350 feet
South Maple Avenue West 2 hrs. 8:30 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Between a point 360 feet
south of Morris Avenue
and Cain Streets
§ 7-11 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-11
7:10
Name of Street Sides Time Limit Hours Days Location
Tooker Avenue South 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
From the intersection of
Tooker Avenue and
Mountain Avenue along
the south curb of Tooker
Avenue in a westerly
direction of a distance to
350 feet
Warner Avenue a. West 2 hrs. 8:30 a.m. to 5:30
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length, except from
the northerly curbline of
Morris Avenue for a
distance of 200 feet
northerly thereof to the
end of the existing office
building property
b. East 2 hrs. 8:30 a.m. to 5:30
p.m.
Monday through
Friday
Entire length, except from
the northerly curbline of
Morris Avenue for a
distance of 110 feet
northerly thereof to the
end of the existing gas
station property
Waverly Avenue a. South 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Monday through
Saturday
From Mountain Avenue
to the easterly terminus of
Waverly Avenue
b. North 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Monday through
Saturday
Beginning 150 feet east of
Mountain Avenue to the
easterly terminus of
Waverly Avenue
§ 7-12. MUNICIPAL PARKING PERMIT. [1991 Code § 219-5; Ord. No. 95-19A;
Ord. No. 2000-01 § 1; Ord. No. 2000-14 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-01 § I(E); Ord. No.
2007-25 § I(E); Ord. No. 2008-20 § I; Ord. No. 2009-08 § I(B); Ord. No. 2011-13
§ 1B; Ord. No. 2012-18]
a. An application for a permit providing parking at any permit parking space within
the Township may be filed with the Police Records Bureau by presentation of proof
of a currently valid New Jersey driver's license; the payment of a fee as set forth
hereafter; a completed application; and a motor vehicle registration certificate and
current automobile liability insurance card for the vehicle to which the permit is to
be affixed except as set forth in paragraph h below. The fee shall be due in full for
the entire permit period, notwithstanding that a portion of the period may have
expired; fees shall not be prorated. Permits may be obtained for a full year,
beginning on the first of February, or for a three month period beginning on the first
of February, May, August or November. A senior permit will be available to any
person 62 years of age or older at the time of application, upon appropriate proof.
§ 7-11 TRAFFIC § 7-12
7:11
b. There shall be a maximum of 76 total permits issued at any given time. [Amended
11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-21]
c. In the event that an application for a permit is denied by the Police Special Services/
Traffic Unit, the denial shall be communicated in writing to the applicant who shall
have the right, within 10 days of the receipt of the denial, to appeal the denial to the
Township Committee (unless the denial is due to the maximum number of permits
having previously been issued, which denial is not appealable). Notice of the appeal
shall be made in writing, and addressed to the Township Clerk. Within 30 days after
receipt of the notice of appeal, the Township Committee shall schedule a hearing
for action on the appeal. Failure of the Township Committee to act within 30 days
of the notice of appeal shall be deemed to be affirmation of the denial and the
applicant may thereafter proceed with any available legal means of appeal.
d. A permit shall be affixed to the vehicle as follows:
1. On vehicles with a rear window, on the outside surface at the lower left so that
it can be read by a person standing outside the vehicle.
2. On vehicles without a rear window, on the outside surface of the rearmost lefthand
side window at the lower right-hand corner so that it can be read by a
person standing outside the vehicle.
3. All permits must be removed from the vehicle upon expiration. Only current
valid permits may be affixed to a vehicle.
e. A valid permit is: a parking permit issued in accordance with this section; affixed
by its own self-adhesive on the vehicle to which it is originally issued, as indicated
on the permit application; clearly legible and unobscured. The permit application
shall be retained in the course of business as a record of the Township. No person
shall transfer, loan or sell a parking permit and no person shall knowingly permit
the transfer, loaning or sale of a parking permit.
f. Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $50, or, in default of the payment of the
fine, imprisonment for a period not exceeding 10 days, unless otherwise stated.
g. Permit fees shall be as follows:
Standard permit fee: Yearly $300
Quarterly $75
Senior permit fee: Yearly $200
Quarterly $50
Nonresident permit fee: Yearly $400
Quarterly $100
h. The Township may offer business parking permits to business located within the
Township in order to provide adequate parking for its employees. These permits
shall be issued based upon the availability of parking spaces and the needs of the
employer. These permits shall be made available at the annual fee of $300 and may
be transferable amongst employees as set forth in the policy established by the
§ 7-12 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-12
7:12
§ 7-12A. ON-STREET RESIDENT-ONLY PARKING.
§ 7-12A.1. License Required; Exemption. [Ord. No. 2000-10 § 1 [A]; Ord. No.
2001-01; Ord. No. 2001-14; Ord. No. 2001-17; Ord. No. 2001-22; Ord. No.
2001-24; Ord. No. 2002-03; Ord. No. 2002-09; Ord. No. 2011-07 § 1A]
Township Administrator, in cooperation with the Springfield Police Department.
a. No vehicle, except as duly licensed pursuant to Subsection 7-12A.2 hereof or
exempt as hereafter set forth, shall be parked between the hours specified on the
days specified, upon any of the street or parts of streets described.
Name of
Street Side Hours Days Location
Baltusrol
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Saturday
Entire length
Battle Hill
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday
Between the southerly
curbline of Morris
Avenue and a point
300 feet south thereof
Colfax Road
[Repealed
12-13-2016 by
Ord. No.
2016-27]
Crest Place Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Saturday
Entire length
Lewis Drive Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Saturday
Entire length
Marcy Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Saturday
Entire length
Molter Avenue
[Added
9-13-2016 by
Ord. No.
2016-18;
amended
7-17-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-11]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Saturday
Entire length
§ 7-12 TRAFFIC § 7-12A.1
7:13
§ 7-12A.2. On-Street, Resident Parking Permit. [Ord. No. 2000-10 § 1[B] 2]
Name of
Street Side Hours Days Location
Park Lane
[Repealed
12-13-2016 by
Ord. No.
2016-27]
Profitt Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Saturday
Entire length
Severna
Avenue
[Repealed
12-13-2016 by
Ord. No.
2016-27]
Short Hills
Avenue
Both 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Saturday
From the intersection
with Morris Avenue
heading southerly
Springbrook
Road
[Repealed
12-13-2016 by
Ord. No.
2016-27]
Tulip Road
[Repealed
12-13-2016 by
Ord. No.
2016-27]
Washington
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday
through Friday
Between the southerly
curbline of Morris
Avenue and a point
300 feet south thereof
b. The following vehicles shall be exempt: contractors, service and delivery vehicles
bearing the name and address of a commercial business during the time they are
rendering service to a residence on any of the restricted streets; public utility
vehicles bearing the name and address of the utility during the time they are
rendering service; and police, fire and medical emergency vehicles while parking
in the line of duty.
c. In addition to all other fines and penalties, a vehicle parked in violation of this
section shall be subject to towing, the cost of which to be paid for by the owner or
operator of the vehicle before such vehicles shall be released.
§ 7-12A.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-12A.2
7:14
§ 7-12A.3. NONRESIDENT PARKING PERMIT. [Added 12-13-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-27]
A nonresident owner of a property that does not have its own on-site parking and is
adjacent to a regulated street may obtain a nonresident permit by making application
to the Township Clerk. There shall be no fee for such application, but such application
must be accompanied by proof of ownership of property. Nonresident property owner's
permits shall be issued for a period of no greater than three years, tenants permits shall be
issued for a period no greater than one year, and all permits shall expire on December 31
of the appropriate year or upon termination of occupancy or ownership of the property.
§ 7-12B. PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING. [Ord. No. 09-12
§ I]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle between the specified
hours and days upon any street or parts thereof described.
a. A permit providing for on-street resident parking as required by Subsection
7-12A-1 may be obtained by application to the Township Clerk by any resident of
the streets restricted thereby. There shall be no fee for such application, but such
application must be accompanied by proof of residence. Property owner permits
shall be issued for a period of no greater than three years, tenant permits shall be
issued for a period of no greater than one year, and all permits shall expire on
December 31 of the appropriate year or upon termination of residence.
b. Residents shall be entitled to receive one resident permit for each vehicle that is
principally garaged or parked at the residence address, which fact shall be certified
to by the resident at the time of application. In addition, each residence shall be
eligible to receive two visitor permits which shall be used only by those persons
actually visiting a resident during such visit. Such visitor permits shall expire on the
same date as the expiration date for the resident permits.
c. Resident permits shall be affixed to the vehicle to which they are issued so as to be
clearly visible and unobscured, at the location hereafter set forth. Visitor permits
shall be displayed in such location, but need not be affixed to the visitor vehicle. On
vehicles with a rear window, the permit shall be placed on the inside surface at the
lower left corner of the rear window. On vehicles without a rear window, the permit
shall be placed on the inside surface of the rearmost left hand side window at the
lower right hand corner of same.
d. All persons parking pursuant to permit shall comply with all applicable parking and
traffic rules and regulations.
e. It shall be a violation of this section to photocopy, otherwise reproduce, or in any
way create a facsimile or counterfeit permit. It shall be a violation hereof to display
or otherwise use a permit known to be counterfeit. It shall be a violation hereof to
furnish false information or fraudulent documents in connection with an application
for a permit. It shall be a violation to use or allow anyone to use a valid permit in
violation of this section. Any person violating the provisions hereof shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $300 and/or imprisonment for not more than 10 days.
§ 7-12A.2 TRAFFIC § 7-12B
7:15
Name of Street Side Hours and Days Location
Brown Avenue East Tuesday, 7:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m.
Entire length
West Wednesday, 7:00 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
Entire length
Commerce Street North Tuesday, 7:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m.
Entire length
South Wednesday, 7:00 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
Entire length
Cornell Parkway East Tuesday, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
West Wednesday, 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Entire length
Diamond Road North Tuesday, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
South Wednesday, 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Entire length
Dundar Road East Tuesday, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
West Wednesday 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Entire length
Edison Place East Tuesday, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
West Wednesday, 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Entire length
Fadem Road East Tuesday, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
West Wednesday, 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Entire length
Lawrence Drive East Tuesday, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
West Wednesday, 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Entire length
Silver Court East Tuesday, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Entire length
West Wednesday, 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m.
Entire length
Stern Avenue East Tuesday, 7:00 a.m. to 9:30
a.m.
Entire length
West Wednesday, 7:00 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
Entire length
§ 7-12B SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-13
7:16
§ 7-13. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN STREETS.
[1974 Code § 8-3.3; Ord. No. 76-9; Ord. No. 76-17; Ord. No. 79-11; Ord. No. 80-4;
Ord. No. 82-1; Ord. No. 83-19; Ord. No. 83-25; Ord. No. 84-15; Ord. No. 85-6;
Ord. No. 85-25; Ord. No. 86-1; Ord. No. 88-16; Ord. No. 89-10; Ord. No. 90-9;
Ord. No. 90-15 § 1; Ord. No. 94-5; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 94-20; Ord. No.
95-18; Ord. No. 96-19; Ord. No. 97-17; Ord. No. 99-17; Ord. No. 99-30; Ord. No.
2001-07; Ord. No. 2002-04 § I(A); Ord. No. 2006-11 § 1; Ord. No. 2007-24 § I;
Ord. No. 2008-03 § I(A); Ord. No. 2008-21 § I; Ord. No. 2011-07 § 1B; Ord. No.
2011-15; Ord. No. 2011-18; Ord. No. 2015-16 § 1B; amended 7-17-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-10]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof described.
Name of Street Sides Location
Adams Terrace a. North For a distance of 80 feet measured
along the northerly curb easterly
from Irwin Street
Adams Terrace b. South For a distance of 20 feet measured
along the southerly curb easterly
from the southwest curbline of
Irwin Street
Alvin Terrace West Between the northerly curbline of
Morris Avenue and a point 160
feet north thereof
Baltusrol Way a. East For a distance of 130 feet
measured along the easterly curb
southerly from Morris Avenue
b. East From a point along the easterly
curb opposite the southwest corner
of the intersection of Crescent
Road and extending 295 feet
southerly
c. East From a point along the easterly
curb northward from the extreme
northeast corner of the curb
northward from the extreme
northeast corner of the Route 24
bridge overpass for a distance of
200 feet
d. West From the intersection of Morris
Avenue until the intersection with
Temple Drive
Blacks Lane Both For its entire length on both sides
Briar Hills Circle Both Between the westerly curbline of
Mountain Avenue and a point 50
feet west thereof
§ 7-13 TRAFFIC § 7-13
7:17
Name of Street Sides Location
Brown Avenue a. Both Between U.S. Route 22 and a
point 150 feet west thereof
b. Both Between Commerce Street and a
point 200 feet east thereof
c. East Between points 100 feet east and
100 feet west of Weber Avenue
d. West Between a point 400 feet south of
the southerly curbline of
Commerce Street to a point 690
feet south from the southerly
curbline of Commerce Street
Caldwell Place a. West Between the westerly curbline of
Mountain Avenue and a point 150
feet west thereof
b. West Beginning at a point on the
westerly side of Caldwell Place,
said point being 342 feet from the
southerly sideline of Morris
Avenue, continuing along the
westerly side of Caldwell Place
200 feet
c. West Between Rose Avenue and Brook
Street
Center Street a. West Between Morris Avenue and
North Trivett Avenue
b. East Between Morris Avenue and
Hannah Street
Colonial Terrace a. East Between Morris Avenue and Cain
Street
b. West Between Morris Avenue and a
point 150 feet south thereof
Country Club Lane South Between the southerly curbline of
South Springfield Avenue and a
point 50 feet southerly thereof
Crescent Road a. South Along the entire southerly curb
from Morris Avenue to Baltusrol
Way
b. North For a distance of 62 feet measured
along the northerly curb of
Crescent Road from Morris
Avenue
§ 7-13 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-13
7:18
Name of Street Sides Location
c. North From a point along the northerly
curb from a point 172 feet of
Morris Avenue for a distance of
226 feet
Diamond Road a. South From the intersection of Diamond
Road and Fadem Road to the
westerly end of Diamond Road
b. North Beginning 270 feet from the
easterly curbline of Fadem Road
to a point 110 feet east therefrom
c. South Beginning 110 feet from the
easterly curbline of Fadem Road
to a point 100 feet east therefrom
d. South Beginning 260 feet from the
easterly curbline of Fadem Road
to a point 190 feet east therefrom
e. South From the easterly curbline of
Fadem Road to a point 125 feet
east therefrom
f. South Beginning 350 feet from the
eastern curbline of Fadem Road to
a point 90 feet east therefrom
g. North From the westerly curbline of
Fadem Road to a point 295 feet
west therefrom
Dundar Road South From Farm Road to Route 22
Fadem Road a. Both Between U.S. Route 22 and
Diamond Road
b. Both On the westerly loop of Fadem
Road beginning 1,040 feet from
the southerly curbline of Diamond
Road to a point 200 feet south
therefrom
§ 7-13 TRAFFIC § 7-13
7:19
Name of Street Sides Location
(Western Branch) c. West Beginning at a point in the
westerly curbline of Fadem Road,
the point being 382.50 feet
measured southerly from the
intersection of the westerly
curbline of Fadem Road with the
southerly curbline of Diamond
Road and running 86.00 feet
southerly to a point in the Fadem
Road curbline which marks the
end of the no parking zone
Fieldstone Drive a. North From the intersection of South
Springfield Avenue to a point 25
feet west thereof
b. South From the intersection of South
Springfield Avenue through the
intersection of the north curbline
of Litchfield Place, if extended
Franklin Place Both Between the southerly curbline of
Henshaw Avenue and a point 100
feet southerly thereof
Garden Oval Both Between the southerly curbline of
Wabeno Avenue and points 220
feet south thereof
Henshaw Avenue Both Between the westerly curbline of
Mountain Avenue and points 150
feet west thereof
Hillside Avenue a. South On the south side of Hillside
Avenue from a point 170 feet west
of the westerly curbline of South
Springfield Avenue to a point 300
feet east of the easterly curbline of
South Springfield Avenue
b. North On the north side of Hillside
Avenue from a point 170 feet east
of the easterly curbline of South
Springfield Avenue to a point 300
feet west of the westerly curbline
of South Springfield Avenue
Irwin Street a. West For a distance of 110 feet
measured along the westerly curb
northerly from the southwest
curbline of Adams Terrace
§ 7-13 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-13
7:20
Name of Street Sides Location
b. East For a distance of 40 feet measured
along the easterly curb northerly
from Adams Terrace
Keeler Street West Between Morris Avenue and
Salter Street
Kew Drive Both Between the westerly curbline of
Mountain Avenue and points 125
feet west thereof
West A distance of 84 feet beginning at
a point at the southwest corner of
the intersection of Kew Drive and
itself, and running southerly
therefrom along the westerly
curbline of Kew Drive towards the
intersection of Kew Drive and
Mountain Avenue
Lawrence Road a. West The entire length of the westerly
side of Lawrence Road
b. East For a distance of 166 feet
measured along the easterly curb
southerly from the southerly
curbline of Route 22 East
c. East Between a point 360 feet
measured along the easterly curb
southerly of the southerly curbline
of Route 22 East and a point 510
feet measured along the easterly
curb southerly of the southerly
curbline of Route 22 East
Linden Avenue a. East Entire length
b. West Between the northwesterly
curbline of Morris Avenue and a
point 80 feet south thereof
Marion Avenue Both Between the northerly curbline of
Morris Avenue and a point 100
feet north thereof
Meisel Avenue a. East Between a point 200 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Milltown
Road and a point 200 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Milltown
Road
§ 7-13 TRAFFIC § 7-13
7:21
Name of Street Sides Location
b. West Between a point 100 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Milltown
Road and a point 200 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Milltown
Road
c. East Between a point 50 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Riverside
Drive and a point 94 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Riverside
Drive
d. West Between a point 28 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Linden
Avenue and a point 104 feet north
of the northerly curbline of Linden
Avenue
Milltown Road a. North Between a point 100 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Meisel
Avenue and a point 200 feet east
of the easterly curbline of Meisel
Avenue
b. South Between a point 200 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Meisel
Avenue and a point 100 feet east
of the easterly curbline of Meisel
Avenue
Morrison Road a. North From the intersection with
Prospect Place heading east to the
eastern terminus
b. South From the intersection with
Prospect Place, heading west, to
the intersection with Morris
Avenue
c. South From the eastern terminus,
heading west for a distance of 100
feet
Mountain Avenue a. Both Between a point 100 feet north of
the northerly curbline of Shunpike
Road and a point 100 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Shunpike
Road
b. Both For a distance of 100 feet north
and south of a crosswalk situated
500 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Briar Hills Circle
§ 7-13 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-13
7:22
Name of Street Sides Location
c. West Between North Trivett Avenue
and a point 100 feet north thereof
d. East Between the southerly curbline of
Morris Avenue and a point 525.48
feet southerly thereof
e. East Between a point 230 feet north of
the curbline of Briar Hill Circle
extending to a point 270 feet north
of the northerly curbline of Briar
Hill Circle, if extended
f. West From the southerly curbline of
Shunpike Road to a point 350 feet
south thereof
g. East From 350 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Shunpike
Road to 100 feet south of the
southerly curblineof Shunpike
Road
h. East Between Hillside and Edgewood
Avenues, if extended
i. East For a distance of 1,470 feet
measured along the easterly curb
south from the southerly curb of
Nelson Place
j. West For a distance of 335 feet
measured along the westerly curb
northerly from the north curb of
Ashwood Road and, for a distance
of 1,100 feet measured along the
westerly curb southerly from the
south curb of Ashwood Road
k. West From the intersection with Hannah
Street to a point 50 feet south
thereof
l. West Between North Trivett Avenue
and South Trivett Avenue
Northview Terrace
(Center island)
All Center island at intersection of
South Springfield Avenue and
Northview Terrace
North Trivett
Avenue
North Between Mountain Avenue and
Center Street
Profitt Avenue West Between Morris Avenue and Tulip
Road
§ 7-13 TRAFFIC § 7-13
7:23
Name of Street Sides Location
Richland Drive Both Between the westerly curbline of
Mountain Avenue and a point 50
feet west thereof
Short Hills Avenue Both Between a point 150 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Morris
Avenue and a point 150 feet north
of the northerly curbline of Morris
Avenue
Shunpike Road a. Both Between a point 100 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Mountain
Avenue and a point 100 feet east
of the easterly curbline of
Mountain Avenue
b. Both From 300 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Mountain Avenue to
100 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Mountain Avenue
c. Both From 100 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Mountain Avenue to
Pitt Road
Silver Court East Along the easterly curb at Silver
Court starting at its intersection
with Diamond Road and moving
230 feet in a southerly direction
South Springfield
Avenue
a. West On the west side of South
Springfield Avenue from a point
100 feet north of the northerly side
line of Beverly Road to a point
400 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Hillside Avenue
b. East On the east side of South
Springfield Avenue from a point
300 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Hillside Avenue to a
point 100 feet north of the
extension of the northerly side line
of Beverly Road
c. East Between Newbrook Lane and
Hillside Avenue
Stern Avenue Both Between U.S. Route 22 and a
point 150 feet west thereof
Summit Road Both Entire length
Tooker Avenue North Entire length
§ 7-13 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-13
7:24
Name of Street Sides Location
Tooker Place South Between the easterly curbline of
Henshaw Avenue and a point 25
feet east thereof; and between the
westerly curbline of Hawthorne
Avenue and a point 25 feet west
thereof
Driveway to Trivett
Park
Both Entire length; approximately 112
feet, running from Colonial
Terrace to Trivett Park, between
Block 28, Lot 32 and Block 28,
Lot 34
Troy Hills Circle Cul-de-sac Outside perimeter of the cul-desac
Wabeno Avenue South Between Mountain Avenue and
Meisel Avenue
Walnut Court Both For its entire length
Warner Avenue a. West From the northerly curbline of
Morris Avenue for a distance of
200 feet northerly thereof to the
end of the existing office building
property
b. East From the northerly curbline of
Morris avenue for a distance of
110 feet northerly thereof to the
end of the existing gas station
property
Waverly Avenue North Between Mountain Avenue and a
point 150 feet east thereof
§ 7-14. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON CERTAIN
STREETS. [1974 Code § 8-3.4; Ord. No. 75-7; Ord. No. 84-14; Ord. No. 90-15 § 1;
Ord. No. 93-13; Ord. No. 94-10; Ord. No. 2001-08; New; Ord. No. 2007-07 § I;
Ord. No. 2009-20 § I; Ord. No. 2011-29 § 1B]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described.
§ 7-13 TRAFFIC § 7-14
7:25
Name of
Street Sides Hours Days Location
All Streets Both 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Every
day
Entire length, except the
westerly side to Meisel
Avenue beginning at a point
therein, the point being 350
feet measured northerly from
the intersection of the
northerly curbline of Laurel
Drive extended with the
westerly curbline of Meisel
Avenue and running, thence,
northerly along the westerly
curbline of Meisel Avenue a
distance of 400 feet to a
point in the curbline
Baltusrol Way a. East 8:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Every
day
For a distance of 232 feet
beginning at a point 130 feet
south of Morris Avenue and
terminating at the
intersection of Baltusrol Way
and Crescent Road
b. East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Every
day
Beginning at a point of
intersection of Temple Drive
and Baltusrol Way southerly
for a distance of 600 feet
along east curb
c. West 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Every
day
Beginning at a point of
intersection of Temple Drive
and Baltusrol Way southerly
for a distance of 600 feet
along west curb
Center Street* East Hours of
Library
Operation
Every
day
Between North Trivett
Avenue and Hannah Street
Evergreen
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
200 feet easterly from South
Springfield Avenue
Keeler Street Both 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
School
Days
A distance of 90 feet
beginning at a point 465 feet
distant from the westerly
curbline of Morris Avenue
and running westerly therefrom
§ 7-14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-14
7:26
Name of
Street Sides Hours Days Location
Laurel Drive South 9:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m. and
4:00 p.m. to
8:00 p.m.
Saturday
and
Sunday.
Monday
through
Friday
From the intersection with
Hemlock Terrace to the
intersection with Sycamore
Terrace
Meisel
Avenue
Westerly 2:00 a.m. to
5:00 a.m.
Every
day
Beginning at a point therein,
the point being 350 feet
measured northerly from the
intersection of the northerly
curbline of Laurel Drive
extended with the westerly
curbline of Meisel Avenue
and running, thence,
northerly along the westerly
curbline of Meisel Avenue a
distance of 400 feet to a
point in the curbline
Molter
Avenue
[Repealed
9-13-2016 by
Ord. No.
2016-18;
7-17-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-11]
.
Mountain
Avenue
a. Reserved
b. East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Monday
through
Friday
Between South Springfield
Avenue and Shunpike Road
c. Reserved
d. West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Between Henshaw Avenue
and Shunpike Road
Salter Street Both 8:00 to 6:00
p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
For a distance of 300 feet
from the intersection of
Salter Street and Keeler
Street
§ 7-14 TRAFFIC § 7-14
7:27
Name of
Street Sides Hours Days Location
Short Hills
Avenue
Both 7:30 a.m. to
5:30 p.m.
Monday
through
Saturday
Between Morris Avenue and
Severna Avenue and Tower
Drive
South Maple
Avenue
East 8:30 a.m. to
4:30 p.m.
Monday
through
Friday
Between a point 360 feet
south of Morris Avenue and
Cain Streets
South
Springfield
Avenue
[Amended
4-10-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-05]
West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
School
days
Between a point 354 feet
measured southerly from the
westerly corner of Mountain
Avenue through to a point
354 feet measured northerly
from the northerly corner of
Shunpike Road
* Parking restricted to library personnel.
§ 7-15. PARKING OF TRUCKS.
§ 7-15.1. Parking Trucks Weighing in Excess of Four Tons Prohibited. [New]
No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or omnibus having registered
gross weights in excess of four tons upon any street between the hours specified.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-15.2. Overnight Truck Parking Prohibited.27 [1974 Code § 8-3.6]
No person shall park a truck upon any street between 12 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
§ 7-16. ROUTES FOR TRUCKS OVER FOUR TONS.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67, the streets or parts of streets as described are hereby
designated as route for vehicles OVER four tons. All trucks having a total combined
registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in excess of four tons shall be excluded from
all streets, except for those streets listed which form a part of the system of truck routes.
Vehicles will be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pick up and delivery of
materials.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-17. VEHICLES OVER DESIGNATED WEIGHT EXCLUDED FROM
CERTAIN STREETS. [1974 Code § 8-4.8; Ord. No. 81-18; Ord. No. 94-15; Ord.
27. Editor's Note: For the prohibition of parking all motor vehicles overnight, see § 7-14.
§ 7-14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-17
7:28
No. 94-19; Ord. No. 2015-03]
Vehicles over the registered gross weight, said gross weight being four tons, are hereby
excluded from the streets or parts of streets described except for the pick up and delivery
of materials on such street, or the use of emergency vehicles on such street.
Name of Street Weight Location
Archbridge Lane 4 tons Entire length
Baltusrol Avenue 4 tons Entire length
Battle Hill Avenue 4 tons Entire length
Blacks Lane 4 tons Entire length
Briar Hills Circle 4 tons Entire length
Cain Street 4 tons Entire length
Caldwell Place 4 tons Between Morris Avenue and Mountain
Avenue
Colfax Road 4 tons Entire length
Colonial Terrace 4 tons Entire length
Commerce Street 4 tons Extension to Hillside Avenue
Crescent Road 4 tons Entire length
Denham Road 4 tons Entire length
Edgewood Avenue 4 tons Entire length
Evergreen Avenue 4 tons Entire length
Green Hill Road 4 tons Entire length
High Point Drive 4 tons Entire length
Hillside Avenue 4 tons From Mountain Avenue to Irwin Street
Joanne Way 4 tons Entire length
Keeler Street 4 tons From the southwest corner of the
intersection with Salter Street to Brook
Street
Kipling Avenue 4 tons Entire length
Linden Avenue 4 tons Entire length
Mapes Avenue 4 tons Entire length
Milltown Road 4 tons From Meisel Avenue to the Union Line
Mount View Road 4 tons Entire length
Outlook Way 4 tons Entire length
Possum Pass 4 tons Entire length
Prospect Place 4 tons Entire length
Remer Avenue 4 tons Entire length
§ 7-17 TRAFFIC § 7-17
7:29
Name of Street Weight Location
Riverside Drive 4 tons Entire length
Salter Street 4 tons Entire length
Severna Avenue 4 tons Entire length
Sharon Road 4 tons Entire length
South Maple Avenue 4 tons Entire length
Wabeno Avenue 4 tons Entire length
Woodside Road 4 tons Entire length
Washington Avenue 4 tons Entire length
§ 7-18. ONE-WAY STREETS. [1974 Code § 8-4.6; Ord. No. 2002-04 § I(B)]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as One-Way
Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be permitted on the sides
indicated below:
Name of Street Direction Limits Parking Permitted
Black's Lane Northbound From Morris Avenue to
Academy Green
Cottage Lane Southbound From Meisel Avenue to
Milltown Road
Dundar Road Westbound From Farm Road to N.J.
Route 22
Maple Avenue Northbound From Morris Avenue to
Springfield Avenue
Morrison Road West From intersection
with Prospect
Place heading west
From Prospect Place to
Morris Avenue, north side
only North Trivett Avenue
Westbound From Center Street to
Caldwell Place
South Trivett
Avenue
Eastbound From Caldwell Place to
Mountain Avenue
§ 7-19. THROUGH STREETS. [1974 Code § 8-4.3; Ord. No. 2011-08]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of streets described
are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near-right
side of each street intersecting the Through Street except where Yield signs are provided
for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Baltusrol Way Between Shunpike Road and Morris Avenue
Caldwell Place Between Mountain Avenue and Morris Avenue
§ 7-17 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-19
7:30
Name of Street Limits
Hillside Avenue a. Between Mountain Avenue and South Springfield
Avenue
b. Between South Springfield Avenue and U.S. Route 22,
YIELD signs having 36 inches in length shall be
installed on Tudor Court
Laurel Drive Between Milltown Road and Meisel Avenue
Milltown Road a. From, but not including, the southerly approach of
South Springfield Avenue to, but not including, Meisel
Avenue
b. From, but not including, Meisel Avenue, to the
Springfield-Union line
Morris Avenue Between the Summit-Springfield line and Morris
Avenue. (NJ Route 24)
Mountain Avenue Between Morris Avenue and State Highway Route 22
Short Hills Avenue Between Morris Avenue and the Springfield-Millburn
line
Shunpike Road a. Between the Summit-Springfield line and Mountain
Avenue
b. From, but not including, Mountain Avenue to, but not
including, the northerly approach of South Springfield
Avenue
South Springfield Avenue-
Meisel Avenue
Between the Westfield-Springfield line and Morris
Avenue. YIELD signs having sides 36 inches in length
shall be installed as follows:
a. On the near right side of the westerly approach of
South Springfield Avenue facing motorists making a
right turn onto the southerly approach of South
Springfield Avenue
South Springfield Avenue
(Between Milltown Road
and Meisel Avenue-South
Springfield Avenue)
Between South Springfield Avenue-Meisel Avenue
and an elongation of the southerly curbline of
Milltown Road. YIELD signs having sides 36 inches
in length shall be installed on North View Terrace.
Summit Road Between Mountainside-Springfield line and Summit-
Springfield line
Tooker Avenue Between Bryant Avenue and Mountain Avenue
Wabeno Avenue Between Mountain Avenue and Meisel Avenue. A
YIELD sign having sides 36 inches in length shall be
installed on Garden Oval.
§ 7-20. STOP INTERSECTIONS. [1974 Code § 8-4.4; Ord. No. 80-19; Ord. No.
81-17; Ord. No. 91-9; Ord. No. 95-9; Ord. No. 97-12; Ord. No. 98-10; Ord. No.
§ 7-19 TRAFFIC § 7-20
7:31
99-32; Ord. No. 99-33; Ord. No. 2001-07; Ord. No. 2004-12, § 1; Ord. No. 2004-17
§ 1; Ord. No. 2005-25 § I; Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1A; Ord. No. 2015-16 § 1C; Ord. No.
2015-17]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described are hereby
designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Baltusrol Avenue and Tower Drive Baltusrol facing northbound traffic and on
Tower Drive facing westbound traffic
Becker Road and Essex Road Essex Road
Becker Road and Lynn Drive Lynn Drive
Briar Hills Circle and Possum Pass Possum Pass
Brook Street and Keeler Street Keeler Street
Church Mall and Academy Green Academy Green
Colonial Terrace and Cain Street Colonial Terrace
Edgewood Avenue and Wentz Avenue
[Ord. No. 2015-16 § 1C]
Wentz Avenue (northeast & southwest
corners)
Eton Place and Norwood Road [Ord.
No. 2015-16 § 1C]
Eton Place
Fadem Road and Diamond Road Diamond Road
Hannah Street and Center Street Center Street
Henshaw Avenue and Franklin Place Franklin Place
Hillside Avenue (Co. Rd. 22A) and
Ann Place
Ann Place
Hillside Avenue and Wentz Avenue Wentz Avenue
Hobart Place and Hawthorne Avenue Hobart Place
Irwin Street and Adams Terrace [Ord.
No. 2015-16 § 1C]
Adams Terrace
Irwin Street and Jefferson Terrace
[Ord. No. 2015-16 § 1C]
Jefferson Terrace
Irwin Street and Madison Terrace
[Ord. No. 2015-16 § 1C]
Madison Terrace
Irwin Street and Mapes Avenue [Ord.
No. 2015-16 § 1C]
Mapes Avenue
Irwin Street and Kipling Avenue [Ord.
No. 2015-16 § 1C]
Kipling Avenue
Irwin Street and Remer Avenue [Ord.
No. 2015-16 § 1C]
Remer Avenue
Irwin Street and Hillside Avenue [Ord.
No. 2015-16 § 1C]
Irwin Street
§ 7-20 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-20
7:32
Intersection Stop Sign On
Marion Avenue and Perry Place [Ord.
No. 2015-17]
Perry Place
Pitt Road and Midvale Drive Midvale Drive
Pitt Road and Litchfield Place Litchfield Place
Prospect Place and Morrison Road Morrison Road in both directions, and on
Prospect Place controlling the traffic heading
towards Morris Avenue
Redwood Road and Southgate Southgate
Riverside Drive and South Maple
Avenue
South Maple Avenue
Riverside Drive and Battle Hill Avenue Battle Hill Avenue
Salter Street and Brook Street Brook Street
Salter Street and Lyons Place [Added
12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-15]
Lyons Place
Short Hills Avenue and Crest Place Crest Place
Short Hills Avenue and Springbrook
Road
Springbrook Road
South Maple Avenue and Cain Street Cain Street
Temple Drive and Baltusrol Way Baltusrol Way, northeast side only on the
easterly approach of Baltusrol Way, facing
westbound traffic
Tooker Avenue and Bryant Avenue
[Repealed 12-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-15]
Tooker Place and Hawthorne Avenue Tooker Place
Tower Drive and Lewis Drive [Added
12-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-15]
Lewis Drive
Tree Top Drive and Highlands Avenue Highlands Avenue
Troy Drive and Stone Hill Road Troy Drive easterly split southbound heading
onto Stone Hill Road eastbound, only
Twin Oaks Oval and Surrey Lane
[Added 12-10-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-15]
Surrey Lane
Warner Avenue and Perry Place [Ord.
No. 2015-17]
Perry Place
Wentz Avenue and Kipling Avenue Kipling Avenue
Wentz Avenue and Mapes Avenue Mapes Avenue
§ 7-21. MULTIPLE DIRECTION STOP INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. No. 85-16;
§ 7-20 TRAFFIC § 7-21
7:33
Ord. No. 91-9; Ord. No. 2004-12 § 1; Ord. No. 2005-25 § I; Ord. No. 2010-14]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-8, the street intersections described are
hereby designated as multiple direction stop intersections — STOP signs shall be
installed on the right side of each approach.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Ann Place and Lelak Avenue Ann Place and Lelak Avenue
Linden Avenue and Owaissa Avenue Linden Avenue and Owaissa Avenue
Tooker Avenue and Bryant Avenue
[Added 11-28-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-17; amended 12-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-15]
Bryant Avenue for northbound traffic
Tooker Avenue and Bryant Avenue
[Added 11-28-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-17; amended 12-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-15]
Bryant Avenue for southbound traffic
Tooker Avenue and Bryant Avenue
[Added 11-28-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-17; amended 12-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-15]
Tooker Avenue for westbound traffic
§ 7-22. YIELD INTERSECTIONS. [1974 Code § 8-4.5; Ord. No. 74-75; Ord. No.
79-22; Ord. No. 77-14; Ord. No. 83-18; Ord. No. 86-2; Ord. No. 90-10; Ord. No.
2011-19 § 1B; Ord. No. 2015-16 § 1D]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described are hereby
designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Sign On
Brian Hills Circle and Wentz Avenue Yield signs having sides 30 inches in length
shall be installed on Wentz Avenue
Edgewood Avenue and Wentz Avenue
[Deleted by Ord. No. 2015-16 § 1D]
Eton Place and Norwood Road
[Deleted by Ord. No. 2015-16 § 1D]
Hillside Avenue and Ann Place Yield signs having sides 30 inches in length
shall be installed on Ann Place
Lawrence Road and Diamond Road Yield signs having sides 30 inches in length
shall be installed on Diamond Road
Midvale Drive and Northview Terrace Yield signs having sides of 36 inches in
length shall be installed on Midvale Drive
Sherwood Road and Ashwood Road A yield sign shall be installed on Sherwood
Road
§ 7-21 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-22
7:34
Intersection Yield Sign On
South Springfield Avenue and
Northview Terrace
A yield sign having sides 30 inches in length
shall be installed on North View Terrace
Troy Drive and Stone Hill Road Troy Drive westerly split southbound
heading onto Stone Hill Road westbound,
only
Troy Drive triangle at Stone Hill Road Troy Drive westerly split northbound
heading onto Troy Drive easterly split
northbound
Warwick Circle and Franklin Place A yield sign having sides 30 inches in length
shall be installed on Franklin Place
Wentz Avenue and Mapes Avenue Yield signs having sides 30 inches in length
shall be installed on Mapes Avenue
§ 7-23. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [1974 Code § 8-4.7; Ord. No. 77-14; Ord. No.
98-6; Ord. No. 98-31; Ord. No. 2001-07; Ord. No. 2001-19; Ord. No. 2002-04
§ I(C); Ord. No. 2010-47]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner described.
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited
Days/
Hours Movement Prohibited
Caldwell Place Left Mountain Avenue
Center Street Left Morris Avenue
Driveways centered 42.5
feet, 101.5 feet and 163 feet
south of the southerly
curbline of Morris Avenue
on the westerly side of
Colonial Terrace
Right Colonial Terrace
Driveway centered 126.5
feet and 219 feet south of
the southerly curbline of
Morris Avenue on the
easterly side of Colonial
Terrace
Left Colonial Terrace
Driveway exiting the
parking lot behind the
building located at 184-188
Short Hills Avenue
Left Short Hills Avenue
Dundar Road Left Northbound onto South
Springfield Avenue
§ 7-22 TRAFFIC § 7-23
7:35
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited
Days/
Hours Movement Prohibited
General Greene driveway
situated 275 feet east of the
easterly curbline of
Mountain Avenue
Left Morris Avenue
Linden Avenue Left Morris Avenue
Morrison Road Left Morris Avenue
South Springfield Avenue Left Northbound onto Dundar
Road
State Highway Route 22,
west-bound, immediately
east of its intersection with
South Springfield Avenue
Left South Springfield Avenue
350 Route 22 West
driveway immediately east
of the intersection of Route
22 westbound with South
Springfield Avenue
Left South Springfield Avenue
Warner Avenue Left Morris Avenue
Washington Avenue Left Morris Avenue
§ 7-24. NO RIGHT TURN ON RED. [Ord. No. 76-28; Ord. No. 82-11; Ord. No.
83-13; Ord. No. 90-15; Ord. No. 2010-22; Ord. No. 2012-10; Ord. No. 2015-16
§ 1E]
Intersection Right Turn on Red Prohibited
Henshaw Avenue/Oakland Drive All 5 right turns prohibited
Milltown Road and South
Springfield Avenue [Ord. No.
2015-16 § 1E]
From westbound Milltown Road to westbound
South Springfield Avenue between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and 4:00
p.m. Monday through Friday
Morris Avenue and Caldwell
Place
From eastbound Morris Avenue to northbound
Caldwell Place between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday
Mountain Avenue and South
Springfield Avenue
All 5 right turns prohibited
Shunpike Road and Mountain
Avenue
From eastbound Shunpike Road to southbound
Mountain Avenue between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday
§ 7-23 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-24
7:36
Intersection Right Turn on Red Prohibited
South Springfield Avenue and
Hillside Avenue
a. From northwestbound Hillside Avenue to
northeastbound South Springfield Avenue
between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday
b. From southeastbound Hillside Avenue to
southwestbound South Springfield Avenue
between 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday
§ 7-25. LOADING ZONE. [New]
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person shall park
a vehicle in these locations during the times indicated other than for the loading or
unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Time Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-26. BUS STOPS. [Ord. No. 2000-20]
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle other than
an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be permitted to occupy said
location between the hours permitted.28
Street Hours
1. Along Main Street, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
a. Edison Place - (Far Side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Edison Place and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom
All
2. Along Main Street, southbound on the westerly side thereof
at:
a. Edison Place (Near Side) (Prolongation)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Edison Place and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
All
3. Along Millbum Avenue (Route 527), eastbound on the
southerly side thereof at:
a. Baltusrol Way - (Near Side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of
Baltusrol Way and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom
All
28. Editor's Note: New Jersey Transit now handles these bus stop regulations. The repealer clause in this Code eliminates
the old bus stop approvals. New Jersey Transit will investigate bus stops and will submit a new list to Springfield
Township. Bus stops can be inserted when the list is furnished.
§ 7-24 TRAFFIC § 7-26
7:37
Street Hours
4. Along Morris Avenue (Route 527), eastbound on the
southerly side thereof at:
a. Crescent Road - (Near Side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Crescent Road and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom
All
5. Along Mountain Avenue, northbound on the easterly side
thereof at:
a. Briar Hills Circle - (Far Side) (Prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Briar Hills Circle and extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
All
b. Gregory Road - (Far Side) (Prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Gregory Road and extending 150 feet northerly
therefrom
All
c. Remer Avenue - (Far Side) (Prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Remer Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
All
d. Hillside Avenue 0 - (Near Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Hillside Avenue
and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom
e. Kimberly Court and Ashwood Road (Mid-Block)
Beginning 300 feet north of the northerly curbline of
Kimberly Court and extending 135 feet northerly
therefrom
All
f. Nelson Place - (Near Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Nelson Place and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom
All
g. Richland Drive - (Near Side) (Prolongation)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Richland Drive
and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom
All
h. Shunpike Road - (Far Side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Shunpike Road
and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom
All
§ 7-26 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-26
7:38
Street Hours
i. South Springfield Avenue - (Near Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of South Springfield
Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom
All
j. Clinton Avenue - (Near Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Clinton Avenue
and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom
All
k. Caldwell Place and Waberno Avenue (Mid-Block)
Beginning 114 feet north of the prolongation of the
northerly curbline of Caldwell Place and extending 135
feet northerly therefrom
All
l. Morris Avenue and Wabeno Avenue - (Mid-Block)
Beginning 120 feet south of the southerly curbline of
Morris Avenue and extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom
All
6. Along Mountain Avenue, southbound on the westerly side
thereof at:
a. Morris Avenue - (Far Side)
Beginning 315 feet south of the southerly curbline of
Morris Avenue and extending 140 feet southerly
therefrom
All
b. Caldwell Place - (Near Side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Caldwell Place and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
All
c. Tooker Avenue - (Far Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Tooker Avenue
and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom
All
d. Henshaw Avenue - (Far Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Henshaw Avenue
and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom
All
e. Shunpike Road - (Far Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Shunpike Road
and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom
All
f. Richland Drive - (Near Side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Richard Drive and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
All
§ 7-26 TRAFFIC § 7-26
7:39
Street Hours
g. Sherwood Road - (Near Side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Sherwood Road
and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
All
h. Kimberly Court and Ashwood Road - (Mid-Block)
Beginning 300 feet north of the northerly curbline of
Kimberly Court and extending 135 feet northerly
therefrom
All
i. Hillside Avenue - (Near Side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Hillside Avenue
and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
j. Remer Avenue - (Near Side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Remer Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
All
k. Gregory Road - (Near Side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Gregory Road and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
All
l. Briar Hills Circle - (Near Side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Briar Hills Circle
and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
All
7. Along Shunpike Road, eastbound on the southerly side
thereof at:
a. Pitt Road - (Near Side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Pitt Road and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom
All
8. Along South Springfield Avenue, northbound on the easterly
side thereof at:
a. Park Place - (Near Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Park Place and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom
All
b. Essex Road - (Far Side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Essex Road and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom
All
c. Hillside Avenue - (Far Side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Hillside Avenue
and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom
All
§ 7-26 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-26
7:40
Street Hours
d. Linda Lane - (Far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Linda Lane and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom
All
e. Independence Way - (Far Side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Independence Way and extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
All
f. Glenview Drive - (Near Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Glenview Drive
and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom
All
g. Milltown Road - (Near Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Milltown Road
and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom
All
9. Along South Springfield Avenue, southbound on the westerly
side thereof at:
a. Fieldstone Drive - (Far Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Fieldstone Drive
and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom
All
b. Cambridge Terrace - (Far Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Cambridge
Terrace and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom
All
c. Independence Way - (Near Side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Independence Way
and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
All
d. Sandmeier School Driveway Exit - (Near Side)
Beginning 100 feet north of the north curbline extended
and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom
All
e. Hillside Avenue - (Far Side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Hillside Avenue
and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom
All
f. Essex Road - (Near Side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Essex Road and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
All
§ 7-26 TRAFFIC § 7-26
7:41
Street Hours
g. Park Place - (Far side) (Prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Park Place and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
All
§ 7-27. TAXI STANDS. [New]
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle other than a
taxi shall be permitted to occupy these locations during the times indicated.
Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 7-28. LANE USE RESERVATIONS. [New]
The land locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and Traffic shall
move as indicated:
(Reserved)
§ 7-29. SPEED LIMITS. [1974 Code § 8-4.9; Ord. No. 78-21; Ord. No. 77-14; Ord.
No. 95-10; Ord. No. 2003-17 § 1]
Speed limits shall be established as follows. Regulatory and warning signs, conforming
to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways,
shall be erected and maintained to effect the designated speed limit(s), as required by
the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New Jersey and as specified and
authorized in writing from the Bureau of Traffic Engineering of the Department of
Transportation.
Name of Street Direction Speed Limit and Location
Summit Road Both 40 m.p.h.; Entire length
Thelma L. Sandmeier
Elem. School
Both 15 m.p.h.; During times when children are
going to or leaving school during opening
and closing hours
The Raymond Chisholm
School
Both 15 m.p.h.; During times when children are
going to or leaving school during opening
and closing hours
The Florence M.
Gaudineer School
Both 15 m.p.h.; During times when children are
going to or leaving school during opening
and closing hours
Saint James School Both 15 m.p.h.; During times when children are
going to or leaving school during opening
and closing hours
§ 7-26 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-29
7:42
Name of Street Direction Speed Limit and Location
Shunpike Road a. Both 35 m.p.h.; From its inception at the City of
Summit border to the intersection with
Mountain Avenue
b. Both 30 m.p.h.; From the intersection with
Mountain Avenue to its inception at the
intersection with South Springfield
Avenue
§ 7-30. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS.
A Mid-Block Crosswalk shall be established and maintained at the following location.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-31. NO PASSING ZONES.
No Passing Zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the following
described streets or parts thereof.
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch No.
(Reserved)
§ 7-32. ANGLE PARKING.
(Reserved)
§ 7-33. TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS. [Ord. No. 2007-15 § 1]
The following Traffic Control Signal shall be installed and operated pursuant to the
designated plan. Such traffic control signal installations shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices and Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey; shall conform to the design; and shall be maintained
in operation, as authorized by the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
Location Designated Plan
South Springfield Avenue (CR 577) at
Belvidere Drive/Office Building
LTS-2440B dated June 9, 2003, revised
April 17, 2007
§ 7-34. INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC CALMING MEASURES.
§ 7-34.1. Request. [Ord. No. 2010-04]
Any property owner within the Township shall have the right to petition the Township
Committee to consider the installation of traffic calming measures on any municipal road
provided the conditions precedent set forth in Subsection 7-34.2 are satisfied.
§ 7-29 TRAFFIC § 7-34.2
7:43
§ 7-34.2. Conditions Precedent to Township Committee Consideration of Traffic
Calming Measures. [Ord. No. 2010-04]
Greater than 50% of the property owners along the municipal road where the traffic
calming measures are proposed to be installed will be required to sign a petition
requesting the Township Committee to install calming measures as a condition precedent
to the Township Committee's consideration of their installation.
§ 7-34.3. Traffic Study. [Ord. No. 2010-04]
If the condition precedent set forth in Subsection 7-34.2 has been satisfied, the Township
Committee shall direct the Traffic Bureau with the Springfield Township Division of
Police to conduct a traffic study as to the viability and/or need for traffic calming
measures at the location(s) identified in the petition. As part of such traffic study, the
following criteria shall be established and/or confirmed by the Traffic Bureau in order
for such location(s) to be considered by the Township Committee for traffic calming
measures installation:
§ 7-34.4. Installation. [Ord. No. 2010-04]
If the Township Committee approves the installation of such speed humps/speed
cushions, (i) the specific device to be installed, (speed humps or speed cushions), (ii) the
precise location where such speed humps/speed cushions are to be installed, shall be left
to the Township Committee, with the recommendation of the Traffic Bureau; and (iii)
the specific device shall not be removed for a minimum of five years after installation.
§ 7-35. HANDICAPPED PARKING REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 98-14; Ord. No.
2003-28 § I; Ord. No. 2010-03]
a. The municipal road must have an average traffic volume of less than 3,000 vehicles
per day (holidays and weekends excluded); and
b. The municipal road must have a posted speed limit of 30 miles per hour or less; and
c. The municipal road is at least 1,000 lineal feet in length.
A formal written recommendation by the Traffic Bureau shall promptly be issued to
the Township Committee.
a. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46,
the following parking spaces within the Township are hereby designated as
restricted parking spaces, which shall be used only by persons with physical
handicaps who have been issued special vehicle identification cards, windshield
stickers or other identification, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-205 and 4-206 or other
applicable statute, when operating or using a motor vehicle on which is displayed
such card, sticker or other identification.
b. Handicapped Parking On-Street. The following on-street locations are designated
as restricted parking spaces hereunder.
§ 7-34.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-35
7:44
Location Number of Spaces
Forest Drive, Bldg. #2 1
344 Mountain Avenue 1
c. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and on Board of Education
Property. The following off-street locations located within Municipal Parking Lots
and on Board of Education Property are designated as restricted parking spaces
hereunder.
Location Number of Spaces
Sandmeir School 2
Independence Way 3
Gaudineer School 2
Walton School 3
Dayton High School 2
Municipal Parking Lot #1 2
Municipal Parking Lot #2 3
Springfield Municipal Pool 19
Town Hall Parking 1
d. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the Public. The following offstreet
locations located within private property open to the public are designated as
restricted parking spaces thereunder.
Location Number of Spaces
42 Route 22 1
75 Route 22 1
90 Route 22 2
99 Route 22 4
100 Route 22 1
101 Route 22 1
114 Route 22 2
124 Route 22 1
126 Route 22 1
136 Route 22 1
146 Route 22 1
155 Route 22 3
170 Route 22 3
200 Route 22 4
§ 7-35 TRAFFIC § 7-35
7:45
Location Number of Spaces
275 Route 22 10
295 Route 22 9
304 Route 22 4
391 Route 22 1
240 Route 22 5
350 Route 22 8
30 Route 22 1
305 Route 22 4
222 Route 22 1
111 Route 22 2
55 Route 22 2
22 Route 22 3
345 Route 22 4
375 Route 22 2
160 Route 22 6
130 Route 22 2
Echo Plaza Shopping Center 8
World of Tile 2
35 Fadem Road 2
72 Fadem Road 1
21 Fadem Road 2
52 Fadem Road 2
55 Fadem Road 1
24 Fadem Road 2
U.S.I. 1
955A South Springfield Avenue 4
958A South Springfield Avenue 1
959 South Springfield Avenue 2
966 South Springfield Avenue 2
Temple Shar'arey Shalom 2
45 South Springfield Avenue 5
899 Mountain Avenue 2
905 Mountain Avenue 1
871 Mountain Avenue 2
§ 7-35 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-35
7:46
Location Number of Spaces
783 Mountain Avenue 1
719 Mountain Avenue 1
709 Mountain Avenue 1
242 Mountain Avenue 2
224 Mountain Avenue 2
225 Mountain Avenue 2
211 Mountain Avenue 3
173 Mountain Avenue 1
160 Mountain Avenue 1
130 Mountain Avenue 2
210 Mountain Avenue 2
586 Morris Avenue 2
201 Morris Avenue 6
288 Morris Avenue 1
671 Morris Avenue 1
597 Morris Avenue 2
175 Morris Avenue 2
570 Morris Avenue 1
18 Morris Avenue 1
25 Morris Avenue 1
55 Morris Avenue 2
66 Morris Avenue 2
99 Morris Avenue 1
100 Morris Avenue 2
150 Morris Avenue 2
155 Morris Avenue 2
193 Morris Avenue 1
265 Morris Avenue 1
385 Morris Avenue 2
454 Morris Avenue 2
500 Morris Avenue 2
505 Morris Avenue 2
530 Morris Avenue 2
535 Morris Avenue 1
§ 7-35 TRAFFIC § 7-35
7:47
§ 7-36. (RESERVED)
Location Number of Spaces
545 Morris Avenue 3
609 Morris Avenue 1
617 Morris Avenue 1
619 Morris Avenue 1
623 Morris Avenue 1
645 Morris Avenue 1
649 Morris Avenue 1
651 Morris Avenue 1
673 Morris Avenue 2
675 Morris Avenue 2
715 Morris Turnpike 3
727 Morris Turnpike 3
Tudor Court Apartments 5
e. Handicapped Parking on all Other Private Property. The following off-street
locations located within private property are designated as restricted parking spaces
hereunder.
Location Number of Spaces
(Reserved)
f. Additional Parking Spaces. In addition to the spaces enumerated herein, these
regulations, requirements and penalties shall apply to any and all additional
handicapped parking spaces within the Township of Springfield established
pursuant to State, County or local law, including any requirements established
under the Land Use Ordinance of the Township of Springfield and any actions by
the Springfield Planning Board and Springfield Board of Adjustment pursuant
thereto.
g. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance. The owners of the
premises referred to in this section shall provide and install signs and pavement
markings as required, which signage and markings shall be in accordance with the
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The cost of procurement and
installation of the signs and pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the property. The owner shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and
installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no
cost or expense to the Township. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and
restoration or replacement of same.
h. Penalty. A person convicted of a violation of this section shall be subject to the fines
and other penalties as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, as amended.
§ 7-35 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-37
7:48
§ 7-37. CONTROL FOR MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF TRAFFIC ON
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 7-37.1. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on Municipal
Property and Board of Education Property. [Ord. No. 97-7 § 219-1[B]; Ord. No.
99-2 § 2; Ord. No. 2008-24 § I; Ord. No. 2014-14]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following Municipal and
Board of Education property shall have the movement of traffic controlled by the type
of regulation indicated. No person shall operate, or park a vehicle in violation of the
regulations indicated.
§ 7-37.2. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on Private
a. Municipal Employee Parking Lot No. 4.
1. Location: At the northwest corner of Brook Street and Caldwell Place.
(a) On all days and times when the Township offices are open for business,
parking shall be limited to employees of the Township of Springfield,
who shall have been issued a parking sticker or pass, pursuant to
procedures established by the Township Committee, or to such other
persons as approved by the Township Committee or their designate. At
all other times, parking shall be limited to such employees, as well as
members of the public transacting business at the Township offices. Any
vehicle parked in violation of this subsection may, in addition to any fines
or other penalties, be towed away at the sole cost and expense of the
vehicle owner.
(b) All vehicles shall be parked head in only.
b. Municipal Property Adjacent to the Springfield Library.
1. Location. Parking spaces upon the property of the Springfield Free Public
Library, along the westerly side of the building, adjacent to Center Street.
2. Limitation. On all days and times when the Springfield Free Public Library is
open for business, parking shall be limited to employees of the Springfield
Library or to such other persons as approved by the Springfield Library Board,
who shall have been issued a parking sticker or pass, pursuant to procedures
established by the Board, in conjunction with the Township of Springfield and
the Springfield Police Department. Any vehicle parked in violation of this
subsection may, in addition to any applicable fines or other penalties, be
subject to being towed at the sole cost and expense of the vehicle owner.
c. All Municipal and Board of Education Property.
1. Location. All property owned or leased and maintained by the Township of
Springfield or by the Township of Springfield Board of Education.
2. Limitation. No vehicle shall be left idling while unattended, and no vehicle,
under any circumstances, shall be kept idling for a period of longer than two
minutes.
§ 7-37 TRAFFIC § 7-37.2
7:49
Property Open to the Public and to Which the Public is Invited (Retail Business).
[New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, on the following private
property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited, the movement of
traffic shall be controlled by the types of regulations indicated. No person shall operate
or park a vehicle in violation of the following regulations.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
§ 7-37.3. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on All Other
Private Property. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 the regulations of Subtitle 1 of
the Title 39 are hereby made applicable to the properties listed below.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
§ 7-37.4. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance. [New]
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and install signs
and pavement markings as required, which signage and markings shall be in accordance
with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The cost of procurement and
installation of the signs and pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the owner
of the property. The owner shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and installation,
maintain such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense
to the Township of Springfield. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and
restoration or replacement of same.
§ 7-37.5. Violations of Provisions of Section 7-37. [New]
For a violation of the provisions of this § 7-37 or any supplement thereto for which no
specific penalty is provided, the offender shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both; except that for a violation of
N.J.S.A. 39:4-80 et seq., N.J.S.A. 39:4-105 et seq., N.J.S.A. 39:4-123 et seq. or N.J.S.A.
39:4-140 et seq., the offender shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $50 or more
than $200 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 7-38. PUBLIC PARKING LOTS AND HOURLY FEE PARKING.
§ 7-38.1. On-Street Hourly Fee Parking. [Ord. No. 2011-12 § 1D; Ord. No.
2012-18]
The streets and avenues specified are hereby designated and established as hourly fee
parking zones.
§ 7-37.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-38.1
7:50
Name of Street Days Hours Time Limit Sides
(Reserved)
No parking space shall be established in any location that standing or parking therein
would infringe upon or violate the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.
§ 7-38.2. Designation of Municipal Parking Lots. [Ord. No. 2011-12 § 1D; Ord.
No. 2012-18]
§ 7-38.3. Regulation of Municipal Parking Lots. [Ord. No. 2011-12 §§ 1D,E; Ord.
No. 2011-13 § 1A; Ord. No. 2012-18]
a. Municipal Parking Lot No. 1 is hereby designated as the municipally owned
property located between the easterly side of Center Street, the northerly side of
Hannah Street and the westerly side of Mountain Avenue, being known and
designated on the Tax Map as Block 707, Lot 1. Parking spaces therein shall be
numbered sequentially beginning with 001 and running through 199, as needed.
b. Municipal Parking Lot No. 2 (commonly known as Duffy's Corner) is hereby
designated as the municipally owned property located on the north side of Morris
Avenue, opposite Caldwell Place, being known and designated on the Tax Map as
Block 206, Lot 6. Parking spaces therein shall be numbered sequentially beginning
with 201 and running through 299, as needed.29
a. General regulations.
1. No person shall park any vehicle longer than three successive hours and they
shall pay hourly parking fees during the time parked, except as otherwise set
forth herein between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays or
legal holidays, except for vehicles displaying a valid parking permit issued by
the Township.
2. No parking is permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except
for vehicles displaying a valid parking permit issued by the Township.
3. Parking during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
shall be free and shall not be time limited.
4. Commercial activities. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to
cause or permit the transaction of any commercial business within or upon any
municipal parking lot. Any person violating the provisions of this paragraph
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100.
5. In municipal parking lots, a vehicle shall be parked head-in only. In the event
the vehicle is not parked head-in, it shall be deemed to be illegally parked and
subject to the penalties provided in this chapter.
6. No person shall park a vehicle in any municipal parking lot whenever snow or
other precipitation has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers any
29. Editor's Note: Former Subsection c, regarding Municipal Parking Lot No. 3, was repealed 11-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-21.
§ 7-38.1 TRAFFIC § 7-38.3
7:51
§ 7-38.4. Parking Fee Regulations. [Ord. No. 2011-12 § 1D; Ord. No. 2012-18]
such parking lot, to such a degree that plowing or other removal of such
snow will reasonably be necessary. Such restriction shall remain in effect after
the snow has ceased until such parking lot has been plowed, or in any other
manner cleared, so that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic within such lot, or with the removal of snow.
7. Senior citizen parking. Residents of Springfield Township, 62 years of age and
up, may obtain, monthly, a one-day parking pass to park in Lot 2 (Duffy's
Corner). The parking pass is valid only for the date issued, allocated to one per
household and must be obtained 72 hours prior to the requested date of use.
Parking shall be allocated to permit-only parking spaces. Residents seeking
such a pass must present a valid driver's license and registration to the
Township Clerk's office. [Amended 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-21]
b. Lot 1 regulations. There shall be 31 parking spaces located along the easterly side
of the lot, adjoining Mountain Avenue, designated as "permit only" parking,
numbered P108 through P138. There shall be seven parking spaces located along
the northerly edge of the lot, designated as "permit only" parking, numbered P139
through P145. All remaining spaces shall be hourly parking. [Amended 9-10-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-11]
c. Lot 2 regulations. There shall be 45 spaces designated as Permit Only parking,
which shall be numbered P219 through P263. All remaining spaces shall be hourly
parking.
d. No person shall park any vehicle in a Permit Only designated parking space without
displaying a valid permit pursuant to § 7-12 hereof.30
a. All persons parking in an on-street hourly parking zone or in a municipal parking
lot hourly parking space during designated hours shall pay a fee of $1 for each hour
of parking.
b. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for a vehicle to
remain in an hourly parking space beyond the time period paid for or beyond any
stated time limit even if paid for.
c. It shall be unlawful to place into or cause to be placed into any parking fee
collection device any slug, device, or metallic substitute for a coin, any counterfeit
or fake dollar bill, or in any other manner to fraudulently pay required fees.
d. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, open, willfully break or destroy
any parking fee collection device.
e. Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $50 or, in default of the payment of the
fine, imprisonment for a period not exceeding 10 days, unless otherwise stated.
30. Editor's Note: Former Subsection d, Lot 3 Regulations, was repealed 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-21. This ordinance
also redesignated former Subsection e as Subsection d.
§ 7-38.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-38.5
7:52
§ 7-38.5. Springfield Park and Ride. [Ord. No. 98-20; Ord. No. 99-6; Ord. No.
99-20; Ord. No. 2000-03 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-06; Ord. No. 2003-30 § I; Ord. No.
2005-02 § I; Ord. No. 2006-02 § I(A), (B); Ord. No. 2011-12 § 1B]
a. Parking Spaces Designated for Park and Ride.
1. There shall be designated in Municipal Pool Parking Lot parking spaces for
Springfield Park and Ride patrons only. Such spaces shall be designated by
signs indicating restricted parking as noted herein or such other municipal
parking lot as designated by resolution of the Township Committee. The
number of such spaces shall be designated from time to time by resolution of
the Township Committee. From 6:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m., Monday through
Friday, except legal holidays, only persons actually using the Park and Ride at
the time their vehicle is parked may use such designated spaces. In addition to
penalties otherwise designated for violation of this section, any vehicle not
parked in accordance herewith may be towed away at the sole cost and
expense of the vehicle owner.
The Township Committee may by resolution, designate additional parking
spots in other municipal parking lots as Park and Ride designated spaces,
which shall be subject to all restrictions as noted herein.
b. Special Use Parking Permit and Park and Ride Bus Permit.
1. Any Springfield resident receiving a Park and Ride identification permit shall
concurrently receive a Special Use Parking Permit for same period of time, at
no extra fee. Special Use Parking Permits issued to nonresidents shall be
issued at the fee set forth herein.
2. Special Use Permits shall be available to any person having been granted a
Springfield Park and Ride identification. Such Special Use Permit will be
subject to all appropriate regulations in this section, but will only entitle the
vehicle to park within those parking spaces in Municipal Parking Lot No. 2
(Duffy's Corner) so designated as Park and Ride spots. A regular Township
parking permit will not entitle a vehicle to park within the Park and Ride
designated spots.
3. Fees and Charges.
Full year Park and Ride Bus Permit $600
(Effective January 1 for a twelve-month period)
Quarterly Park and Ride Bus Permit (As available) $150
(Effective January 1, April 1, July 1 or October 1,
for a 3-month period)
Daily Park and Ride Bus Permit, one way $3
Special Use, Park and Ride Parking Permit (Non-
Springfield Resident)
January 1 to December 31 $250
April 1 to December 31 $187.50
§ 7-38.5 TRAFFIC § 7-38.5
7:53
§ 7-39. RED LIGHT RUNNING AUTOMATED ENFORCEMENT.
§ 7-39.1. Installation. [Ord. No. 2010-19]
§ 7-39.2. Issuance of the Summons. [Ord. No. 2010-19]
The Division of Police of the Township shall review the recorded images produced
by the System, to determine whether sufficient evidence exists demonstrating that a
traffic control signal violation has occurred and shall issue summons when appropriate
in accordance with the Rules of the Court.
§ 7-39.3. Use of Recorded Images. [Ord. No. 2010-19]
July 1 to December 31 $125
October 1 to December 31 $62.50
a. The Township hereby determines to install and utilize a traffic control signal
monitoring system (the "System") at the intersections of (i) Morris Avenue and
Maple Avenue and (ii) Morris Avenue and Springfield Avenue as approved by the
Commissioner of Transportation pursuant to P.L. 2007, Chapter 348 (the "Act").
b. The System to be installed shall be approved by the Township Committee by
Resolution.
c. The Township shall have the authority to enter into a contract, following a lawful
procurement process, for the installation of the System. Any contract that shall
contain provisions contrary to the Act shall not be deemed invalid but rather
reformed to conform to the Act.
d. The signs notifying drivers that the System is being utilized shall be approved by
the Township Engineer, and shall be placed on each street converging into the
affected intersection as required by the Act.
e. The Township Engineer shall inspect and certify the System at least once every six
months from the date of its installation.
a. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the recorded images produced by the
System shall be available for the exclusive use of the Division of Police for the
purpose of discharging his or her duties under the Act.
b. Any recorded image or information produced in connection with the System shall
not be deemed a public record in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., or common law. The
recorded images shall not be: (i) discoverable as a public record by any person,
entity, or governmental agency, except upon a subpoena issued by a grand jury or a
court order in a criminal matter, or (ii) offered as evidence in any civil or
administrative proceeding not directly related to a traffic control signal violation.
c. Any recorded image or information collected in connection with a traffic control
signal violation shall not be retained after 60 business days following the collection
of any fine or penalty.
d. If a summons is not issued within 40 business days following the traffic control
§ 7-38.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 7-39.3
7:54
§ 7-39.4. Owner's Liability. [Ord. No. 2010-19]
The liability of the owner and operator of a motor vehicle for a traffic control signal
violation summons pursuant to the System shall be joint, subject to provisions of the Act.
signal violation, all recorded images and any information collected with respect to
the traffic control signal violation shall be removed by the Division of Police within
two business days.
e. The Township shall certify compliance of this section by filing a report with the
Commissioner of Transportation in accordance with the Act.
§ 7-39.3 TRAFFIC § 7-39.4
7:55

Chapter 8
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
§ 8-1. DEFINITIONS. [1991 Code § 259-1; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No. 2001-09]
As used in this chapter:
LIMOUSINE — Shall have the same meaning as set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-13.
TAXICAB—Shall have the same meaning as "autocab" as set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-1.
§ 8-2. TAXICAB LICENSES FOR VEHICLES.
§ 8-2.1. License and Certificates Required. [1991 Code § 259-4; Ord. No. 91-16;
Ord. No. 2001-09]
§ 8-2.2. Taxicab License Application. [1991 Code § 259-5; Ord. No 91-16; Ord.
No. 2001-09]
§ 8-2.3. Investigation of Applicant; Report; Issuance of Taxicab License. [1991
Code § 259-6; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No. 2001-09; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
a. No person shall operate or permit a taxicab to be operated within the Township
without having first obtained a license for each individual vehicle to be used.
b. The Clerk shall issue appropriate certificates for taxicabs in compliance with this
chapter, N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq.
a. Each application for a taxicab license shall be filed with the Township Clerk on
forms provided by the Township.
b. Each application shall furnish the following information:
1. The name, including the trade name or partnership name, if any, date of birth,
social security number, home address and business address of the applicant(s).
In the case of a corporation, the aforesaid information is to be provided for all
officers, directors and those owners with more than 10% of the outstanding
shares of the corporation.
2. The home and business telephone numbers of the applicant and all individuals
named in paragraph 1, above.
3. Prior to the actual issuance of the license, a description of the vehicle(s) to be
licensed, including the make, mileage, serial number and state registration
number.
c. Each application shall be accompanied by the license fee prescribed in subsection
8-2.6.
a. The Township Clerk shall retain and file in the Clerk's office the original of the
application and shall promptly submit a copy of the application to the Chief of
Police who shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant or, in the case
§ 7-39.4 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 8-2.3
8:1
§ 8-2.4. Insurance. [1991 Code § 259-7; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No. 2001-09]
§ 8-2.5. Power of Attorney. [1991 Code § 259-8; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No.
2001-09; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(C)]
Concurrently with the filing of the insurance policy referred to in subsection 8-2.4, each
taxicab owner shall submit a power of attorney whereby the owner shall appoint the
Township Clerk as true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of
any process out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by
virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed, as provided by N.J.S.A.
48:16-5.
§ 8-2.6. License Fee; Expiration; Transfer. [1991 Code § 259-9; Ord. No. 91-16]
§ 8-2.7. (Reserved)31
of a partnership, corporation or company, of its principals, as to each person's
moral character. Additionally, a nonresident applicant shall submit a letter of good
conduct from the Police Department from the place of the applicant's residence or
business.
b. The Chief of Police shall report, in writing, the results of the investigation, and
unless cause to the contrary is shown, the Township Committee shall, within 30
days, authorize the Township Clerk to issue the license.
a. No taxicab subject to the requirements of this chapter shall operate in the Township
unless the applicant shall furnish to and file with the Clerk a valid liability insurance
policy in the applicant's name issued by an insurance company duly authorized to
transact business in the State of New Jersey, covering each vehicle to be operated
by the applicant, protecting the owner and the drivers of such vehicle against
liability or damages for injuries to persons or property suffered or sustained by any
person as the result of an accident in which such vehicle may be involved, in the
following amounts:
1. For injuries or death sustained by one person; the sum of $50,000.
2. For injuries or death sustained by more than one person: the sum of $100,000.
3. For damage to property: the sum of $25,000.
b. Each policy shall indicate that the covered vehicles are insured to operate as
taxicabs in the Township. Each policy shall also contain a ten-day cancellation
clause and shall name the Township of Springfield as coinsured.
a. The license fee for each taxicab license shall be $50.
b. All taxicab licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December in the year in which
issued.
c. No license shall be transferable from one person to another.
31. Editor's Note: Former subsection 8-2.7, Renewal of License, containing 1991 Code Section 259-10 and portions of Ord.
No. 91-16, was repealed by Ordinance No. 2001-09.
§ 8-2.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 8-3
8:2
§ 8-3. TAXICAB LICENSES FOR DRIVERS.
§ 8-3.1. License Required. [1991 Code § 259-11; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No.
2001-09]
No person shall drive or operate or permit or cause to be driven or operated a taxicab
within the Township without first having secured a driver's license as herein provided.
§ 8-3.2. Qualifications of Drivers. [1991 Code § 259-12; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No.
2001-09]
No taxicab driver's license shall be issued unless the applicant is:
§ 8-3.3. Application for Driver's License; Accompanying Items. [1991 Code
§ 259-13; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No. 2001-09]
§ 8-3.4. Investigation of Applicant; Report; Temporary Driver's Permit. [1991
Code § 259-14; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No. 2001-09; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
a. At least 18 years of age.
b. Of good moral character.
c. The holder of a current and valid driver's license issued by the State of New Jersey,
Division of Motor Vehicles.
d. Not addicted to the use of narcotics or intoxicating liquors.
e. In good physical and mental condition.
a. An application for a taxicab driver's license shall be filed with the Township Clerk
on forms provided by the Township. The application shall contain the following
information:
1. The name, birth date, social security number, address and telephone number
of the applicant.
2. The number of the applicant's state driver's license and whether such license
has ever been suspended or revoked and the reasons therefor.
3. A record of convictions of the applicant of any crimes or disorderly persons
therefor.
4. Such other information as the Township Committee may require.
b. The application shall be accompanied by:
1. Two recent photographs of passport size of the applicant.
2. The driver's permit fee prescribed in subsection 8-3.5.
a. The Township Clerk shall retain and file in the Clerk's office the original of the
application and shall promptly submit a copy of the application to the Chief of
Police, who shall thereupon cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's
§ 8-3 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 8-3.4
8:3
§ 8-3.5. Driver's License Fee; Expiration; Transfer. [1991 Code § 259-15; Ord.
No. 91-16; Ord. No. 2001-09]
§ 8-3.6. (Reserved)32
§ 8-4. (RESERVED)
§ 8-5. REGULATION OF TAXICABS.
§ 8-5.1. Rates to Be Posted. [1991 Code § 259-17; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No. 93-30;
Ord. No. 96-1]
§ 8-5.2. Taxicab Signs. [1991 Code § 259-18; Ord. No. 91-16]
Each taxicab shall display a sign indicating the name of the taxicab company and its
telephone number.
moral character. Additionally, nonresident applicants shall submit a letter of good
conduct from the Police Department of the place of the applicant's residence.
b. The Chief of Police shall report, in writing, the results of the investigation, and
unless cause to the contrary is shown, the Township Committee shall, within 30
days, authorize the Township Clerk to issue the license.
c. Pending the completion of the investigation and report by the Chief of Police, the
Township Clerk may issue a temporary driver's permit.
a. The fee for a taxicab driver's license shall be $50.
b. The taxicab driver's license shall expire on the 31st of December of the year in
which issued.
c. No taxicab driver's license shall be transferable from one person to another.
a. No licensee or permittee shall charge any rate for transportation of passengers
which exceed the following rates per trip:
Zone Rates
1 $2.75
2 $3.75
3 $4.25
4 $5.50
5 $6.50
b. All rate charges per trip by licensee or permittee shall be posted conspicuously in
each vehicle. All impending notices of rate changes shall be posted in each vehicle.
32. Editor's Note: Former subsection 8-3.6, Renewal of Driver's License, containing 1991 Code Section 259-16 and portions
of Ordinance No. 91-16, was repealed by Ordinance No. 2001-09.
§ 8-3.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 8-5.3
8:4
§ 8-5.3. Display of Licenses. [1991 Code § 259-19; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No.
2001-09]
Each taxicab shall display, in a conspicuous place, the taxicab driver's license issued
under this chapter, and each taxicab shall also display, in a conspicuous place, the
taxicab license issued under this chapter.
§ 8-5.4. Fare Receipts. [1991 Code § 259-20; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No. 2001-09]
Every taxicab driver shall carry a receipt book and, upon request of any passenger, issue
a receipt showing the fare charged.
§ 8-5.5. Trip Records. [1991 Code § 259-21; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No. 2001-09]
§ 8-5.6. Refusal to Carry Orderly Passengers Prohibited. [1991 Code § 259-22;
Ord. No. 91-16]
No taxicab driver shall refuse or neglect to carry an orderly person, upon request, unless
the driver is previously engaged or unable or forbidden by law.
§ 8-5.7. Lost Articles. [1991 Code § 259-23; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No. 2001-09]
At the termination of each shift, every taxicab driver shall thoroughly search the interior
of the vehicle for any property lost or left therein by a passenger. Such property, unless
sooner claimed or delivered to the owners, shall be delivered to the Police Department.
§ 8-5.8. Conduct of Driver. [1991 Code § 259-24; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No.
2001-09]
Every taxicab driver shall, while operating a vehicle, refrain from smoking, and act in an
orderly and businesslike manner.
a. The driver of each taxicab shall keep a daily trip record upon which all trips shall
be recorded.
b. The daily trip records shall show:
1. The New Jersey vehicle registration number of the vehicle.
2. The name of the taxicab driver and the driver's taxicab license number.
3. The time and place of commencement of each passenger's trip and the time
and place of the termination thereof.
4. The number of passengers carried each trip.
5. The fare charged each passenger.
c. The daily trip records shall be retained by the owner for a period of at least six
months.
§ 8-5.3 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 8-5.9
8:5
§ 8-5.9. Taxicab Stands. [1991 Code § 259-24; Ord. No. 91-16]
No vehicle licensed under this chapter shall park in any public streets or public places of
the Township, except in such place or places as may be designated by the Township.
§ 8-5.10. False Statements. [1991 Code § 259-26; Ord. No. 91-16]
No person shall make or disclose any false statement in any application or in any record
required to be kept or maintained by this chapter.
§ 8-5.11. Conveyance of Passengers. [1991 Code § 259-27; Ord. No. 91-16]
No driver shall convey any passenger to any other place or over any route contrary to a
passenger's instructions.
§ 8-6. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
§ 8-6.1. Action After Hearing.
Any license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the Township Committee, after due notice and hearing, if:
§ 8-6.2. Action Pending Hearing. [1991 Code § 259-2; Ord. No. 91-16; Ord. No.
2001-09; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
Suspension prior to and pending a revocation or suspension for punishment proceeding
may be made by the Township Administrator for any of the causes set forth herein.
§ 8-7. REGULATION OF LIMOUSINES.
§ 8-7.1. License Required. [Ord. No. 2001-09]
No person shall drive or operate or permit or cause to be driven or operated a limousine
within the Township without first complying with the terms hereof and N.J.S.A.
48:16-13 et seq.
§ 8-7.2. Insurance. [Ord. No. 2001-09]
No limousine whose principal place of business is within the Township of Springfield
shall be operated wholly or partly along any street in the Township until the owner of the
limousine shall have filed with the Township Clerk an insurance policy of a company
a. The holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this chapter;
b. The holder thereof has violated any ordinance of the Township or the laws of the
United States or of this State, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the
fitness of the holder;
c. The holder thereof has performed any act which would be a basis for denial of the
application; or
d. The licensed taxicab is unfit, unsanitary or unsuitable for public patronage.
§ 8-5.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 8-7.2
8:6
duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of the State of New Jersey,
in the sum of $1,500,000 against loss by reason of the liability imposed by law upon
every limousine owner for damages on account of bodily injury or death suffered by
any person as a result of an accident occurring by reason of the ownership, maintenance
or use of the limousine upon any public street. Such operation shall be permitted only
so long as the insurance policy shall remain in force to the full and collectible amount
of $1,500,000. Any such insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership, maintenance and use
of such limousine or any fault and respect thereto, and shall be for the benefit of every
person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
§ 8-7.3. Issuance of License; Contents; Fee. [Ord. No. 2001-09; Ord. No. 2010-33]
The Township Clerk, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-17, upon the filing of the
required insurance policy and the payment of a fee of $50 for each limousine service plus
$10 for each limousine which is covered under the required insurance policy, shall issue
in duplicate a license to operate showing that the owner of the limousine has complied
with the terms hereof. Such license shall recite the name of the insurance company,
the number and date of expiration of the policy, a description of each limousine issued
thereunder, and the registration number of each.
§ 8-8. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [1991 Code § 259-3; Ord. No. 91-16;
Ord. No. 2001-09]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be liable
to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 8-7.2 TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES § 8-8
8:7

Chapter 9
SMOKING
§ 9-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE.
§ 9-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2015-05]
§ 9-1.2. Findings of Fact and Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2015-05]
§ 9-2. DEFINITIONS AND USAGE. [Ord. No. 2015-05]
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
ENCLOSED AREA — Shall mean all areas between a floor and a ceiling, extending to
the outer perimeter walls of a structure.
a. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, provides that the
governing body of a municipality may make, amend, repeal, and enforce such
ordinances, regulations, rules and by-laws not contrary to the laws of this State or
of the United States, as it may deem necessary and proper for the good of
government, order and protection of person and property, and for the preservation
of the public health, safety and welfare of the municipality and its inhabitants, and
as may be necessary to carry into effect the powers and duties conferred and
imposed by any law; and said Legislature in N.J.S.A. 26: 3D:55, et seq., known and
cited as the "New Jersey Smoke-Free Air Act, provides for prohibitions regarding
smoking, and therein, by N.J.S.A. 26:3D-63, expressly authorizes municipalities to
enact ordinances under the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 or 40:48-2, or by any other
statute or regulation adopted pursuant to law for the purposes of protecting life and
property from fire or protecting public health, and prohibiting smoking, and further,
expressly authorizes municipal ordinances to provide restrictions on or prohibitions
against smoking equivalent to, or greater than those provided under the "New
Jersey Smoke-Free Air Act.
b. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey in N.J.S.A. 2C:33-13b, provides that the
owner and/or operator of a public place, such as public parks and recreational areas,
may prohibit smoking on such property.
a. The Township Committee recognizes the well-known health and safety risks posed
by smoking and finds that it is within the public interest to prohibit smoking in
public buildings and on public property, such as public parks and recreation areas.
b. The Township Committee has determined that the public interest is especially
implicated in preventing the youth of Springfield from being exposed and
succumbing to the temptations of experimenting with tobacco products; and
c. The Township Committee also finds that the appearance of parks and recreation
areas can be enhanced and the limited resources of the Township's Department of
Public Works can be conserved if smoking were to be banned from such areas,
thereby keeping such areas free of the litter typically generated by the smoking of
cigarettes, such as cigarette butts, ashes and packaging.
§ 8-8 SMOKING § 9-2
9:1
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS — Shall include all structures owned, leased, rented and/or
operated by the Township of Springfield, and/or occupied by Township employees and
used for official business of the Township of Springfield.
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — Shall include all public parks,
playgrounds, ball fields, publicly owned or leased by the Township of Springfield and
all property owned or leased by the Township of Springfield upon which the public
is invited or upon which the public is permitted and where individuals gather for
recreational activities, including all areas adjacent to such facilities, including, but not
limited to, any parking area, driveway or drive aisle.
SMOKING — Shall mean the burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or substance which
contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked.
§ 9-3. PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES; SIGNS. [Ord. No.
2015-05]
a. Smoking shall be prohibited in all Municipal Buildings as defined herein. Nosmoking
signs or the international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a diagonal red line
through its cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at
each Municipal Building entrance and within each closed area where smoking is
prohibited by this chapter. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall
contain letters or a symbol which contrast in color with the sign, indicating that
smoking is prohibited therein. The sign shall also indicate that violators are subject
to a fine.
b. Smoking shall be prohibited within a twenty-foot radius of entrances of all
Municipal Buildings. No-smoking signs or the international no-smoking symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red
circle with a diagonal red line through its cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently
and conspicuously posted both on the building and at the twenty-foot perimeter of
the entrances of all Municipal Buildings where smoking is prohibited by this
chapter. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public and shall contain letters or a
symbol which contrast in color with the sign, indicating that smoking is prohibited
therein. The sign shall also indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
c. Smoking shall be prohibited in all public parks and recreation facilities owned or
leased by the Township of Springfield and all property owned or leased by the
Township of Springfield upon which the public is invited or upon which the public
is permitted and where individuals gather for recreational activities, including all
areas adjacent to such facilities, including, but not limited to, any parking area,
driveway or drive aisle, which have been designated with no-smoking signs. Nosmoking
signs or the international no-smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a diagonal red line
through its cross section) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in
all areas regulated by this chapter. The signs shall be clearly visible to the public
and shall contain letters or a symbol which contrasts in color with the sign,
indicating that smoking is prohibited at the designated area. The sign shall also
indicate that violators are subject to a fine.
§ 9-2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 9-3
9:2
§ 9-4. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 2015-05]
The enforcement authority of this chapter shall be the Police Department, Fire
Department, Recreation Department, Public Works Department and Health Department
of the Township of Springfield.
§ 9-5. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2015-05]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $50 for the first offense, $100 for the second offense, $200 for a third offense,
and $500 for each subsequent offense. Any municipal employee found in violation of
this chapter may also be subject to discipline in accordance with the provisions of the
Township of Springfield's policies and procedures.
d. Smoking shall be prohibited in any vehicle registered to the Township of
Springfield.
§ 9-3 SMOKING § 9-5
9:3

Chapter 10
(RESERVED)
§ 9-5 (RESERVED) § 9-5
10:1

Chapter 11
HOUSING REHABILITATION PLAN
§ 11-1. ADOPTION OF HOUSING REHABILITATION PLAN.
§ 11-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 98-23 § 186-1]
It is the purpose of this chapter in part to meet the Township of Springfield's fair share
housing obligation through provisions designed to result in the voluntary rehabilitation
of substandard low and moderate-income housing units within the Township in one or
more of the following ways:
§ 11-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 98-23 § 186-2]
As used herein, the terms which follow shall have the following meanings:
AFFORDABLE—Shall mean a sales price or rent within the means of low or moderateincome
households as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4.
APPLICANT — Shall mean the person applying for financial assistance for housing
rehabilitation.
ASSISTED UNIT — Shall mean a unit assisted under the provisions of this chapter.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Union County Department of Community
Development.
HOUSING OFFICER—Shall mean the person designated by the Township Committee
to administer the provisions of this chapter.
LOW INCOME HOUSING — Shall mean as defined in the Land Use Ordinance of the
Township of Springfield.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING — Shall mean as defined in the Land Use
Ordinance of the Township of Springfield.
REHABILITATION — Shall mean the restoration of a substandard housing unit to
a decent, safe, and sanitary condition by eliminating the condition(s) making the unit
substandard and bringing the unit up to Code standard.
SUBSTANDARD HOUSING — Shall mean a dwelling unit that is unsafe and/or
unsanitary based upon one or more of the following characteristics:
a. Through deferred payment loans from the Township's funds to eligible low and
moderate-income homeowners for rehabilitation of owner-occupied housing
through a program to be administered by the Township and/or its agent.
b. Through deferred payment loans as may be available from the Union County
Department of Community Development to eligible low and moderate-income
homeowners for housing rehabilitation of owner-occupied housing, or such other
sources which may be identified.
a. Absence of a private entranceway to the dwelling unit.
b. Absence of complete plumbing facilities and adequate kitchen facilities, including
§ 9-5 HOUSING REHABILITATION PLAN § 11-1.2
11:1
§ 11-1.3. Eligibility. [Ord. No. 98-23 § 186-3]
§ 11-1.4. Terms of Assistance. [Ord. No. 98-23 § 186-4]
Grants provided to eligible applicants under the Housing Program shall be subject to the
following terms and conditions:
a sink with piped water, a stove, and a refrigerator.
c. Absence of central heat.
One or more major Health and Safety Code violations, including one major system
deficiency in which any one of the following systems must be replaced or
extensively repaired: plumbing (including wells and sanitary plumbing), heating,
roof, electrical, or major load-bearing structural systems.
d.
a. Only owners of houses or structures within the Township of Springfield are eligible
for the financial assistance made available pursuant to this chapter. The homeowner
must either live in a low or moderate-income household (owner-occupied housing)
or must agree to rent the house or other dwelling unit to be rehabilitated to a low or
moderate-income household (rental housing).
b. An applicant for housing rehabilitation assistance must complete all required forms
in a timely fashion.
c. The rehabilitation plan for the housing unit must, upon completion, result in the
elimination of all deficiencies and improve the unit to Code standards. The
Construction Official will review the adequacy of the plan before final approval and
approve the rehabilitation upon completion.
d. Any grant from the Housing Trust Fund shall be secured by a lien on the
rehabilitated property subject to the terms and conditions set forth in subsection
11-1.4 of this chapter.
e. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all housing units which receive
assistance through a Housing Rehabilitation Fund. The applicant shall agree, in
writing, to comply with its terms.
a. The maximum amount of assistance per applicant shall be $19,200.
b. Owner-Occupied Housing. Rehabilitation assistance for owner-occupied housing
shall be in the form of a non-interest-bearing, deferred-payment loan with a term of
six years, which is secured by a mortgage on the property. Such loan shall be
forgiven and the lien shall be discharged at the end of the six-year term, so long as
the owner has not vacated the premises or transferred title to the property prior to
the expiration of the term. An owner who conveys or vacates the property shall be
required to repay the loan in full at such time as the owner conveys title or ceases
to occupy the property unless the conveyance is to another low or moderate-income
household at an affordable sales price, or rented to low/moderate income eligible
tenants at an affordable rent. In the event of conveyance of the dwelling unit to
another low or moderate-income household during the six-year term, such
conveyance shall be subject to the mortgage lien which shall remain in effect for
§ 11-1.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 11-1.4
11:2
§ 11-1.5. Affordability Controls for Owner-Occupied Single-Family Units. [Ord.
No. 98-23 § 186-5]
For rehabilitation assistance for owner-occupied single-family housing units, the
applicant shall consent to a deed restriction and mortgage lien to be recorded, requiring
that the dwelling unit be sold only to low and moderate-income households. This deed
restriction shall be a real covenant running with the land and shall bind the applicant and
all successors in interest for a period of six years from the date of closing on the deferredpayment
loan. The deed restriction shall be termed the "sales affordability control" and
shall be in a form satisfactory to the Township Attorney and shall comply with the
following requirements.
§ 11-1.6. Affordability Controls for Rental Housing. [Ord. No. 98-23 § 186-6]
For rehabilitation assistance for rental housing, the applicant shall consent to a deed
the balance of the six-year term.
c. Rental Housing. Rehabilitation assistance for rental housing shall be in the form of
non-interest-bearing, deferred-payment loan with a term of 10 years, which is
secured by a mortgage on the property. The lien shall secure the full amount of the
loan and shall require compliance with the rental affordability controls set forth
hereinafter. The deferred-pavement loan shall be forgiven and the lien shall be
discharged at the expiration of the ten-year term. The full amount of the deferredpayment
loan shall be paid to the Housing Trust Fund upon any leasing or
occupancy of the housing unit by a non-lower-income household, or rent exceeding
affordable rent.
d. Any applicant receiving assistance shall be subject to and shall consent to the
recording of a deed restriction and mortgage lien on the real property in accordance
herewith.
a. Prior to a sale of an assisted owner-occupied single-family housing unit, the owner
shall apply for a certificate of affordable housing from the Housing Officer. The
application shall include a copy of the proposed contract of sale and an affidavit by
the owner that the affordable sales restriction will be adhered to. Upon request, the
Housing Officer will assist the owner in locating an income-eligible purchaser. Any
prospective purchaser must submit adequate proof of household income and
household size. If the Housing Officer or designee determines that the proposed
sale will be in compliance with the affordability control, then a certificate of
affordable housing shall be issued.
b. The sales price of an assisted rehabilitated owner-occupied single-family housing
unit may increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional median
income limit for the region as established by the Council on Affordable Housing.
c. Owners of assisted rehabilitated owner-occupied single-family housing units may
apply to the Housing Officer for permission to increase the maximum sales prices
for eligible capital improvements which render the unit suitable for a larger
household provided that the maximum price of the improved housing unit does not
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
§ 11-1.4 HOUSING REHABILITATION PLAN § 11-1.6
11:3
restriction requiring that the dwelling unit may only be leased to or otherwise occupied
by a low or moderate-income household at a rental amount which does not exceed the
affordable rent applicable to the particular dwelling unit size. This deed restriction shall
be a real covenant running with the land and shall bind the applicant and all successors
in interest for a period of 10 years from the date of closing on the deferred-payment
loan. This deed restriction shall be termed the "rental affordability control," shall be in a
form satisfactory to the Township Attorney, and shall require compliance with all of the
following requirements.
§ 11-1.7. Administration. [Ord. No. 98-23 § 186-7]
The Springfield Township Housing Rehabilitation Program shall be administered by
the Township of Springfield unless the Township enters into a separate agreement with
an appropriate outside agency, such as the Union County Department of Community
Development or their consultant, to assume some or all of the responsibilities noted
herein. The Township shall designate an individual to serve as Housing Officer who may
be an elected or appointed Township Official or a designee of the outside agency.
a. Prior to any change in occupancy of a housing unit, subject to a rental affordability
control, the owner shall apply for a certificate of affordable housing from the
Housing Officer. The application shall include a copy of the proposed lease and an
affidavit by the owner that the affordable rent restriction will be adhered to. Upon
request, the Housing Officer will assist the owner in locating an income-eligible
tenant. Any prospective tenant must submit adequate proof of household income
and household size. If the Housing Officer or designee determines that the proposed
change in occupancy will be in compliance with the rental affordability control,
then a certificate of affordable housing shall be issued.
b. The permissible affordable rent may increase annually based on the annual
household income statements published by NJCOAH.
c. An owner of property subject to a rental affordability control may apply to the
Housing Officer for permission to increase the affordable rent for capital
improvements which render the unit suitable for a larger household, provided that
such change does not result in the displacement of existing low and moderateincome
occupants. The new rent shall not exceed the affordable rent permitted for
such larger household size.
a. The duties of the Housing Officer shall include:
1. Publicizing the rehabilitation program through a combination of some, though
not necessarily all of the following: brochures, posters in prominent locations,
radio announcements, notices in municipal tax bills, notices in municipal
publications, information meetings with welfare organizations, urban action
community groups, civic and religious leaders, senior citizen groups and
fraternal organizations, newspaper press releases, and providing information
and application packages to interested applicants.
2. Identifying eligible homeowners and marketing the program to potential
applicants.
3. Implementation of the program including:
§ 11-1.6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 11-1.7
11:4
§ 11-1.8. Application, Review, and Approval Procedures. [Ord. No. 98-23 § 186-8]
(a) Application review and eligibility determinations.
(b) Conducting client interviews and home inspections.
(c) Preparation of home inspection reports.
(d) Approval of construction contracts.
(e) Preparation of contract and lien agreement.
(f) Performance of ongoing and final inspections.
(g) Maintenance of files and preparation of quarterly and annual status
reports to the Springfield Township Committee and such agencies as may
be required.
4. Administering the housing rehabilitation funds and preparing periodic status
reports on the program and available funding to the Township Committee.
5. Administering the rental affordability controls set forth in Section 16-5 and
subsection 11-1.6 of this chapter.
b. The Springfield Township Construction Official shall:
1. Determine or assist in determining the deficiency of an applicant's unit under
the provisions of this chapter.
2. Review and determine the adequacy of plans to rehabilitate a housing unit in
accordance with the rehabilitation program established herein.
3. Conduct initial and final inspections required in connection herewith and issue
certificates of rehabilitation upon completion of work to the Housing Officer.
a. Interested homeowners will be able to secure information and application packets
regarding the rehabilitation program from the Township Clerk at the Municipal
Building during regular business hours.
b. Once an application has been completed and filed with the Housing Officer, a
determination shall be made as to income eligibility.
c. Once a homeowner has been certified to be income eligible, a home inspection shall
be conducted to determine the existence of a housing deficiency requiring
rehabilitation.
d. Once the home and the applicant have been certified as eligible, a home inspection
report shall be prepared which shall include specifications to be used to obtain
construction estimates.
e. Written cost estimates for the rehabilitation work from qualified contractors will be
secured. A list of contractors will be supplied to applicants upon request.
f. Cost estimates shall be reviewed by the Housing Officer and the lowest responsible
bidder will be selected.
§ 11-1.7 HOUSING REHABILITATION PLAN § 11-1.8
11:5
g. The rehabilitation work may begin as soon as all necessary agreements including
construction contract and lien documents have been executed.
h. Written progress reports shall be maintained and payment shall be made to the
appropriate parties as work progresses. After construction has been completed, the
Construction Official shall conduct a final inspection to certify that the repaired
property improvements are complete and issue a final inspection report. Final
payment for the rehabilitation work will then be released and lien documents
recorded.
§ 11-1.8 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 11-1.8
11:6
Chapter 12
BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS
§ 12-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 12-1.1. Title. [1991 Code § 149-1]
The section shall be known as the "Building and Construction Ordinance."
§ 12-1.2. Purpose. [1991 Code § 149-2; Ord. No. 02-28 § (D)]
It is the intent and purpose of this section:
§ 12-1.3. Definitions. [1991 Code § 149-3]
Except as otherwise defined herein and unless the context clearly indicates otherwise,
whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in the State Uniform
Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.), such term is intended to have the
meaning as defined in that Act. Any word or term not defined herein or in the Act shall
be considered to be as defined in standard usage.
§ 12-1.4. Establishment. [1991 Code § 149-4A]
a. To establish a municipal enforcing agency pursuant to the State Uniform
Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) and to provide procedures for
the administration of the agency.
b. To ensure adequate construction and maintenance of buildings and structures
throughout the Township and to adequately protect the health, safety and welfare of
the people.
c. To establish fees to be collected by the enforcing agency for certain activities,
including the issuance of a construction permit, certificate of occupancy, demolition
permit, moving of buildings, sign permits and the like.
a. There is hereby established a municipal enforcing agency within the Township of
Springfield for the administration and enforcement of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, the code and any amendments thereto, which agency shall
be entitled the "Construction Bureau" and which shall consist of the Construction
Official and all subcode officials and assistants thereto, and which shall be situated
within the Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code
Enforcement. The Construction Bureau shall require compliance with the
provisions of the Code, overall rules lawfully adopted and promulgated thereunder
and the laws relating to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition and
integral equipment and location, occupancy and maintenance of buildings and
structures, except as may be otherwise provided for. [Amended 12-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-24]
b. The public shall have the right to do business with the Construction Bureau at one
office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
§ 11-1.8 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-1.4
12:1
§ 12-1.5. The Construction Official. [1991 Code § 149-4B; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A);
amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
The Municipal Construction Official shall be appointed as set forth within the Township
Code at Subsection 2-22.1. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Construction
Official to serve as the chief administrator of the Construction Bureau. The Construction
Official shall establish, and may amend, office procedure for the Construction Bureau,
to assure efficient and timely operation of that Bureau. The Construction Official shall
further have the power to overrule a determination of any subcode official based on
an interpretation of a substantive provision of the subcode which the subcode official
administers, provided only that the Construction Official is qualified to act as a subcode
official for such subcode. A subcode official or the Township Engineer may serve as
Construction Official if otherwise qualified.
§ 12-1.6. Subcode Officials. [Ord. No. 2009-06 § I]
The Township Committee shall appoint such subcode officials as are necessary to
administer each subcode adopted by the Commissioner of the Department of Community
Affairs pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code Act as amended, including but
not necessarily limited to a building code, a plumbing code, an electrical code, an energy
code, a fire prevention code, a mobile home code and a mechanical code. A subcode
official so appointed shall serve for a term of four years, during which time such person
shall administer the subcode for which such person is appointed. Nothing contained
herein shall prevent the Township from accepting inspections as to compliance with the
code or any subcode thereof made by an on-site inspection authority, including private
inspection agencies approved by the State of New Jersey, pursuant to law.
§ 12-1.7. Duties of Subcode Officials. [1991 Code § 149-4C; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A);
Ord. No. 2009-06 § I]
As to their respective subcodes, each subcode official shall pass on:
§ 12-1.8. Qualifications of Officials. [1991 Code § 149-5]
The Construction Official and each subcode official shall be qualified for such position
pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the
same person, provided that such person is qualified to hold each such position.
§ 12-1.9. Application for Permit; Review and Approval; Issuance. [1991 Code
§ 149-6; amended 5-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-09]
circumstances.
a. Matters relative to the mode, manner of construction or material to be used in the
erection or alteration of buildings or structures, except as to any such matter
foreclosed by State approval pursuant to the State Uniform Construction Code Act
as amended; and
b. Actual execution of the approved plans and the installation of the materials
approved by the State.
§ 12-1.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-1.9
12:2
a. Except as otherwise provided by the State Uniform Construction Code Act or by
the code, before construction, alteration, demolition, or removal of any building or
structure, the owner or his agent, engineer or architect shall submit an application
for a construction permit in writing, including signed and sealed drawings and
specifications, to the Construction Bureau. The application shall be in accordance
with regulations established by the Commissioner of the Department of Community
Affairs and on a form prescribed by the Commissioner, accompanied by payment
of a fee as established by ordinance. The application for a construction permit shall
be filed with the Construction Bureau and shall be a public record, and no
application for a construction permit shall be removed from the custody of the
Construction Bureau after a construction permit has been issued.
b. The Construction Bureau shall examine each application for a construction permit.
If the application conforms to the State Uniform Construction Code Act, the Code
and the requirements of other applicable laws and ordinances, the Construction
Bureau shall approve the application and shall issue a construction permit to the
applicant. Every application for a construction permit shall be granted, in whole or
in part, or denied within 20 business days. If an application is denied in whole or in
part, the Construction Bureau shall set forth the reasons therefor in writing. If the
Construction Bureau fails to grant, in whole or in part, or deny an application for a
construction permit within the period of time prescribed herein, such failure shall
be deemed a denial of the application for purposes of an appeal to the Construction
Board of Appeals, unless such period of time has been extended with the consent of
the applicant. The Construction Board may approve changes in plans and
specifications when such changes remain in conformity with law. Except as
otherwise provided in the State Uniform Construction Code Act or the code, the
construction, alteration, demolition, or removal of a building or structure shall not
be commenced until a construction permit has been issued. The construction,
alteration, demolition, or removal of a building or structure shall be in compliance
with the approved application for a construction permit, and the Construction
Bureau shall ensure such compliance in the manner set forth in Subsection 12-1.10.
c. Prior to the issuance of a construction permit authorizing the demolition or removal
of any building or structure, the permit applicant, where applicable, must provide
the following to the Construction Official;
1. Certification from an accredited environmental agency attesting to the status
of any asbestos presence;
2. Proof that asbestos will be or has been abated;
3. Proof, consistent with the requirements of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, confirming the removal and/or closure of any
underground oil tanks on the premises.
4. Certification of pest control treatment by a certified, licensed exterminator 10
days prior to demolition;
5. Proof of fourteen-day notice to all abutting and adjoining property owners
prior to demolition commencement. Notice to all abutting and adjoining
property must be made by regular and certified mail;
§ 12-1.9 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-1.9
12:3
6. Releases from all utilities that provided service to the property (including but
not limited to gas, water, electric and sewer), confirming the disconnection of
each such service, and stating that their respective service connections and
appurtenant equipment, such as meters and regulators, have been removed or
sealed or plugged in a safe manner;
7. In the event of an abandoned well on the property, or a well to be abandoned
in conjunction with the proposed demolition, a certification must be obtained
from a well driller licensed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection indicating that the well has been sealed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:9-9; and
8. Plumbing permit for the capping of the sewer and water line, and inspection of
the capping to confirm it was capped in a safe manner.
d. A construction permit issued in accordance with the foregoing provisions, pursuant
to which no construction, alteration, demolition, or removal activity for a building
or structure has been undertaken above the foundation walls within one year from
the time of the issuance, shall expire. The Construction Bureau may suspend,
revoke or cancel a construction permit in case of neglect or failure to comply with
the provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code Act or the code or upon a
finding by it that a false statement or representation has been made in the
application for the construction permit.
e. Maintenance of sites under construction or renovation. [Added 7-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-12]
1. Definitions. As used in this section:
COMMENCEMENT OF WORK—Any activity by the contractor, owner, or
agent of either, that begins the process of construction, renovation, demolition
or excavation, which includes but is not limited to, the use or storage of
construction, renovation, demolition or excavation machinery and supplies on
the construction/renovation site.
CONSTRUCTION/RENOVATION SITE — The real property identified in
a building permit issued by the Township Construction Official; or the real
property identified in the demolition permit; or, in the event no such building
or demolition permit has been issued, a property that received site plan
approval by any of the Township Land Use Boards; or the property identified
on the tax map of the Township where demolition, excavation, construction or
renovation activity is occurring.
CONTRACTOR — The person or entity identified on the building permit
issued by the Township Construction Official as the contractor.
DEMOLITION — The act of demolishing, throwing or pulling down,
destroying or razing, pulling to pieces all or part of a structure or ground
surface.
EXCAVATION — The digging, storage and/or removal of soil or other
material forming the surface grade of a construction/renovation site so as to
leave a hole and/or cavity in, or mounding upon, the surface grade.
§ 12-1.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-1.9
12:4
OWNER—The person or entity vested with the legal title to the construction/
renovation site as recorded with the Township Tax Assessor.
2. Securing the construction/renovation site.
(a) It shall be the responsibility of the contractor working a construction/
renovation site or the owner of a construction/renovation site to secure
the construction/renovation site with a lockable fence to protect the health
and safety of the public. The Township Engineer or the Construction
Official, in the reasonable exercise of their discretion, shall determine the
type of fence as to material, height, location, type, fence locking
mechanism, and the type of machinery that requires fencing and the size
of the hole, cavity or mound that requires fencing so as to protect the
health and safety of the public. The fence shall be installed prior to the
commencement of work and shall remain and be maintained on the
construction/renovation site until there is no longer a hole, cavity or
mound, until there is no machinery or until a structure is closed,
whichever is later. For subdivisions and new single-family construction,
it shall be the responsibility of the contractor/owner to install a fence
around the entire perimeter of the construction area. Fencing is to remain
closed/locked/secured when no personnel are at the construction site or
no construction activities are taking place. Amended 3-10-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-06]
(b) Fences shall be constructed and erected according to trade standards and
of adequate strength to resist wind pressures, and for purposes of
preventing unauthorized entry. Fences shall not be constructed of barbed
wire, razor ribbon, metal spikes, electrified materials or other dangerous
materials. Affixed to the fence shall be two signs: the first sign shall read
"NO TRESPASSING," and the second sign shall read "DANGER."
(c) The construction/renovation site must be closed, and fence locked, as set
forth in this subsection at the end of each work day and whenever the
construction/renovation site is not attended to by either the owner or
contractor.
(d) Fences shall not block or prohibit access to fire hydrants or fire
department suppression system/standpipe system connections.
(e) Fences erected on construction/renovation sites pursuant to this
Subsection 12-1.9d shall be considered temporary fences; and nothing
within this Subsection 12-1.9d shall be construed to replace, amend or
supersede the provisions of the Township's Land Use Code at Chapter
XXXV, Subsection 35-22 (Fences and Sight Triangles).
(f) Fences shall not be permitted within municipal, county or state rights-ofway,
nor shall fences obstruct public sidewalks. If right-of-way or
sidewalk encroachment is deemed necessary, for critical operations, the
Construction Official or Township Engineer may issue written
permission authorizing such encroachment for a limited and specified
period of time. The duration of this authorization may be reevaluated and
modified by the Construction Official or Township Engineer based upon
§ 12-1.9 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-1.9
12:5
current site conditions and other factors. [Added 3-10-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-06
(g) Any fence which creates an unsafe condition shall constitute a violation
pursuant to this Subsection 12-1.9e2. [Added 3-10-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-06
(h) All approvals of necessary construction fencing shall be effective for a
specified duration, which shall be identified in the applicable building
permit. The duration of such approval shall be subject to reevaluation and
modification by the Construction Official or Township Engineer based
upon current site conditions and other factors. [Added 3-10-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-06
3. Portable toilets. In accordance with the National Standard Plumbing Code
311.1 of the State of New Jersey, toilet facilities shall be provided at all
construction/renovation sites for workers, and such facilities shall be
maintained in a sanitary condition. In the event toilet facilities are not
available, a portable toilet must be provided by the owner or contractor for the
property. Construction worker toilet facilities of the non-sewer type shall
conform to ANSI Z4.3.
4. Vehicles tracking dirt and other materials onto the roadway. It shall be
unlawful for an owner or contractor at a construction/renovation site or
unpaved site to permit, allow or cause any vehicle to track, deposit or allow to
fall dirt, mud or other materials onto any road located within the Township of
Springfield. The owner of the property and contractor shall be responsible for
installing and maintaining truck stone pads or other effective means or devices
to prevent dirt, mud and other materials from leaving the property, and shall
be responsible for cleaning from the road any mud, dirt or other material that
has been tracked, deposited or allowed to fall upon a road located in the
Township.
5. Penalties.
(a) Any violation of the provisions of this subsection shall result in an oral
notification and followed up with written notice of the violation to the
owner and contractor of the construction/renovation site.
(1) First violation - The contractor and owner shall be provided with
oral and written notice of the violation(s), which shall include a
deadline to correct the violation(s). If the violation(s) are not cured
by the prescribed deadline, a summons shall be issued for $250 per
day for every day the violation remains uncured. [Amended
3-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-06]
(2) Second violation - immediate issuance of a $500-per-day summons
for every day the violation remains uncured.
(3) Third violation - immediate issuance of a $750-per-day summons
for every day the violation remains uncured.
§ 12-1.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-1.9
12:6
§ 12-1.10. Inspection of Construction. [1991 Code § 149-7; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
(4) Fourth and subsequent violations - immediate issuance of a
$1,000-per-day summons for every day the violation remains
uncured.
(5) If any of the violations are not cured within 72 hours of notification,
a stop-work order shall be issued until all violations are cured.
(b) The owner of any construction/renovation site and any contractor
operating, engaged to operate or otherwise working at the construction/
renovation site shall be jointly and severally liable for any violation of the
provisions of this subsection.
6. Enforcement.
(a) This subsection shall be enforced for all new construction permits and for
all sites that have an open construction permit at the time of the effective
date of its adoption. After enactment, existing sites will have 10 days to
comply with the terms of this subsection after written notification to the
owner or contractor by the Construction Official or Township Engineer.
(b) The provisions of this Subsection 12-1.9d may be enforced by the
Township Engineer, Construction Official, Code Enforcement Officer,
Zoning Officer or a police officer of the Township of Springfield.
a. The Construction Bureau shall periodically inspect all construction undertaken
pursuant to a construction permit issued by it to ensure that the construction or
alteration is performed in accordance with the conditions of the construction permit
and consistent with the requirements of the code and all applicable municipal
ordinances.
b. The owner of any premises upon which a building or structure is being constructed
shall be deemed to have consented to the inspection by the Construction Bureau of
the entire premises and of any and all construction being performed on it until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued. An inspector or team of inspectors, on
presentation of proper credentials, shall have the right to enter and inspect such
premises and any and all construction thereon for the purposes of ensuring
compliance with the provisions of the applicable construction permit, the code and
other applicable laws and regulations. All inspections shall be between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on business days or when construction is actually being
undertaken; provided, however, that inspections may be conducted at other times if
the Construction Bureau has reasonable cause to believe that an immediate danger
to life, limb or property exists or if permission is given by an owner or the owner's
agent, architect, engineer or builder. No person shall accompany an inspector or
team of inspectors on any inspection unless such person's presence is necessary for
the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act, the code or this
chapter or unless consent is given by an owner or the owner's agent, architect,
engineer or builder.
c. If the construction of a structure or building is being undertaken contrary to the
provisions of a construction permit, the State Uniform Construction Code Act, the
§ 12-1.9 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-1.10
12:7
§ 12-1.11. Certificates of Occupancy. [1991 Code § 149-8]
No building or structure hereafter constructed shall be used or occupied in whole or in
part until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Construction Bureau.
No building or structure hereafter altered in whole or in part shall be used or occupied
until such a certificate has been issued, except that any use or occupancy in an already
existing building or structure that was not discontinued during its alteration may be
continued in the preexisting structure for 30 days after the completion of the alteration
without the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be
issued by the Construction Bureau when all of the work covered by a construction permit
shall have been completed in accordance with the permit, the code and other applicable
laws and ordinances. On request of a holder of a construction permit, the Construction
Bureau may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a building or structure or part
thereof before the entire work covered by the construction permit has been completed
if the part or parts of the building or structure to be covered by the certificate may
be occupied prior to the completion of all work in accordance with the permit, the
code and all other applicable laws and ordinances without endangering the health and
safety of the occupants or users. When a building or structure is entitled thereto, the
Construction Bureau shall issue a certificate of occupancy within 10 business days after
receipt of a written application therefor in accordance with regulations established by the
Commissioner, on a form prescribed by the Commissioner, accompanied by payment of
a fee. The certificate of occupancy shall certify that the building or structure has been
constructed in accordance with the provisions of the construction permit, the code and
other applicable laws and ordinances.
§ 12-1.12. Certificate of Continued Occupancy. [Ord. No. 2004-10 § 1]
Pursuant hereto N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3, of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, as amended
shall be incorporated herein. Before any structure subject thereto is sold, leased, or
otherwise made subject to a change of occupancy for residential purposes, the owner
thereof shall obtain a certificate of continued occupancy, which shall only be issued
upon compliance with the requirements for a certificate of smoke detector and carbon
monoxide alarm compliance as set forth therein. The fee for such inspection and
certificate shall be as hereafter set forth. All inspections hereunder shall be performed
code or other applicable laws or ordinances, the Construction Bureau may issue
a stop-construction order in writing, which shall state the conditions upon which
construction may be resumed and which shall be given to the owner or the holder of
the construction permit or to the person performing the construction. If the person
doing the construction is not known or cannot be located with reasonable effort,
the notice may be delivered to the person in charge of or apparently in charge
of the construction. No person shall continue or cause or allow to be continued
the construction of a building or structure in violation of a stop-construction order
except with the permission of the Construction Bureau to abate a dangerous
condition or remove a violation or except by court order. If an order to stop
construction is not obeyed, the Construction Bureau may apply to the appropriate
court, as otherwise established by law, for an order enjoining the violation of the
stop-construction order. The remedy for violation of such an order provided in
this subsection shall be in addition to and not in limitation of any other remedies
provided by law or ordinance.
§ 12-1.10 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-1.12
12:8
by the inspector responsible for enforcement of the Uniform Fire Code, within the
Township.
§ 12-1.13. Commercial Certificate of Continued Occupancy. [Ord. No. 2005-27
§ 1]
As concerns any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential building for which no
current certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to this chapter, no person shall
occupy or use any portion of such building, after such building or portion thereof has
been sold, leased, or otherwise made subject to a change of occupancy, use or ownership,
until the owner thereof shall apply for and obtain a commercial certificate of continued
occupancy from the Construction Bureau, pursuant to the terms of this chapter. Such
certificate shall only be issued upon inspection and a finding that the building or portion
thereof complies with all provisions of this Code, and all other applicable laws. A
temporary certificate may be issued as provided in Subsection 12-1.11, hereof. The fee
for such inspection and certificate shall be as hereafter set forth.
§ 12-1.14. Schedule of Fees.33 [1991 Code § 149-14; Ord. No. 93-28; Ord. No. 96-4;
Ord. No. 2000-19 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-10 § I; Ord. No. 2011-24; Ord. No. 2012-06;
Ord. No. 2012-11]
a. Construction fees: [Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
1. New Construction and Additions:
(a) Minimum Fee $50
(b) Use Groups: B, H, I-1, 2, 4, M, E, R, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, U
(per cubic foot)
$0.038
(1) Up to $50,000 $34 per $1,000
(2) $50,000.01 to $100,000 $26 per $1,000
(3) Over $100,000 $32 per $1,000
(c) Use Groups: A-1, 2, 3, 4, 5, F-1, 2 S-1, 2 (per cubic
foot)
$0.021
(1) Up to $50,000 $34 per $1,000
(2) $50,000.01 to $100,000 $26 per $1,000
(3) Over $100,000 $22 per $1,000
(d) Deck or Balcony (all use groups):
(1) Up to $50,000 $34 per $1,000
(2) $50,000.01 to $100,000 $26 per $1,000
(3) Over $100,000 $22 per $1,000
(e) Fence (all use groups):
(1) Up to $50,000 $30 per $1,000
(2) $50,000.01 to $100,000 $23 per $1,000
33. Editor's Note: Former Subsections 12-1.12 through 12-1.16, pertaining to the Construction Board of Appeals and
containing 1991 Code §§ 149-9 through 149-13 were repealed by Ordinance No. 02-28.
§ 12-1.12 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-1.14
12:9
(3) Over $100,000 $19 per $1,000
(f) Signs (all use groups) $65
(g) Pylon:
(1) Up to 100 square feet $6 per square foot
(2) 101 to 400 square feet $4.75 per square
foot
(3) Over 400 square feet $3.50 per square
foot
(h) Wall or Ground:
(1) Up to 100 square feet $3 per square foot
(2) 101 to 400 square feet $2.10 per square
foot
(3) Over 400 square feet $1.40 per square
foot
(i) Pool: In-ground (all use groups):
(1) Less than or equal to 550 square feet $106
(2) Greater than 550 square feet $210
(j) Pool: Aboveground (all use groups):
(1) Less than or equal to 550 square feet $70
(2) Greater than 550 square feet $140
(k) Temporary Structures (all use groups) $129
(l) Open Structural Towers:
(1) Up to $50,000 $34 per $1,000
(2) $50,000.01 to $100,000 $26 per $1,000
(3) Over $100,000 $22 per $1,000
2. Rehabilitation:
(a) Minimum Fee $50
(b) Use Groups: B-E-H-1, 2, 3, 4, 5, I-1, 2, 3, 4, M, R-1,
2, 4, U, C, A-1, 2, 3, 4, F-1, S-1, 2
(1) Up to $50,000 $34 per $1,000
(2) $50,000.01 to $100,000 $26 per $1,000
(3) Over $100,000 $22 per $1,000
(c) Roofing:
Use Groups: R-3 and R-5 (only) $65 (flat rate)
(d) Roofing (all other use groups):
(1) Up to $50,000 $34 per $1,000
(2) $50,000.01 to $100,000 $26 per $1,000
(3) Over $100,000 $22 per $1,000
§ 12-1.14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-1.14
12:10
(e) Siding:
(1) Up to $50,000 $34 per $1,000
(2) $50,000.01 to $100,000 $26 per $1,000
(3) Over $100,000 $22 per $1,000
(f) Retaining Wall (all use groups):
(1) Class 3 - Residential
[a] Less than or equal to 550 square feet $106
[b] Greater than 550 square feet $210
(2) Other than Class 3 Residential
[a] Up to $50,000 $34 per $1,000
[b] $50,000.01 to $100,000 $26 per $1,000
[c] Over $100,000 $22 per $1,000
3. Asbestos Abatement $196
4. Lead Hazard Abatement $176
5. Radon Remediation:
(a) Up to $50,000,000 $34 per $1,000
(b) $50,000.01 to $100,000 $26 per $1,000
(c) Over $100,000 $22 per $1,000
6. Demolition:
(a) Less than 5,000 square feet in area and over 30 feet
in height
$92
(b) More than 5,000 square feet in area and over 30 feet
in height
$168
7. Tank Removal:
(a) Use Groups: R-3 and R-5 $92
(b) All other Use Groups $168
8. Solar Panels (all use groups):
(a) Minimum Fee $50
(b) Up to $50,000 $34 per $1,000
(c) Up to $50,000.01 to $100,000 $26 per $1,000
(d) Over $100,000 $22 per $1,000
9. Plan Review: Alternative Systems and Nondepletable
Energy Source Provisions of Energy Subcode:
(a) Use Groups R-3 and R-5 $345
(b) All other Use Groups $1,725
b. Plumbing and mechanical fees: [Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02;
7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-08]; amended 10-13-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-21
§ 12-1.14 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-1.14
12:11
Type Fee
1. Minimum fee $63
2. Water closet $25
3. Urinal/bidet $25
4. Bathtub $25
5. Lavatory $25
6. Shower $25
7. Floor drain $25
8. Sink $25
9. Dishwasher $25
10. Drinking fountain $25
11. Washing machine $25
12. Hose bibb $25
13. Water heater $25
14. Fuel oil piping $25
15. Gas piping $25
16. LP gas tank $100
17. Steam boiler $100
18. Hot-water boiler $100
19. Sewer pump/ejector $100
20. Interceptor separator $100
21. Backflow preventer (commercial) $100
22. Backflow preventer (residential) $25
23. Grease trap $100
24. Sewer connection (repair/
reconnect)
$100
25. Water service connection (repair/
reconnect)
$100
26. Stacks $25
27. Water-cooled AC units (chillers) $100
28. Refrigeration units $100
29. Active solar systems $100
30. Condensers $100
31. Sewer and water line capping
(demo)
$100 each
32. Drains (all) $25
§ 12-1.14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-1.14
12:12
Type Fee
33. Water softeners $100
34. Furnaces $100
35. Sump pump $100
36. Gas burners $100
37. Oil burners $100
38. Other fixtures $25
39. Other special devices $100
c. Electrical permits: [Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02; 7-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-08]
Type Fee
1. Minimum fee $63
2. Lighting fixture
1 to 50 $63
Each additional 25 $20
3. Receptacles
1 to 50 $63
Each additional 25 $20
4. Switches
1 to 50 $63
Each additional 25 $20
5. Detectors
1 to 50 $63
Each additional 25 $20
6. Light standards <8 feet in height
1 to 50 $63
Each additional 25 $20
7. Motors-fractional HP
1 to 50 $63
Each additional 25 $20
8. Emergency and exit lights
1 to 50 $63
Each additional 25 $20
9. Communication points
1 to 50 $63
§ 12-1.14 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-1.14
12:13
Type Fee
Each additional 25 $20
10. Alarm devices/FAC panel
1 to 50 $63
Each additional 25 $20
11. Devices rated <20 amps
1 to 50 $63
Each additional 25 $20
12. Equipment rated <1kw $63
13. Pool permit $25
14. Private pool/spa/hot tub/fountain $80
15. Storable pool/hydro massage
bathtub
$80
16. Electrical range
1 to 10 KW $25
11 to 10 KW $75
51 to 100 KW $139
Over 100 KW $650
17. Oven/surface unit
1 to 10 KW $25
11 to 50 KW $75
51 to 100 KW $139
Over 100 KW $650
18. Household electrical cooking
equipment
Up to 16 KW $25
19. Electrical dryer
1 to 10 KW $25
11 to 50 KW $75
51 to 100 KW $139
Over 100 KW $650
20. Dishwasher
1 to 10 KW $25
11 to 50 KW $75
51 to 100 KW $139
§ 12-1.14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-1.14
12:14
Type Fee
Over 100 KW $650
21. Central AC unit
1 to 10 KW $25
11 to 50 KW $75
51 to 100 KW $139
Over 100 KW $650
22. Space heater/air handler
1 to 10 KW/hp $25
11 to 50 KW/hp $75
51 to 100 KW/hp $139
Over 100 KW/hp $650
23. Baseboard heat
1 to 10 KW $25
11 to 50 KW $75
51 to 100 KW $139
Over 100 KW $650
24. Motors (1 + hp)
1 to 10 hp $25
11 to 50 hp $75
51 to 100 hp $139
Over 100 hp $650
25. Transformer/generator
1 to 10 KW or kva $25
11 to 50 KW or kva $75
51 to 100 KW or kva $139
Over 100 KW or kva $650
26. Service
<=225 amps $75
>225 but <1,000 amps $139
Over 1,000 amps $650
27. Subpanels
<=225 amps $75
>225 but <1,000 amps $139
Over 1,000 amps $650
§ 12-1.14 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-1.14
12:15
Type Fee
28. Motor control center
<=225 amps $75
>225 but <1,000 amps $139
Over 1,000 amps $650
29. Electric sign outline light (in
KWS)
1 to 10 KW $25
11 to 50 KW $75
51 to 100 KW $139
Over 100 KW $650
30. Electric sign
>20 but <=225 amps $75
31. Fire, security or burglar alarm
control unit
$25
32. Light standard
> than 8 feet in height $75
33. Communications closet $50
34. Single/multi-station smoke/heat
detectors, fire, burglar or security
alarm systems, 1- and 2-family
dwellings
Flat fee $50
35. Utility load management device $75
36. Photovoltaic systems
1 to 50 KW $75
51 to 100 KW $139
Over 100 KW $650
37. Solar meters $75
38. Solar disconnects
1 amp - 200 amps $75
221 - 1,000 amps $139
Over 1,000 amps $650
39. All other devices
1 to 10 hp $25
11 to 50 hp $75
§ 12-1.14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-1.14
12:16
Type Fee
51 to 100 hp $139
Over 100 hp $650
1 to 10 KW $25
11 to 50 KW $75
51 to 112.5 KW $139
Over 112.5 KW $650
>30 but <=50 amps $25
>50 amps $75
40. Alarms, per item $25
41. Antenna cable $65
42. Trenches $25
43. Walk-in box (each) $65
d. Elevators. All elevators are handled by the State of New Jersey Bureau of Code
Services, Elevator Safety. [Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02; 7-16-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-08]
e. Certificates and other permits: [Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02;
7-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-08]
1. Certificates:
Type Fee
(a) Certificate of occupancy $50
(b) Temporary certificate of
occupancy
$50
(c) Certificate of occupancychange
of use
$200
(d) Certificate of continued
occupancy
$200
(e) Certificate of continued
occupancy (commercial)
$250
(f) Temporary certificate of
occupancy-renewal
$50
(g) Certificate of clearance-lead
abatement
$50
2. Moving houses:
§ 12-1.14 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-1.14
12:17
(a) Moving of house to different
lot
$200
(b) Moving of house on same lot $100
3. Annual inspections:
(a) Annual pool inspection $85
(b) Annual backflow inspection $85
4. Special overtime inspections. Inspections that are to be conducted on
weekends and other than normal working hours will be a minimum of four
hours at the inspector's current hourly rate. Each additional hour over four
hours will be charged at the same rate.
5. All variations will be at state minimum.
f. Fire protection: [Amended 3-8-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02; 7-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-08]
Type Fee
1. Minimum fee $63
2. Alarm systems
1 to 12 $60
Each additional 25 $27
3. Detection devices
1 to 12 $60
Each additional 25 $27
4. Supervisory devices
1 to 12 $60
Each additional 25 $27
5. Signaling devices
1 to 12 $60
Each additional 25 $27
6. Other devices
1 to 12 $50
7. 110v interconnected alarms/CO
detectors (Commercial)
1 to 12 $75
Each additional 25 $20
8. CO detectors/detection vent system $200
§ 12-1.14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-1.14
12:18
Type Fee
9. CO detectors/110v interconnected
alarms - 1- and 2-family dwellings (per
dwelling unit)
Flat rate $50
10. Sprinkler heads
Up to 20 $100
21 to 100 $178
101 to 200 $331
201 to 400 $841
401 to 1,000 $1,160
Over 1,000 $1,479
11. Number of standpipes $350 each
12. Preengineered systems:
(a) Wet chemical $130
(b) Dry chemical $130
(c) CO2 suppression $130
(d) Foam suppression $130
(e) FM200 suppression $130
(f) Other $130
13. Kitchen hood exhaust (residential) $75
14. Kitchen hood exhaust (commercial) $100
15. Gas-fired appliances (residential) $75
16. Gas-fired appliances (commercial) $100
17. Oil-fired appliances (residential) $75
18. Oil-fired appliances (commercial) $100
19. Fireplace venting $75
20. Incinerator $500
21. Crematorium $500
22. Tank removal/installation
(a) Combustible tanks $75
(b) Residential (flat fee) $100
(c) Commercial $200
23. Chimney liner $75
g. Waiver of construction permit fees for disabled accessibility construction. Pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126e, no person within the Township of Springfield shall be
§ 12-1.14 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-1.14
12:19
§ 12-2. UNFIT BUILDINGS.
§ 12-2.1. Definitions. [1991 Code § 144-1]
As used in this section:
BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and including any outhouses and appurtenances
belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Township Committee of the Township of
Springfield, Union County, New Jersey.
OWNER — Shall mean the holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Shall mean all individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Shall mean any housing or any officer who is in charge of
any department or branch of the government of the Township of Springfield, County
or State relating to health, fire or building regulations or to other activities concerning
buildings in the Township.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the officer, officers, board or body who is or are
authorized by ordinances adopted hereunder to exercise the powers prescribed by such
ordinances and by this chapter.
§ 12-2.2. Certain Buildings to Be Repaired, Closed or Demolished. [1991 Code
§ 144-2]
Any building which now exists or which hereafter may exist which is unfit for human
habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities or due to other conditions
rendering such dwelling unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health
or safety or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the Township shall be
repaired, closed or demolished in accordance with the provisions herein provided.
charged a construction permit surcharge fee or enforcing agency fee for any
construction, reconstruction, alteration or improvement designed and undertaken
solely to promote accessibility by disabled persons to an existing public or private
structure or any of the facilities contained therein; and a disabled person, or a parent
or sibling of a disabled person, shall not be required to pay any municipal fee or
charge in order to secure a construction permit for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration or improvement which promote accessibility to the person's own living
unit.
h. Waiver of construction permit fees for construction necessitated by a natural
disaster or other occurrence. No person within the Township of Springfield shall be
charged an enforcing agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement which is directly related to a natural disaster or other occurrence
which results in a declaration of a State of Emergency, for a period of 365 days,
subsequent to such declaration. Such deadline may be extended by resolution of the
Township Committee either for all applicants or on a case-by-case basis.
§ 12-1.14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-2.3
12:20
§ 12-2.3. Designation of Public Officer. [1991 Code § 144-3]
A committee consisting of the Construction Code Official, who shall be Chairman of
such committee, the Sanitarian and the Fire Chief is hereby designated and appointed
as the Public Officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter. A majority vote
shall be necessary for all actions taken by the committee.
§ 12-2.4. Determination That Dwelling is Unfit. [1991 Code § 144-4; Ord. No.
02-28 § I(A)]
For the purpose of this section, the Public Officer may determine that a building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use if the Officer finds that conditions exist
in such building which are or may become dangerous or injurious to the health or
safety of the occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents of the Township. Such conditions may include the following, without limiting
the generality of the foregoing:
§ 12-2.5. Issuance of Complaint; Notice of Hearing. [1991 Code § 144-5; Ord. No.
02-28 § I(A)]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by a public authority or by at least
five residents of the Township charging that any building is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use or whenever it appears to the Township Engineer that any building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, the Public Officer shall, if a preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner and any parties in interest in such building a complaint stating the charges in that
respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Public Officer or a
designated agent, at a place therein fixed, not less than seven days nor more than 30 days
after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be given
the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence
prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings before the Public Officer.
§ 12-2.6. Findings at Hearing; Order. [1991 Code § 144-6; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
If, after such notice and hearing, the Public Officer determines that the building under
consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, the Officer shall state
in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause
to be served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order requiring the repair,
alteration or improvement of the building to be made by the owner within a reasonable
time, which time shall be set forth in the order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate
or have the building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order, and if the
building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health and safety of persons
on or near the premises and if the owner fails to repair, alter or improve the building
a. Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities.
b. Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities.
c. Dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
d. Conditions otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the Township.
§ 12-2.3 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-2.6
12:21
within the time specified in the order, the owner shall be required to remove or demolish
the building within a reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
§ 12-2.7. Failure to Comply With Order. [1991 Code § 144-7]
§ 12-2.8. Performance of Work by Township; Costs. [1991 Code § 144-8]
The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search fees
and advertising charges incurred in the course of any proceeding taken under this chapter
determined in favor of the municipality, and the amount of such cost of such repairs,
alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing or demolition, if any, or the amount
of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any realized from the sale
of materials derived from such building or from any contract for removal or demolition
thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the Public Officer, the officer
shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited against the cost of the
removal or demolition thereof, including the clearance and, if necessary, leveling of the
site, the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sums derived from any contracts
for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum
total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid
costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other
custodian of the records of tax liens and a copy thereof shall be forwarded to the owner
by certified mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance remaining
shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Public Officer, shall be secured in such
manner as may be directed by such Court and shall be disbursed according to the order
or judgment of the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or
judgment of such Court. Any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the
date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior
Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth
in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 12-2.9. Service and Posting of Complaints and Orders. [1991 Code § 144-9]
Complaints or orders issued by the Public Officer pursuant to this section shall be served
upon persons either personally or by certified mail, but if the whereabouts of such person
is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Public Officer in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, and the Public Officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then
a. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or, at the
option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Public Officer may cause
such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed. The
Public Officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so
closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is prohibited
and unlawful."
b. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the building, the
Public Officer may cause such building to be removed or demolished or may
contract for the removal or demolition thereof after advertisement for and receipt of
bids therefor.
§ 12-2.6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-2.9
12:22
the serving of such complaint or order upon such person may be made by publishing the
same once every week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published
in the Township of Springfield, or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and
published in the County and circulated in the Township. A copy of such complaint or
order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint
or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record
with the Union County Clerk.
§ 12-2.10. Authority and Power of Public Officer. [1991 Code § 144-10; Ord. No.
02-28 § I(A)]
The Public Officer is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or
convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this section,
including the following powers in addition to others herein granted:
§ 12-2.11. Appeals. [1991 Code § 144-11]
Any owner or party in interest aggrieved by an order issued by the Public Officer under
this section may, within 10 days after the posting and service of such order, file an
appeal with the Township Committee seeking to vacate, amend or modify the order of
the Public Officer. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the right of any
person to bring an action for injunctive relief as provided in Subsection 12-2.12.
§ 12-2.12. Restraining Action. [1991 Code § 144-12]
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Public Officer under this section may,
within 30 days after the posting and service of such order, bring an action for injunctive
relief to restrain the Public Officer from carrying out the provisions of the order and for
any other appropriate relief. The court may proceed in the action in a summary manner or
otherwise. The remedy herein provided shall be exclusive, and no person affected by an
order of the Public Officer shall be entitled to recover any damages for action pursuant
thereto or because of noncompliance of any person with any order of the Public Officer.
§ 12-2.13. Interpretation. [1991 Code § 144-13]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the
Township or any officer or department thereof to enforce any provisions of its
a. To investigate the building conditions in the Township in order to determine which
buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use.
b. To administer oaths or affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence.
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations, provided that such
entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to
the persons in possession.
d. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as deemed
necessary to carry out the purpose of this section.
e. To delegate any of the functions and powers under this section to such officers and
agents as the Officer may designate.
§ 12-2.9 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-2.13
12:23
ordinances or regulations or to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers
conferred by this section shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred
upon the Township by any other law or ordinance.
§ 12-3. NEW JERSEY STATE HOUSING CODE. [1991 Code § 65-6; Ord. No.
92-13; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
The Township of Springfield hereby adopts the New Jersey Housing Code (1980) by
reference as if set forth in its entirety herein. Enforcement of the New Jersey State
Housing Code shall be performed by the following public officers: the Building Subcode
Official, Subcode Officials, the Fire Inspector and the Township Sanitarian.
§ 12-4. NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS.
§ 12-4.1. Numbering System Established. [1991 Code § 213-1]
The owner of every dwelling, store, office building, warehouse, factory or other structure
or building which now fronts or may hereafter front upon any public street within
the Township shall cause the street number assigned to the property upon which the
dwelling, store, office building, warehouse, factory or other structure or building is
erected to be placed in digital numbers, Roman numerals or script as outlined below:
§ 12-4.2. Assignment of Numbers. [1991 Code § 213-2]
Street number assignments shall be made by the office of the Township Engineer.
§ 12-4.3. Enforcement. [1991 Code § 213-3]
The enforcement of the section shall be vested in the Bureau of Fire Prevention, the
Police Department and the Construction Code Official of the Township.
§ 12-4.4. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 213-4; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 12-5. AFFORDABLE HOUSING CONTROLS.
§ 12-5.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 99-24 § [C]; 12-5.1]
Whereas the Township of Springfield has entered into an Agreement with the New
Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency, Affordable Housing Management
Service, for purposes of transferring responsibility to the State of New Jersey for
a. Dwellings: to be placed in digital numbers, Roman numerals or script at least three
inches in height with two feet to the right or left of the main entrance or on the door
of the structure facing the street.
b. All other structures or buildings: to be placed in digital numbers, Roman numerals
or script at least six inches in height within two feet to the right, left or above the
main entrance or on the door.
§ 12-2.13 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-5.1
12:24
enforcement of long term affordability controls on units created as affordable housing
within the Township of Springfield; and
Whereas, in order to properly implement such Agreement, it is necessary that all
developers offering such units either for sale or rental, execute a Project-specific
Contract Addendum, in a form set forth as Exhibit B to such Agreement; the purpose of
this section shall be set forth such requirement and regulations concerning same.
§ 12-5.2. Mandatory Execution of Agreement. [Ord. No. 99-24 § [C]; 12-5.2]
Within 10 days of the effective date of this section, or within 10 days of Final Planning
Board Approval, whichever shall be later, each developer within the Township of
Springfield with affordable housing component shall execute a Project-specific Contract
Addendum in a form designated by the Affordable Housing Management Service or
their designee.
§ 12-5.3. Procedures. [Ord. No. 99-24 § [C]; 12-5.3]
As soon as practicable, but no later than upon final Planning Board approval, each
developer with Springfield with an affordable housing component shall contact the
Administrator of the Affordable Housing Management Service to develop a cooperative
work plan for interviewing applicants and marketing the units to make arrangements for
payment of fees, and to establish viable pricing schedules.
§ 12-5.4. Requirements. [Ord. No. 99-24 § [C]; 12-5.4]
All developers, renters, unit owners, and their agents, employees, heirs, executors,
successors and assigns shall be bound by the terms of this section, the Agreement with
the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency and all Federal, State and local
laws and regulations in effect and as amended.
§ 12-5.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 99-24 § [C]; 12-5.5]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable, in addition to any other penalty at law, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 12-6. HOTEL AND MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX.
§ 12-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 03-023 § 1]
It is the purpose of this section to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003, c. 114, which
authorizes the Governing Body of a municipality to adopt an ordinance imposing a tax
at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy on
or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent
for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to
taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3)
which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local
ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 12-6.2. Implementation. [Ord. No. 03-023 § 1; amended 7-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-15]
§ 12-5.1 BUILDING, HOUSING AND HOTELS § 12-6.2
12:25
§ 12-6.3. Regulations. [Ord. No. 03-023 § 1]
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
§ 12-6.4. Collection. [Ord. No. 03-023 § 1]
The tax imposed by this section shall be collected on behalf of the Township by the
person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each person required to
collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or
required to be collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the same right in respect
to collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at
the same time, provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall be joined
as a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
a. There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the Township
which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of 7% on charges of rent for every
occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the Township on or after July 1, 2003, but
before July 1, 2004, and 5% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or
motel room in the Township on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel
subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40,
N.J.S.A. 54:32D-la (sales tax).
b. The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other tax or fee
imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental
entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
c. The hotel and motel room occupancy tax authorized herein shall not be imposed on
the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user or consumer is an entity exempt
from the tax imposed on an occupancy under the "Sales and Use Tax Act" pursuant
to Subsection (a) of Section 9 of P.L. 1966, c. 30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9).
a. All taxes imposed by this section shall be paid by the purchaser.
b. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this section.
c. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or to the public
in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the tax will be assumed or
absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the
customer, or that the tax will be refunded to the customer.
d. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a separate
offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor for each day that the
representation or advertisement continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
e. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 12-6.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 12-6.4
12:26
Chapter 13
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
§ 13-1. DEFINITIONS. [1991 Code § 253-1]
The words or phrases listed below, for the purposes of this chapter, except when the
context requires a different meaning, shall be defined as follows:
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean building or installing a new swimming pool or
enlarging an existing swimming pool or any of its facilities.
POOL — Shall mean any private swimming pool or more than 100 cubic feet capacity
of permanent construction, and all equipment and appurtenances thereto, used by any
person for swimming or bathing.
PORTABLE POOL — Shall mean any above-surface-type pool of more than 100 cubic
feet capacity, not stationary or fixed and capable of being removed for storage.
WADING POOL — Shall mean a permanently constructed pool not designed or used
for swimming, with a maximum area of 100 square feet and a maximum water depth of
12 inches.
§ 13-2. PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE. [1991 Code 253-2; New]
Application for a permit to construct, establish or maintain or to alter, remodel or add
to a permanent private swimming pool or permanent wading pool shall be made to
the Construction Code Official by the owner of the property. The application shall
be accompanied by two sets of plot plans showing property lines of the premises, all
existing houses and structures thereon and the location and dimensions of the proposed
private swimming pool or wading pool and its auxiliary structures and all existing
fences or walls and the height thereof, and two sets of plans and specifications for
the proposed private swimming pool or wading pool and all auxiliary structures and
appurtenances related thereto and the location, height and aperture dimensions of the
fence to be erected, together with the self-closing gate and its locking devices. The fees
for construction of a private swimming pool or wading pool shall be as established by
the Governing Body.
§ 13-3. APPROVAL OF PLANS REQUIRED. [1991 Code § 253-3]
No permit for a private swimming pool or wading pool shall be issued by the
Construction Code Official until the plans, specifications and plot plans have been
approved by the Engineer, the Health Officer and the Plumbing Inspector of the
Township and such approval has been properly certified on the plans.
§ 13-4. CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS. [1991 Code § 253-4]
Unless otherwise provided in the State Uniform Construction Code, the following
regulations shall apply.
§ 13-4.1. Size; Location. [1991 Code § 253-4A]
§ 12-6.4 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS § 13-4.1
13:1
§ 13-4.2. Pool Barrier Requirements. [1991 Code § 253-4B; Ord. No. 2011-11]
a. A private swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool shall not be constructed,
installed or maintained within 15 feet of any side yard or rear yard line, nor shall
any such pool be constructed, erected, installed or maintained in the front yard of
the property. In the case of any lot less than 50 feet in width, it will be permissible
to place a pool within 10 feet of a side or rear property line.
b. In the case of a corner lot, a pool shall not be constructed any closer to the side
street line than the prevailing setback line on that street or the required setback line
for front yards as set forth in the zoning regulations.
c. A private swimming pool or wading pool shall not be constructed or installed on
any premises unless a residence building is also located on the premises or unless
the premises are part of a residence curtilage.
d. No private swimming pool or wading pool and its accessory buildings shall cover
more than 20% of the rear yard of the lot involved. The rear yard designated is to
be as defined in the zoning regulations.
a. Permanent Pools.
1. A residential swimming pool barrier shall comply with the following:
(a) The barrier must be at least four feet high on the outside.
(b) The barrier may not have any gaps, openings, indentations, protrusions,
or structural components that could allow a young child to crawl under,
squeeze through, or climb over the barrier.
(c) The barrier must be placed around the perimeter of the pool and must be
separate from any fence, wall, or other enclosure surrounding the yard
unless the fence, wall, or other enclosure or portion thereof is situated on
the perimeter of the pool, is being used as part of the barrier, and meets
the barrier requirements of this subsection.
(d) The barrier must be placed sufficiently away from the water's edge to
prevent a young child or medically frail elderly person who may have
managed to penetrate the barrier from immediately falling into the water.
2. The structure of an aboveground swimming pool may be used as its barrier or
the barrier for such a pool may be mounted on top of its structure; however,
such structure or separately mounted barrier must meet all barrier requirements
of this section. In addition, any ladder or steps that are the means of access to
an aboveground pool must be capable of being secured, locked, or removed to
prevent access or must be surrounded by a barrier that meets the requirements
of this section.
3. Gates that provide access to swimming pools must open outward away from
the pool and be self-closing and equipped with a self-latching locking device,
the release mechanism of which must be located on the pool side of the gate
and so placed that it cannot be reached by a young child over the top or through
any opening or gap.
§ 13-4.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 13-4.2
13:2
§ 13-4.3. Lighting. [1991 Code § 253-4C]
No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with a private
swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool in such a manner as to be a nuisance or an
annoyance to neighboring properties. No lighting shall shine directly upon any abutting
property. No unshielded lights shall be permitted.
§ 13-4.4. Accessory Buildings. [1991 Code § 253-4D]
Any accessory buildings that are to be constructed must comply with that portion of the
Zoning Chapter pertaining to accessory buildings. Locker rooms, bathhouses, cabanas,
shower rooms, toilets, runways and all other physical facilities or equipment incident to
the operation of any private swimming pool or wading pool shall be kept in a sanitary
condition at all times.
§ 13-5. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS; WATER REGULATIONS.
§ 13-5.1. Maintenance Requirements. [1991 Code § 253-5]
All materials used in the construction of private swimming pools or wading pools shall
be waterproof and so designed and constructed as to facilitate emptying and cleaning
and shall be maintained and operated in such manner as to be clean and sanitary
at all times. Inlets of the treated water shall be so located and spaced as to secure
satisfactory dispersion of the water throughout the pool and to permit draining, cleaning
and disinfecting of the bottom and sides. Sand or earth bottoms shall not be used.
§ 13-5.2. Water Supply, Pipe, Pump and Filter System. [1991 Code § 253-5A]
There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or private water supply
system and private swimming pools, wading pools or portable pools below the maximum
waterline of the pool or to a recirculating or heating system of the pool. The piping
system shall be designed to fill the pool and circulate the pool water through filtering
equipment. Sampling taps shall be placed conveniently for obtaining samples of the
water entering and leaving the pool. Potable water shall feed the pool with a downspout
with an air gap not less than six inches from the pool overflow level. Potable water
siphons will not be permitted to drain the aforesaid pools. The installation, repair and
control of plumbing facilities shall comply with the Plumbing and Sanitary Codes of
the Township. All circulating units shall have sufficient capacity to recirculate the entire
contents of a pool within 18 hours of less.
4. A wall of a dwelling may serve as part of the barrier if it does not contain any
door or window that opens to provide access to the swimming pool.
5. A barrier may not be located in a way that allows any permanent structure,
equipment, or similar object to be used for climbing the barrier.
b. Portable Pools. A portable pool, unless enclosed by a fence of the type and
dimensions set forth in paragraph a above, when not in use or unattended shall be
either emptied or covered with a suitable, strong protective covering, securely
fastened or locked in place.
§ 13-4.2 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS § 13-5.3
13:3
§ 13-5.3. Water Use; Enclosure. [1991 Code § 253-5B]
§ 13-5.4. Bacteriological Standards. [1991 Code § 253-5C]
Chlorine gas bearing compounds in solution shall be required as disinfecting agents for
swimming pools, wading pools or portable pools. The use of ozone, ultraviolet light or
any other method wherein a residual cannot be determined is prohibited. Not more than
15% of the samples of water taken from any private swimming pool, wading pool or
portable pool, when more than 20 samples have been examined, and not more than three
samples when less than 20 samples have been examined, shall contain more than 200
bacteria per cubic centimeter or shall show positive test (confirmed) for coliform in any
of five ten-cubic-centimeter portions of water at times when the pool is ready for use.
For the purpose of this section, any number of samplings or water on a single day shall
be considered as one sample. The local Board of Health is hereby authorized to take
samples to ensure compliance with these requirements. Free chlorine residuals and pH
values shall be maintained within ranges indicated below:
pH
Free Chlorine Residual
(parts per million)
7.0 - 7.6 0.4 - 0.6
8.0 - 8.4 2.0 - 5.0
§ 13-5.5. Discharge System. [1991 Code § 253-5D]
a. All pools not equipped with facilities for the recirculation and reuse of the pool
water shall be subject to closure by order of the Board of Health during any period
of emergency water shortage.
b. Whenever any pool by reason of mechanical defects or failure to comply with the
requirements of this section is a hazard to the health of users thereof, the Health
Officer is authorized to summarily close the pool and keep it closed until no further
hazard to users of the same exists. The owner of the pool shall have the right of
appeal to the Board of Health. An appeal, however, shall not stay the action of the
Health Officer.
a. All private swimming pools, wading pools or portable pools with a water depth of
more than one foot hereafter constructed, installed, established or maintained within
the Township shall be provided with the necessary equipment to completely pump
out or empty the pool or shall be emptied by providing one drainage outlet, which
shall be installed at the lowest point of the pool, not in excess of three inches in
diameter extending from the pool to either a storm sewer, lawn sprinkling system,
adequate dry well or sand filtering pit on the premises on which the private pool,
wading pool or portable pool is located.
b. The discharge of water from such pools into a storm sewer shall be permitted only
where the capacity is adequate as determined by the Township Engineer. No private
pool drain, wading pool drain or portable pool drain shall be connected into the
sanitary sewer system. Pool water may not be discharged at the curb or upon the
surface of any street. The discharge of such waters shall in no case cause or create
§ 13-5.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 13-5.5
13:4
§ 13-6. POOL USE REGULATIONS.
§ 13-6.1. Registration. [1991 Code § 253-6A]
Every private swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool constructed, installed,
established or maintained in the Township shall be registered by the owners thereof
with the Health Officer on or before March 31 of each year, or if constructed, installed,
established or maintained after the registration date, within 10 days after first use or
operation of the pool.
§ 13-6.2. Hours of Operation or Use. [1991 Code § 253-6B]
It shall be unlawful for any pool to be operated or used between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
§ 13-6.3. Board of Health Regulations. [1991 Code § 253-7; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
Every private swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool constructed, installed,
established or maintained in the Township shall at all times comply with the
requirements of the local Board of Health. Any nuisance or hazard to health which
may exist or develop in or in consequence of or in connection with any such private
swimming pool, wading pool or portable pool shall be forthwith abated and removed by
the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises on which the pool is located upon receipt
of notice from the Construction Code Official or Health Officer.
§ 13-6.4. Enforcement. [1991 Code § 253-7; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
a nuisance to the abutting property or to the public.
a. It shall be the duty of the Construction Code Official and Health Officer to enforce
the provisions of this chapter.
b. The owner or operator of any pool within the Township shall allow the
Construction Code Official and the Health Officer or other authorized official
access to any private swimming pool or wading pool or portable pool and
appurtenances thereto for the purpose of inspection to ascertain compliance with
this chapter and all other pertinent Township ordinances, at all reasonable times.
§ 13-5.5 PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS § 13-6.4
13:5

Chapter 14
RENT LEVELING
Editor's Note: Rent Control regulations were previously codified in the 1991 Code
as Chapter 233. Ord. No. 97-24 retitled this chapter to Rent Leveling and amended
the chapter in its entirety.
§ 14-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-1]
The purpose of this chapter shall be to regulate, control and stabilize rents, and to create
a Rent Leveling Board within the Township of Springfield.
§ 14-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 97-24 §§ 233-2 - 233-11; Ord. No. 99-24 § 1[B];
Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
As used in this chapter:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS — Shall mean fit for habitation as defined
by the Statutes, Codes and ordinances in full force and effect in the State of New Jersey,
County of Union and Township of Springfield, occupied or unoccupied and offered for
rent.
BASE RENT — Shall mean the rent properly charged and paid for each housing space
and parking facility, which rent may not be increased except as set forth herein. Base
rent is rent exclusive of major capital improvement surcharges.
DWELLING — Shall mean any building or structure or group of contiguous buildings
or structures in common ownership rented or offered for rent to one or more tenants or
family units. Exempt from this chapter are motels, hotels, rooming houses and similar
type buildings, housing units of two units, and housing units of three units where at least
one unit is owner-occupied, and any units within the Township of Springfield under
the control of New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency, Affordable Housing
Managing Service. Ownership of three or more dwellings offered for rent by an owner
makes the owner subject to this chapter.
HOUSING SPACE — Shall mean that portion of a dwelling rented or offered for rent
for living and dwelling purposes to one or more individuals or family units, together with
all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and improvements
connected with the use or occupancy of such portion of the property.
LANDLORD — Shall mean any person or party or entity which owns rental estate and
any agent, servant, and employee of an owner engaging in management, supervision or
maintenance of the real estate. Landlord shall, for all purposes contained herein, include
a tenant who sublets or assigns an interest in any dwelling or living space.
MAJOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean and shall consist of a substantial
change in the housing accommodations such as would materially increase the rental
value in a normal market and will provide tenants with a benefit or service which
they had not previously enjoyed. Repair or replacement of already existing materials or
equipment so as to maintain the same level of services as previously provided shall not
constitute a capital improvement. A capital improvement also shall not include those
items or services which were previously required to be provided by law. The landlord
shall have a reasonable period of time to comply with any capital improvement newly
§ 13-6.4 RENT LEVELING § 14-2
14:1
required by law before being precluded from application as set forth herein. It is within
the Board's discretion to determine the reasonableness of the compliance period.
OPERATING EXPENSES—Shall mean and include, but is not limited to, maintenance
costs, administrative expenses, fuel costs and real estate taxes, and specifically excludes
depreciation, amortization or debt service.
OPERATING RATIO — Shall mean the ratio between operating expenses and total
income, less any capital improvement surcharge.
PARKING FACILITY —Shall mean any off-street parking provided by the landlord to
the tenant, whether in the form of a parking space or a garage.
TENANT — Shall mean any person who occupies housing space as defined herein in
consideration for the payment of money or the providing of services for any fixed or
indeterminate period of time.
§ 14-3. RENT LEVELING BOARD.
§ 14-3.1. Membership. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-12; Ord. No. 2003-29 § I; Ord. No.
2010-09]
The Rent Leveling Board of the Township of Springfield (hereinafter the "Board") shall
consist of seven members, of which, to the extent possible, at least one may be a landlord
of residential real estate and at least one may be a tenant of residential real estate. The
members of the Board shall be appointed by the Township Committee and their terms of
office shall be for a period of three years, which terms shall be staggered. All members
shall serve without compensation. At the first meeting of each year, by majority vote,
the Board shall choose one of its members as Chairman, and another as Vice Chairman
to act in the absence or unavailability of the Chairman, the term of each which shall run
through December 31 of such year.
§ 14-3.2. Powers of the Board. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-13]
The Board is hereby granted and shall have and exercise, in addition to other powers
herein granted, all the powers necessary and appropriate to carry out and execute the
purposes of this chapter including, but not limited to, the following:
a. To issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter, which rules and regulations shall have the
force of law until revised, repealed or amended from time to time by the Board in
the exercise of its discretion, providing that the rules and regulations and any
amendments thereto are approved by resolution of the Township Committee and
filed with the Clerk.
b. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to help them comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
c. To investigate the validity and basis for all applications and grievances presented to
it pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
d. To hold hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for additional rental
and surcharges as herein provided and to adjust base rent in accordance with the
§ 14-2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 14-3.2
14:2
§ 14-3.3. Application to the Board. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-14; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(A)]
provisions of this chapter.
e. To hold hearings and adjudicate grievances from tenants as to violations of this
chapter, or for rent reductions.
f. The Board shall give both landlord and tenant reasonable opportunity to be heard
before making any determination.
g. To utilize the services of an attorney appointed by the Township Committee to
advise and counsel the Board in the proper exercise of its functional discretion. It
shall not be the function of the attorney to advise any landlord or tenant, whether or
not that person is a participant in any proceedings before the Board, but only to
advise the Board and its members as aforesaid. The attorney shall be remunerated
in accordance with a properly and duly enacted ordinance of the Township of
Springfield. If violations of any of the provisions of this chapter by a landlord are
prosecuted in the Municipal Court, the attorney appointed by the Township
Committee to counsel the Board may prosecute such case. The attorney's legal fees
will be calculated at the same hourly rate as the rate paid to the Township Attorney
at that time.
h. To utilize the services of a secretary to be appointed by the Township Committee.
i. The Board shall have the power to issue a summons in the Municipal Court for the
violation of any provision of this chapter with the approval of the majority of the
Board. The Chairman of the Board shall be authorized to sign the summons.
a. Any tenant aggrieved by an act or omission by any landlord may notify the Board,
in writing, and under oath, of the nature of the grievance whereupon the Board shall
determine whether the grievance is within its jurisdiction as set forth herein. Upon
making such determination the Board shall fix a time and date for a hearing and
give the landlord 10 days' written notice thereof.
b. No application to the Board by any landlord shall be heard by the Board unless the
landlord shall first prove by affidavit that all effected tenants have received a notice
of the time, date, and nature of the hearing and a copy of subsection 14-3.5,
Discovery, of this chapter by personal service or certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by posting same in a prominent place in each building of the
dwelling no less than 10 days prior to the hearing.
c. Any time for notice provided for herein may be shortened by the Chairman of the
Board upon determination that an emergency requires such a shortening, provided
that actual notice is given to all interested parties.
d. The Board shall have a hearing on every application presented to it within 90 days
of the date of filing of the application with the Township Clerk, except that
application for Hardship Increase shall be heard by the Board not later than 45 days
after filing of application with the Township Clerk. A decision shall be rendered
within 30 days from the last formal hearing date. These time periods may be
extended only by agreement between the applicant and the Board.
§ 14-3.2 RENT LEVELING § 14-3.4
14:3
§ 14-3.4. Appeal of Rent Leveling Board Decision. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-15]
Both landlord and tenant have the right to appeal the findings of the Rent Leveling Board
to the Township Committee within 20 days from the date of the determination by the
Board. Thereafter there will be a hearing by way of trial de novo, based upon the record
made before the Rent Leveling Board, to be heard by the Township Committee or a
hearing officer designated thereby. The appellant shall supply six copies of transcripts
to the Committee and one copy to the opposing party. The parties may supplement
such record with additional nonrepetitive testimony and documents, at the discretion
of the body or person hearing the appeal. The record on appeal will be the transcripts
of testimony before the Rent Leveling Board, and such supplemental evidence as is
permitted under this section. All documents marked as evidence will also be part of the
record.
§ 14-3.5. Discovery. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-16]
Unless otherwise limited by order of the Rent Leveling Board in a particular case and
for good cause shown, the scope of discovery shall be as follows:
§ 14-4. REGISTRATION. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-17; Ord. No. 2007-25 § I(F);
Ord. No. 2010-09 § II]
Every landlord shall, no later than January 31st of each year, register with the Township
Clerk pursuant to the following:
a. The applicant to the Rent Leveling Board shall, no later than 20 days prior to the
hearing, file with the Township Clerk all documents and things to be introduced on
behalf of the applicant at the hearing including, but not limited to, all appraisals and
all reports of all experts expected to testify at time of the hearing. Experts' reports
shall set forth the subject matter on which the expert is expected to testify, state the
substance of all facts and opinions to which the expert is expected to testify and
give a detailed summary of the grounds for each opinion. No later than 10 days
prior to the hearing any opponent of the application shall file all documents and
things to be introduced at the hearing in opposition to the application, including but
not limited to all appraisals and all experts' reports as above defined.
b. Within 10 days of the filing by any party of an application to the Board and
notification to adversaries, the landlord shall file with the Township Clerk a paper
specifically designating a place within the State of New Jersey and reasonably
accessible to tenants, or their designated representatives, where the landlord's
financial books and records shall be made available for inspection during regular
business hours and upon prior reasonable notice.
c. No provisions of this section shall be considered as limiting the power of the Board
in its discretion, to limit, relax or enlarge the scope of discovery allowed herein
upon its own motion or on good cause shown in any particular case.
a. The Board will create a form for the registration of all rental apartments.
b. The initial registration fee shall increase from $4 to $5 per year per rental unit
effective January 1, 2011. Until January 1, 2011, the registration fee per rental unit
shall be $4.
§ 14-3.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 14-4
14:4
§ 14-5. RENT INCREASES.
§ 14-5.1. Allowable Increase in Base Rent. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-18]
Rents charged and paid for housing space and parking facilities in the Township may be
increased only by an annual increase of 4% since the last rent increase for the housing
space and parking facility in question, provided such increases are otherwise permitted
by law. No increase shall take effect until the expiration of 12 months from the last
increase. Furthermore, no increase shall take effect if the landlord is in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 14-5.2. Excess Rents. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-19]
Any rental charge in excess of that authorized by the provisions of this chapter shall be
void.
§ 14-5.3. Notice. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-20]
c. One-half of the registration fee shall be paid by the landlord and the other half shall
be paid by the tenant residing in the apartment during the month of January of each
year.
d. The registration fee is to be paid to the Township each year when the registration
form is filed.
e. Registration fees are to be used by the Board for the operation of the Board
including but not limited to experts, counsel fees, Board Secretary salary, and
clerical expenses.
f. Failure of the landlord to register an individual unit by May 1 of a given year will
result in Board issuing a monetary penalty in the amount of $25 per unit. The
aforesaid $25 penalty amount shall continue to be imposed each month during
which landlord noncompliance continues. Said accumulated penalty amount shall
be a lien against the landlord's property collectible as taxes on said property.
a. No increase in rent pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become effective
until 30 days sifter the landlord shall notify the tenant or any prospective tenant, in
writing, of the following:
1. The calculations involved in computing the increase;
2. The date the last increase became effective;
3. The rent payable after the last increase in rent;
4. The maximum allowable percentage increase;
5. The actual percentage increase imposed;
6. The amount of the maximum allowable rent increase;
7. The actual amount of the rent increase.
§ 14-4 RENT LEVELING § 14-5.3
14:5
§ 14-5.4. Vacancy Decontrol. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-21; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
Notwithstanding any limitations upon permissible rent increases under any other
provisions of this chapter, upon the voluntary, uncoerced vacation of any apartment
which is controlled by this chapter, the landlord shall have the right to fix the rent for
such vacated apartment at such sum as deemed appropriate subject to the following:
b. In addition to the above notice requirements, the landlord must inform tenants of
the following at the initial rental and upon renewal of a tenant's lease:
1. That the landlord is required to file a rental registration form pursuant to
Section 14-4 herein and that the tenant may verify the base rent by contacting
the Rent Leveling Board;
2. That the tenant has a right to file a complaint/application and request a hearing
with the Rent Leveling Board if the tenant believes his rights under this
chapter have been violated;
3. That a tenant may receive a copy of this chapter by contacting the Rent
Leveling Board or the Township Clerk;
4. The landlord will provide all tenants with the address and telephone number
of the Township of Springfield Rent Leveling Board and the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, Office of Landlord/Tenant Information.
a. In order for a landlord to qualify for the vacancy decontrol rent increase, the
landlord shall first be required to file with the Rent Leveling Board a written
statement, signed by the vacating tenant, certifying to the Board that the landlord
has not, in any way, harassed or pressured the tenant into vacating the housing space
unit and that the vacation of such unit was a voluntary act on the part of the tenant.
For the purposes of this chapter, a vacation caused or necessitated by sub-standard,
unsafe, or unsanitary conditions in the rental premises shall not be deemed a
voluntary vacation. Such noncoercing certification shall not be required in order for
the landlord to qualify for the vacancy decontrol increase if:
1. The increase does not exceed the total of all permissible increases authorized
by any other provisions of this chapter;
2. The tenant has moved from the unit without notice to the landlord;
3. The unit has been vacated pursuant to a judicially mandated eviction; or
4. The tenant has refused to sign such certification, and upon appeal by the
landlord the Rent Leveling Board has found that such refusal was unwarranted
and that there was in fact no coercion exerted by the landlord upon the vacating
tenant. A hearing pursuant hereto shall be held before the Rent Leveling Board
upon at least seven days' notice to the public and the vacating tenant.
b. Once a vacant apartment has been rented, it shall immediately be subject to all of
the other terms and provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
maximum amounts of increases of rent thereafter, unless and until it shall become
vacant and again qualify for vacancy decontrol.
§ 14-5.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 14-5.4
14:6
§ 14-6. ADJUSTMENTS.
§ 14-6.1. Capital Improvement Surcharge. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-22]
A landlord may seek rent surcharges for major capital improvement. Any landlord
seeking a capital improvement surcharge shall apply to the Rent Leveling Board, which
Board shall, upon a showing of satisfactory proof, determine if the improvement is a
major capital improvement and, if so, shall permit such surcharge. In no event shall
any permitted capital improvement surcharge exceed 10% of the last rent charged and
allowable for the housing space in question in the last prior calendar year. No tenant
shall be liable for an annual capital improvement surcharge exceeding the annual cost
of the capital improvement per room, not dwelling, multiplied by the number of rooms
occupied by tenant. A capital improvement surcharge shall not be considered rental and,
therefore, the surcharge shall not be calculated in base rent.
The landlord must notify each tenant, by certified mail, not less than 30 days prior to any
proposed hearings by the Board of any application for increase. Such notice shall include
the following:
c. Subsequent to the vacation of any apartment hereafter, and once a new tenant has
been selected who is subject to the vacancy decontrol rent increase, the landlord
shall file a report with the Rent Leveling Board, certifying to the Board:
1. The apartment and building number of such dwelling unit;
2. The rent paid by the vacating tenant;
3. The maximum rent increase that would be permissible under this chapter were
it not for the vacancy decontrol provisions herein;
4. The number of days of vacancy of such apartment;
5. The rent agreed to by the new tenant.
d. The Rent Leveling Board shall submit monthly reports to the Township Committee,
summarizing the number of apartments vacated during each such month and the
difference, if any, between the rent charged to the new tenant and that which would
have been allowed were it not for the vacancy decontrol provisions herein. Such
monthly reports shall also include a statement of the number of complaints received
by the Board with respect to the alleged coercion by landlords for the purpose of
forcing tenants to vacate apartments.
a. A description of the capital improvement being applied for, and the proposed
hearing date;
b. The total cost of the completed capital improvement;
c. The number of years of useful life of the improvement based on a manufacturer's
warranty, and in the absence of the warranty, the Board will use its discretion to
determine the period of useful life, not to exceed 15 years;
d. The average annual cost of the improvement;
§ 14-5.4 RENT LEVELING § 14-6.1
14:7
§ 14-6.2. Hardship Increase. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-23; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
§ 14-6.3. Unreasonable Profit Reduction. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-24]
At any time not less than 5% of the tenants of any dwelling may apply to the Rent
Leveling Board for a reduction of rents for the dwelling on the grounds that the landlord
is receiving an unreasonable profit. The "conclusive presumption" set forth in subsection
e. The total number of rooms of the dwelling;
f. The total number of rooms occupied by the tenant;
g. The capital improvement surcharge the landlord is seeking from each tenant.
The landlord must notify prospective new tenants of a pending surcharge application or
an existing capital improvement surcharge. Any capital improvement surcharge granted
by the Board shall be payable by tenants in equal monthly installments.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, any capital improvement adjustment
shall provide in the total cost for the completed capital improvement or the average
annual cost of the improvement reasonable debt service paid or payable by the landlord.
Reasonableness is defined as nothing in excess of the prime interest rate plus 2%.
The application for increase, and all supporting documents, shall be sworn to by
the applicant or other person preparing the documents in support of the application.
Applications for capital improvement surcharge must be filed within one year of the
completion of the capital improvement.
a. In the event that the landlord cannot meet current expenses for maintenance and/or
repairs and/or heat and/or utility expenses as a result of insufficient rental income
from subject property, the landlord may apply to the Board for a rental increase
which increase shall be granted upon an adequate showing by the landlord after
hearing. In an application for an increase submitted by a landlord, all data and
information contained therein shall be sworn to by the landlord, under oath, as to
the truthfulness of the data and information therein. The landlord shall be entitled
to a hardship increase if the building qualifies for same pursuant to the Rate of
Return formula set forth below.
b. Rate of Return Formula. The landlord shall be entitled to a just and fair rate of
return. In the event that a landlord cannot obtain a just and fair rate of return, the
landlord may apply to the Board for a rental increase. No application for a
Hardship/Rate of Return Increase shall, however, be considered unless the landlord
has established that his operating ratio has exceeded 0.60 for at least one calendar
year. Any rental property having an annual operating ratio equal to or less than 0.60
shall be conclusively presumed to be yielding a just and fair rate of return. Any
Hardship/Rate of Return Increase granted shall be considered to have adjusted the
rental amount used to compute allowable rental increases pursuant to subsection
14-5.1. However, the Rent Leveling Board shall have the discretion to determine if
the Hardship/Rate of Return Increase should be added to the base rent pursuant to
subsection 4-5.1 and to determine the period during which the Hardship/Rate of
Return Increase shall exist without further proof by the landlord that such Hardship/
Rate of Return Increase is still required.
§ 14-6.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 14-6.3
14:8
14-6.2 hereof shall not be operative in consideration by the Board of the question of
unreasonable profit under this section.
§ 14-7. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS.
§ 14-7.1. Responsibilities of Landlords. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-25; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(A)]
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any landlord, or any representative, agent or
employee of any landlord to solicit, accept or receive from any person any payment for
consideration for the rental or renewal of any rental of any housing space.
During the term of the provisions of this chapter the landlord shall maintain no less
than the same standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings, facilities and
equipment in the housing space and dwelling as was provided or was required to be
provided by law or lease at the date the lease was entered into and prior to the effective
date of this chapter. Landlord's failure to comply with the foregoing provision shall, in
addition to constituting a violation hereunder, be construed to be an increase in rent for
all purposes contained herein.
In the event that the Rent Leveling Board determines that deficiencies exist in the
services, maintenance, furniture, furnishings, facilities, and equipment, as stated herein,
the Rent Leveling Board shall have the power to reduce the rent of the unit to the
reasonable rental value in view of the deficiency.
§ 14-7.2. Penalty. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-26]
A violation of any provision of this chapter including, but not limited to, the filing with
the Board of any material misstatement of fact shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both. A violation affecting
more than one housing space shall be considered a separate violation as to each landlord.
Each day of a violation may be considered a separate violation.
§ 14-7.3. Construal of Provisions. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-27]
This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the Township of Springfield and its
inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof.
§ 14-7.4. Statute of Limitations. [Ord. No. 97-24 § 233-28]
This chapter provides for a one year statute of limitations on the filing of a complaint by
either owners, landlords or tenants.
§ 14-6.3 RENT LEVELING § 14-7.4
14:9

Chapter 15
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 15-1. TITLE. [1991 Code § 228-1]
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the Township of
Springfield" and may be referred to in this chapter as the "Property Maintenance Code"
or as "this code."
§ 15-2. PURPOSES. [1991 Code § 228-2]
Pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, the purposes of this code are
hereby stated to be:
§ 15-3. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS. [1991 Code § 228-3; Ord. No. 2015-25]
For the specific purposes of this code, the following terms, whenever used herein or
referred to in this code, shall have the respective meanings assigned to them hereunder
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CREDITOR — Shall mean a State chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan
association or credit union, any person or entity required to be licensed under the
a. To provide for the public health, safety and welfare.
b. To avoid, prevent and eliminate the maintenance or creation of hazards to the public
health or safety.
c. To avoid, prevent and eliminate conditions which, if permitted to exist or continue,
will depreciate or tend to depreciate the value of adjacent or surrounding properties.
d. To prevent the creation, continuation, extension or aggravation of blight.
e. To preserve property values in the Township.
f. To prevent the physical deterioration or progressive downgrading of the quality of
housing facilities in the Township.
g. To maintain the value and economic health of the commercial properties and
businesses that serve and help to support the Township and its citizens.
h. To prevent and eliminate physical conditions in or on property which constitute
nuisances and are thereby potentially dangerous or hazardous to the life, health or
safety of persons on or near the premises where such conditions exist.
i. To establish minimum standards governing the maintenance and condition of land,
buildings, structures and premises in the Township.
j. To fix responsibilities and duties thereof upon owners and operators of property.
k. To provide for administration and enforcement.
l. To fix penalties for the violation of this code.
§ 14-7.4 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 15-3
15:1
provisions of the "New Jersey Residential Mortgage Act," P.L. 2009, c.53 (C.17:11C-51
et seq.), any foreclosing entity subject to the provisions of C.46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c.
127, Sec. 17, as amended from time to time) and any entity acting on behalf of the
creditor named in the debt obligation including, but not limited to, servicers.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Shall mean those portions of a structure which are
exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or adjacent lots, including all
outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto, and the open land space of any premises
outside of any building or structure erected thereon, including vacant lots.
NUISANCE — Shall mean:
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person, persons or entity not the owner, but including
any agent of the owner, who has charge, possession, custody, care or control of a
dwelling or premises or a part thereof.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, persons or entity who shall have legal or equitable
title in any form whatsoever to any premises or part thereof, including any fiduciary,
trustee, receiver, guardian or mortgagee in possession. Any lessee, sublessee or assignee
of a lessee of any part of any premises shall be deemed an "owner" with respect to that
portion of the premises sublet, leased or assigned.
PREMISES—Shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land, right-of-way or multiples thereof,
including the building or structures thereon.
REFUSE OR RUBBISH — Shall mean all discarded, useless, unusable, unused or
worthless solid waste matter or materials, combustible or noncombustible, including but
not limited to garbage, trash, ashes, paper, paper goods and products, wrappings, cans,
bottles, containers, yard clippings, garden waste, debris, junk, glass, boxes, crockery,
wood, plastic, rubber, leather, furniture, household goods, appliances, bedding, scrap
lumber, scrap metal, construction material, inoperable machinery or parts thereof, garden
or farming implements and supplies, dead or rotting vegetation, tires and abandoned,
inoperative or unusable automobiles and vehicles and solid commercial or industrial
waste. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, a compost pile free of discarded
foodstuffs shall not be deemed to be "refuse" or "rubbish."
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean a motor vehicle without a valid
and current State inspection sticker.
VACANT AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Shall mean, where a
property is not occupied and at least two of the following conditions exist:
Any public or private condition that would constitute a nuisance according to the
statutes, laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey, its governmental agencies
or the ordinances of the Township.
a.
Any physical condition existing in or on the exterior of any premises which is
potentially dangerous, detrimental or hazardous to the life, health or safety of
persons on, near or passing within the proximity of the premises where the
condition exists.
b.
a. Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
b. The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the property;
§ 15-3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 15-3
15:2
§ 15-4. GENERAL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES AND LANDS.
§ 15-4.1. Compliance Required. [1991 Code § 228-4]
Every lot and every structure and the premises or part of the premises on which it is
situated shall comply with the provisions of this code, whether or not any such structure
shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this code,
and irrespective of any permits or licenses which may have been issued for the use or
occupancy of such structure or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities
prior to the effective date of this code.
§ 15-4.2. Higher Standard to Prevail. [1991 Code § 228-5]
In any case where the provisions of this code impose a higher or stricter standard
than set forth in any other ordinance or regulation of the Township or under the laws
or regulations of the State of New Jersey or any of its agencies, then the standards
c. Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or materials on
the property;
d.
e. The accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
f. The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or shutters;
g. The absence of furnishings and personal items;
Statements of neighbors, association management, delivery persons, or government
employees indicating that the residence is vacant and abandoned;
h.
Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or closed off or multiple
window panes that are damaged, broken and unrepaired;
i.
Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off, unhinged, or
continuously unlocked;
j.
A risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining or adjacent
property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism, loitering, criminal conduct, or the
physical destruction or deterioration of the property;
k.
An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing, or similar code during
the preceding year, or an order by municipal authorities declaring the property to be
unfit for occupancy and to remain vacant and unoccupied;
l.
The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized the property due
to the property being deemed vacant and unprotected or in danger of freezing;
m.
A written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear intent of all
mortgagors to abandon the property;
n.
o. Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
§ 15-3 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 15-4.2
15:3
as set forth herein shall prevail; but if the provisions of this code impose a lower or
lesser standard than any other regulation or ordinance of the Township or the laws and
regulations of the State of New Jersey or any of its agencies, then the higher standard
contained in any such other ordinance, regulation or law shall prevail.
§ 15-4.3. Compliance With Other Ordinances. [1991 Code § 228-6]
Compliance with this code shall not constitute a defense against any violation of any
other ordinance of the Township applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any
one act of compliance constitute a defense against any subsequent or other violation of
this code.
§ 15-4.4. Individual Responsibility of Owner, Operator and Occupant. [1991 Code
§ 228-7; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
Every owner, operator or occupant shall comply with all of the requirements of this
chapter. No owner or operator shall be relieved of any duty, obligation or responsibility
hereunder, nor be entitled to assert as a defense against any charge made against any
owner for violation of this code the fact that another owner, operator or any other third
person or entity is also responsible and in violation thereof.
§ 15-4.5. Applicability of Construction Standards. [1991 Code § 228-8]
Any alterations to buildings, structures or appurtenances thereto or changes of use
therein which may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall
be done in accordance with all applicable sections of the Building Code of the Township
and the State Uniform Construction Code.34
§ 15-4.6. Applicability of Zoning Regulations. [1991 Code § 228-9]
Nothing contained in this code or any requirement of compliance herewith shall be
deemed to alter, impair or affect the application of the Zoning Ordinance or zoning laws
of the Township.
§ 15-4.7. Applicability of Health Regulations. [1991 Code § 228-10]
Nothing contained in this code or any requirement of compliance herewith shall be
deemed to alter, impair or affect the application of any and all applicable governmental
health regulations, be they State, County or municipal.
§ 15-4.8. Existing Remedies. [1991 Code § 228-11]
Nothing in this code shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the
Township or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any
buildings or structures which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
§ 15-5. MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
34. Editor's Note: See Chapter 12, Building and Housing.
§ 15-4.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 15-5.1
15:4
§ 15-5.1. Maintenance of Exterior of Premises. [1991 Code § 228-12]
The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of the following matter, materials or
conditions:
§ 15-5.2. Painting and Repair. [1991 Code § 228-13]
Without limitation by the foregoing, it shall also be the duty and responsibility of owners
and operators to keep all exposed surfaces susceptible to decay at all times painted
or otherwise provided with a protective coating sufficient to prevent deterioration and
to keep the exterior of all premises structurally sound, in good general repair and
sufficiently maintained so as to prevent conditions that violate the purposes of this
chapter.
§ 15-6. REGULATION FOR CARE, MAINTENANCE, SECURITY AND
UPKEEP OF PROPERTIES IN FORECLOSURE AND VACANT AND
ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES.
§ 15-6.1. Registration of Vacant and Abandoned Properties. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
a. Refuse, as hereinabove defined.
b. Rubbish, as hereinabove defined.
c. Abandoned, uncovered or structurally unsound wells, shafts, towers, exterior cellar
openings, basement hatchways, foundations or excavations.
d. Abandoned appliances, including iceboxes, refrigerators, boilers, hot-water heaters,
television sets and the like.
e. Structurally unsafe or unsound buildings, structures or fences.
f. Rodents, vermin, pest infestations or rodent harborages.
g. Grass, weeds and the like in excess of 12 inches in height.
h. Nuisances, as hereinabove defined.
i. Vehicles or paths thereof, including boats and trailers, motorized or not, licensed or
unlicensed, registered or unregistered, which vehicles or parts thereof are to have
been junked, abandoned or dismantled.35
a. Every creditor filing an action to foreclose on a mortgage of any residential
property within the Township of Springfield shall, within 10 days thereof, notify
the Township Clerk for the Township in writing by mail of said filing. (See N.J.S.A.
46:10B-51) The notice shall also include the street address, lot and block number
of the property, and the full name and contact information of an individual located
within the State who is authorized to accept service on behalf of the creditor.
The notice shall also contain the name and contact information of the representative
of the creditor who is responsible for receiving complaints of property maintenance
35. Editor's Note: See also Section 3-10, Abandoned Vehicles.
§ 15-5.1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 15-6.1
15:5
and code violations. In the event the creditor that has served a summons and
complaint in an action to foreclose on a residential property is located out-of-state,
the notice shall also contain the full name and contact information of an in-state
representative or agent who shall be responsible for the care, maintenance, security
and upkeep of the exterior of the property if it becomes vacant and abandoned.
b. A creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a vacant and
abandoned property, or a creditor who has previously filed a summons and
complaint to foreclose on a residential property which subsequently becomes
vacant and abandoned, shall within 30 calendar days after the building becomes
vacant and abandoned or within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of the
vacant and abandoned property, whichever is earlier; or within 10 calendar days of
receipt of notice from the Township, and annually thereafter, file a registration
statement for such vacant and abandoned property with the Municipal Clerk on
forms provided by the Township for such purposes. Any failure to receive notice
from the Township shall not constitute grounds for failing to register the vacant and
abandoned property.
c. Each vacant and abandoned property having a separate block and lot number as
designated in the official tax maps of the Township shall be registered separately.
d. The registration statement shall include the name, street address, telephone number,
and email address (if applicable) of a person 21 years or older, designated by the
creditor as the authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations and for
receiving process in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement
proceeding on behalf of such creditor in connection with the enforcement of any
applicable code.
e. The registration statement shall include the name, street address, telephone number,
and email address (if applicable) of the firm and the actual name(s) of the firm's
individual principal(s) responsible for maintaining the abandoned and vacant
property. The individual or representative of the firm responsible for maintaining
the abandoned and vacant property shall be available by telephone or in person on
a twenty-four-hour per day, seven-day per week basis. The two entities may be the
same or different persons. Both entities shown on the statement must maintain
offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the State of New Jersey.
f. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of registration except
for the initial registration which shall be valid through December 31st of the year in
which it was filed. The creditor shall be required to renew the registration annually
as long as the building remains vacant and abandoned and shall pay a registration
or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in paragraph j of this section for each
vacant and abandoned property registered.
g. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1st each year. The initial
registration fee shall be pro-rated for registration statements received less than 10
months prior to that date.
h. The creditor shall notify the Municipal Clerk within 30 calendar days of any change
in the registration information by filing an amended registration statement on a
form provided by the Municipal Clerk for such purpose.
§ 15-6.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 15-6.1
15:6
§ 15-6.2. Creditor Responsibility for Vacant and Abandoned Properties; In-State
Representative Required. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
§ 15-6.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
§ 15-6.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-25]
i. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements
therein contained in any administrative enforcement proceeding or court
proceeding instituted by the Township against the creditor.
j. Fee Schedule. The initial registration fee for each vacant and abandoned property
under the provisions of this section shall be $500. The fee for the first annual
renewal shall be $1,500 and the fee for the second annual renewal shall be $3,000.
The fee for any subsequent annual renewal beyond the second renewal shall be
$5,000.
a. A creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a residential
property within the Township shall be immediately responsible for the care,
maintenance, security and upkeep of the exterior of the property, after the property
becomes vacant and abandoned.
b. Where a creditor is located out-of-state, the creditor shall be responsible for
appointing an in-state representative or agent to act for the foreclosing creditor in
accordance with subsection 15-6.1a of this section.
a. The enforcement officers designated in Section 15-7, infra, shall be authorized to
issue a notice to a creditor that has filed a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a residential property within the Township, if the enforcement officer
determines that the creditor has violated this section by failing to provide for the
care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of a vacant and abandoned
property.
b. Where a creditor is an out-of-state creditor, the notice shall be issued to the
representative or agent that has been identified by the creditor pursuant to
subsection 15-6.1a of this section (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51).
c. The notice referenced in paragraphs a and b of this subsection shall require the
creditor to correct the violation(s) within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or within
10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation presents an imminent threat to public
health and safety.
d. The issuance of a notice pursuant to paragraphs a and b of this subsection shall
constitute proof that a residential property is vacant and abandoned for the purposes
of this section.
a. A creditor subject to this section that is found by the Municipal Court of the
Township, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in violation of the
requirement to correct a care, maintenance, security, or upkeep violation cited in a
notice issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each
day of the violation. Any fines imposed pursuant to this paragraph shall commence
31 days following the service of the notice, except if the violation presents an
§ 15-6.1 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 15-6.4
15:7
§ 15-7. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
§ 15-7.1. Enforcement Officer. [1991 Code § 228-14; Ord. No. 2015-25]
This chapter may be enforced by the Construction Code Official, Zoning Officer, Health
Inspector, Police Department and the Construction Code Office of the Township.
§ 15-7.2. Enforcement Procedure. [1991 Code § 228-15; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A);
Ord. No. 2015-25]
Whenever the Enforcement Officer determines that there is or has been a violation of
any provision of this chapter, the Officer shall give notice of such violation to the person,
persons or entities responsible therefor under this chapter. Such notice shall be in writing
and shall include a concise statement of the reasons for its issuance. Such notice shall
be deemed to be properly and sufficiently served if a copy thereof is sent by registered
or certified mail to the last known address of the person or entity upon which the same
is served, as shown by the most recent tax lists of the Township, or if a copy thereof is
handed to the person or persons or a copy thereof is left at the usual place of abode or
office of the persons or entities. Notice shall be given as aforesaid within or without the
Township. The notice shall also state that unless the violation is abated, removed, cured,
prevented or desisted from within 10 days of the date of service of such notice (exclusive
of the date of service), a summons shall issue for such violation. The Enforcement
Officer may, at the time the officer issues the notice, extend the period for correction
of the violation stated in the notice for a period in excess of the aforesaid 10 days if, in
the Officer's judgment, the abatement, removal, prevention, cessation of or cure of the
condition violated cannot reasonably be effected within the ten-day period; and in such
cases the Enforcement Officer shall state such reasonably required extended period in
the notice, which shall then be applicable instead of the aforesaid 10 days. In the event
the violation is not abated, removed, cured, prevented or desisted from or otherwise fully
imminent risk to public health and safety, in which case any fines shall commence
11 days following service of the notice.
b. An out-of-state creditor subject to this section that is found by the Municipal Court
of the Township, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in violation
of the requirement to appoint an in-state representative or agent pursuant to this
section shall be subject to a fine of $2,000 for each day of the violation. Any fines
imposed on a creditor for the failure to appoint an in-state representative or agent
shall commence on the day after the ten-day period set forth in subsection 15-6.1a
for providing notice to the municipal clerk that a summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
c. A creditor subject to this section that is found by the Municipal Court of the
Township, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in violation of the
requirement to register a vacant and abandoned property pursuant to this section
shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000. Any fines imposed on a creditor
under this paragraph shall commence 11 days following receipt of notice from the
Township pursuant to subsection 15-6.1b of this section.
d. No less than 20% of any money collected pursuant to this section shall be utilized
by the municipality for Municipal Code enforcement purposes.
§ 15-6.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 15-7.2
15:8
remedied within the ten-day period or within such extended period as set forth in the
notice pursuant to the foregoing, a summons shall then issue against the person, persons,
entity or entities so notified.
§ 15-7.3. Emergency Conditions. [1991 Code § 228-16; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A);
Ord. No. 2015-25]
Whenever the Enforcement Officer finds that an emergency condition in violation of
this chapter exists, which condition requires immediate attention in order to protect the
public health or safety, the Officer may issue an order by service of notice as set forth
in subsection 15-7.2 reciting the existence of such an emergency condition and requiring
that such action be taken by the violator as soon as reasonably necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such order shall be
effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately, but upon objection in writing to the Enforcement Officer any
such person shall be afforded a hearing before the Governing Body of the Township as
soon as is reasonably possible. After such a hearing and decision by the Governing Body
as to the existence or nonexistence of the emergency condition, the Governing Body may
continue such order in effect, or modify or withdraw it, subject to issuance of a summons
for violation thereof if such order is continued.
§ 15-7.4. (Reserved)36
§ 15-8. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [1991 Code § 228-18; New; Ord. No.
2015-25]
With the exception of the violations and penalties contained within subsection 15-6.4 of
this chapter, any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter
or any order promulgated hereunder shall, after a summons is issued under the terms
hereof, upon conviction, be punished as follows:
§ 15-9. CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS. [1991 Code § 228-19; Ord.
No. 2015-25]
In any case where a provision of this code is found to be in conflict with or inconsistent
with a provision of any other ordinance or code of this municipality which establishes a
lower standard for the promotion and protection of the safety, health and welfare of the
people, the provisions of this code shall prevail, and such other ordinances or codes or
parts thereof are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be so found
to be in conflict with this code.
§ 15-10. through § 15-15 (RESERVED)
a. For a first offense, by a fine not to exceed $50.
b. For a second offense, by a fine not to exceed $200.
c. For a third offense or any subsequent offenses, by the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
36. Editor's Note: Subsection 15-7.4, Hardship Considerations was deleted by Ord. No. 2015-25.
§ 15-7.2 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 15-16
15:9
§ 15-16. BRUSH, GRASS AND DEBRIS.
§ 15-16.1. Prohibited Accumulation. [1991 Code § 141-1; Ord. No. 2015-25]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant or person to gather, accumulate, keep or permit
the gathering, accumulation or keeping of brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash, debris, litter, refuse, rubbish or any of the
articles on any land or in any place in the Township in such a manner as to constitute a
menace to public health, safety or general welfare or to create a fire hazard.
§ 15-16.2. Removal Required. [1991 Code § 141-2; Ord. No. 2015-25]
The owner, tenant or person having charge or control over the premises where any
material has accumulated in violation of any provision of subsection 15-16.1 shall
remove or cause the removal of the articles as provided in this chapter.
§ 15-16.3. Enforcement; Notice. [1991 Code § 141-3; Ord. No. 2015-25]
§ 15-16.4. Enforcement Officers. [1991 Code § 141-4; Ord. No. 2015-25]
The Health Officer, the Zoning Officer, the Sanitarian, the Fire Chief and appointed
Fire Inspectors and the Police Department are hereby designated enforcement officers
of this section with full power to make complaints and issue summonses for violations.
The designation herein contained shall not limit the capacity or authority of any person
or officer authorized to enforce this section or any similar ordinance under any other
ordinance or law.
§ 15-16.5. Compliance With Notice; Lien. [1991 Code § 141-5; Ord. No. 2015-25]
If the owner, tenant or person in charge shall fail to remove the brush, weeds, dead
and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash, debris or other
articles within the time required by the notice, then the Chief of the Fire Department and
the Sanitary Inspector or any officer stated hereinabove may remove or cause or arrange
for the removal of the articles. The officer causing the removal shall keep an accurate
account of the cost thereof and shall certify the cost and expense to the Township
Committee, which shall examine the certification. If the Township Committee shall find
a. Enforcement. If any condition described in subsection 15-16.1 above is deemed to
exist, it shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department, appointed Fire
Inspectors, the Health Officer, the Sanitarian and the Police Department of the
Township, or any of them, to then give written notice to the owner of the premises
or the tenant therein or the person having charge or control thereof, requiring the
removal of the articles within 10 days after the service of the notice.
b. Notice. Any notice mentioned herein may be served in person or by mailing to the
last known address of the respective owner or tenant or person in charge. When the
owner or person in charge does not reside in the Township and when service is by
mailing, then a copy of the notice shall be posted on the same day as the mailing at
the premises where the condition exists. Failure to rectify the condition of which
notice is given within the period specified in the notice shall constitute a violation
hereunder.
§ 15-16 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 15-16.5
15:10
the same correct, the cost shall be charged against the lands upon which the articles are
located and from which they were removed. A statement of the cost shall forthwith be
furnished by the Township Clerk to the Collector of Taxes, and the cost shall forthwith
become a lien upon the lands where the violation existed and shall be added to, become
and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the lands, to bear interest
at the same rate as taxes, and the lien shall be collected and enforced in the same manner
as taxes, pursuant to the statutes governing the subject matter.
§ 15-17. BAMBOO.
§ 15-17.1. Prohibition on Bamboo Plantings. [Added 7-14-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-15]
No owner, tenant or occupant of a property, or person, corporation or other entity, shall
plant, install or cause or permit the planting or installation of plant species commonly
known as "running (monopodial) bamboo" or "clumping (sympodial) bamboo" upon any
property located within the Township. This prohibition shall include but is not limited to
the following plant genera:
§ 15-17.2. Duty to Confine Existing Bamboo. [Added 7-14-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-15]
a. Arundinaria;
b. Bambusa;
c. Chimonobambusa;
d. Dendrocalamus;
e. Fargesia;
f. Phyllostachys;
g. Pleioblastus;
h. Pseudosasa;
i. Sasa;
j. Sasaella;
k. Semiarundinaria.
a. In the event any species commonly known as "running bamboo" or "clumping
bamboo" is located upon any property within the Township, prior to the effective
date of this section, the owner and occupant of said property shall jointly and
severally be required to confine such species to prevent the encroachment, spread,
invasion or intrusion of same onto any other private premises or public place.
b. This duty to confine shall not apply if the property owner and/or occupant can
establish to the satisfaction of the Township that the bamboo which is on his/her
property at the time of the adoption of this section originated on another property.
§ 15-16.5 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 15-17.2
15:11
§ 15-17.3. Enforcement. [Added 7-14-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-15]
The Enforcement Officers designated in Subsection 15-7.1 shall be authorized to
investigate and issue notices for violations of this section, consistent with the
enforcement procedure set forth in Subsection 15-7.2.
§ 15-18. MULCH. [Added 10-13-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-22]
Mulch may be purchased from the Department of Public Works, when available, in
accordance with the following fees:
c. The failure to properly confine existing bamboo pursuant to this section may
require removal of the bamboo. The cost of any bamboo removal shall be at the
expense of the owner of the property from which the bamboo originated.
a. Township residents.
1. Fifty dollars for delivery of up to five cubic yards of mulch to Township of
Springfield residents.
2. Free pickup by residents from Department of Public Works facilities.
b. Commercial individuals/entities.
1. Fifteen dollars per cubic yard of mulch for pickup only from Department of
Public Works facilities.
2. Minimum required purchase of five cubic yards.
§ 15-17.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 15-18
15:12
Chapter 16
(RESERVED)
§ 15-18 (RESERVED) § 15-18
16:1

Chapter 17
ALARM SYSTEMS
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1991 Code AAA 124-1 -
124-20 and Ordinance Nos. 02-28 and 2012-23.
§ 15-18 ALARM SYSTEMS § 15-18
17:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 17-1. FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
The Township Committee hereby finds and declares that:
§ 17-2. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
The purpose of this section is to provide standards, procedures and regulations for
various types of burglar, fire and other private or local alarm systems which require a
response by the Police Department, Fire Department or other Township agency.
§ 17-3. APPLICABILITY. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
The provisions of this section shall apply to any person, other than the Township, who
operates, maintains or owns any private or local alarm system designed to summon
the Police Department, Fire Department or other Township agency to any location
in response to the signal of any type of emergency alarm. This section shall not be
construed to prohibit alarm companies from providing alarm services to other offices
within or without the Township. No person shall have premises protected by a private or
local alarm system unless the alarm system is registered in accordance with this section.
§ 17-4. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
As used in this section:
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean the actuation of an alarm system or warning device by
causes other than those to which the alarm system or warning device was designed or
intended to respond, or the testing of alarms required by law or practice without prior
notice to the Police Department.
LICENSEE — Shall mean the person obtaining the license to install, operate and
maintain the alarm.
LOCAL ALARM — Shall mean any device installed to serve an improved property
and designed to sound an alarm by a bell, horn, siren or other noisemaking instrument
located upon the property where the device is installed and audible beyond the limits of
the property in the event of the presence of fire, smoke or similar hazards, unauthorized
a. Alarm systems and devices to detect and report emergencies such as burglary and
fire have been installed in numerous residential, commercial and industrial
premises in the Township.
b. Unless the various systems and devices of the many alarm companies are uniformly
regulated, there will be unnecessary drain on the manpower, time, space, facilities
and finances of the Township and its public safety departments; deterioration of the
quality of and inefficiency in, the service to persons subscribing to the alarm
services; and confusion or inequities among the alarm companies in the Township.
c. The public interest, therefor, requires the enactment of standards, procedures and
regulations to control the use of private emergency alarm systems and devices in
the Township.
§ 17-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 17-4
17:3
entry, the commission of an unlawful act or any one or more of the foregoing. Any
equipment which combines the characteristics of a private alarm system and a "local
alarm" shall be classified as a private alarm system for the purposes of this section.
PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEM —Shall mean any system installed to serve an improved
property and designed to use for detection of fire, smoke or similar hazards, the detection
of unauthorized entry or commission of any unlawful act or the detection of any one or
more of the foregoing, or for reporting an emergency, which system communicates or
causes the communication of information to the alarm panel in the Township's Police
Department. A "private alarm system" includes a telephone call system (also known as
a "central station system") which automatically alerts a person beyond the limits of the
property served who is engaged in the business of relaying information by telephone to
the Township Police Department or reacting independently of the Police.
REGISTRANT — Shall mean any person owning or leasing a private or local alarm
system and holding a registration submitted pursuant to this section.
§ 17-5. through § 17-6 (RESERVED)
§ 17-4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 17-5
17:4
ARTICLE II
Private Alarm Systems
§ 17-7. REGISTRATION REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
No person shall install, maintain or use, or cause or permit to be used, any private alarm
system within the Township unless a registration has been submitted to the Chief of
Police of the Township in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No person
shall use a private alarm system during any period when the registration has expired or
is suspended.
§ 17-8. APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
Any person desiring to use a private alarm system upon improved property owned or
occupied by such person shall submit a written application to the Chief of Police. The
application shall be on forms to be furnished by the Chief of Police, which shall require
the following information over the signature of the applicant:
§ 17-9. FEES.
§ 17-9.1. To the Township. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
At the time an application is submitted and by January 15 of each year as long as the
registration is in force, the registrant shall pay to the Township of Springfield an annual
fee of $15.
§ 17-9.2. No Proration Delinquent Fees. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
Any registration submitted between January 1 and October 15 shall require the same
fees, no portion of which shall be prorated, but the fees shall be refunded to the applicant
in the event the registration is not accepted. Any registration issued between October 15
and December 31 shall be valid until December 31 of the following year. If the registrant
shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with registrant's obligation to pay the annual fee,
the registrant shall be considered in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties
a. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
b. The location of the property to be served.
c. The name, address and telephone number of the company which will furnish and
maintain the private alarm system.
d. The name and telephone number of a person to be notified of a faulty private alarm
system at any time when no one is present on the property served by the system.
The applicant has an affirmative duty to notify the Township in writing within three
days of a change in the information required herein.
e. The particular type of private alarm system for which the registration is sought.
f. Consent to inspection of the premises on which the private alarm system is installed
at reasonable hours by the Police Chief or a designated representative.
§ 17-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 17-9.2
17:5
outlined in § 17-18.
§ 17-10. REGISTRATIONS.
§ 17-10.1. Investigation and Registration. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
The Chief of Police shall not accept a registration for a private alarm system if the Chief
finds that the system covered by the application does not meet applicable standards.
Whenever the Chief of Police shall refuse to accept a registration, the Chief shall advise
the applicant in writing of the reason or reasons for refusal.
§ 17-10.2. Expiration of Registration. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
Every registration submitted for a private alarm system shall expire on December 31
of the year in which it was issued, with the exception of those registrations submitted
between October 15 and December 31, which shall be valid until December 31 of the
following year.
§ 17-10.3. Terms and Conditions of Registration. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
All registrations for private alarm systems shall be issued upon the following terms and
conditions:
§ 17-10.4. Suspension of Registration. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
a. A registration shall be issued for each separate improved property; store, building
or other facility, and no registration shall be transferred or assigned in any manner.
b. If required, an applicant shall furnish complete information and specifications for
the system. Such information shall include specific data relating to testing
procedures and the prevention of false alarms.
c. Each person or separate business entity shall have a single registration. If the alarm
covers an area of more than 10,000 square feet, unless, waived by the Chief of
Police the applicant shall provide an annunciator mechanism at a place approved by
the Chief of Police indicating the location of the emergency.
d. Every registration shall be subject to rules and standards which may be promulgated
by the Chief of Police with respect to private alarm systems. Such rules shall be in
writing and shall be given to each registrant at the time of registration or renewal of
any registration or at time of promulgation or amendment.
a. Any registration issued for a private or local alarm system may be suspended by the
Chief of Police if it shall appear that:
1. The registrant has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of the
registration or has failed to comply with rules and standards promulgated by
the Chief of Police with respect to private or local alarm systems;
2. The registrant or any agent knowingly installed or maintained a faulty private
or local alarm system; or
§ 17-9.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 17-10.4
17:6
§ 17-11. (RESERVED)
3. The registrant or any agent failed to comply with a request by the Chief of
Police to render necessary services to a faulty private or local alarm system
within eight hours after such request was made or failed to disconnect such
system within such period and until such system has been repaired.
b. Four false alarms within a calendar year period constitute prima facie evidence that
a private or local alarm system is faulty and is in violation of this chapter and the
registrant shall be subject to the penalties outlined in section 17-18. In the case of
false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall immediately notify, by the
quickest means available, the Police or the Fire Department. In addition, in case of
false alarms, the Police Chief shall cause an investigation to be made and keep a
record of the false alarms on file. If, in the event of a false alarm, the Police
Department is advised of the name, address, preassigned code number and that the
alarm is false before Police or fire vehicles or personnel arrive at the scene, the false
alarm, in the discretion of the Police Chief or a designee, may be deemed not to be
a false alarm. If, in the event of the testing of a private alarm system or local alarm,
the Police receives prior notice of at least five minutes before each test, the alarm
will not be deemed a false alarm.
§ 17-10.4 ALARM SYSTEMS § 17-11
17:7

ARTICLE III
Local Alarms
§ 17-12. REGISTRATION OF LOCAL ALARMS.
§ 17-12.1. Registration. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
Every person who installs, maintains or uses a local alarm within the Township shall
notify the Chief of Police of such device by completing and filing with the Chief
of Police a form to be furnished by the Chief of Police providing for the following
information:
§ 17-12.2. Inspection. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
Owners of local alarms, upon registration, shall be deemed as having consented to
inspection of the premises in which the alarm devices are installed, at reasonable hours
by the Police Chief or any designated representatives. Owners of local alarms shall be
governed by the false alarm procedure set forth in § 17-18. All local alarms shall be
equipped with a time relay or battery to limit the sounding of alarms to 15 minutes or
less.
§ 17-13. (RESERVED)
a. The name, address and telephone number of the owner or occupant of the property
served by the warning device.
b. The location of the property served and the location of the device on the property.
c. The name, address and telephone number of any company installing or maintaining
the alarm device.
d. The type of device.
e. The name and telephone number of a person to be notified of a faulty local alarm at
any time when no one is present on the property served by the local alarm. There
shall be an affirmative duty upon the applicant to notify the Police Chief, in writing,
within three days of a change in the information required in this section.
§ 17-12 ALARM SYSTEMS § 17-13
17:9

ARTICLE IV
Miscellaneous
§ 17-14. PROPER MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE SYSTEM OR LOCAL
ALARMS. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
Every person who installs, maintains or uses a private or local alarm system to serve
an improved property within the Township shall maintain it in good repair and proper
working condition, shall meet the standards which may be promulgated by the Police
Chief to prevent faulty systems or devices and shall promptly correct or disconnect any
faulty system or device upon notice from the Chief of Police that the system or device
is sounding an inordinate number of false alarms, and upon a failure to respond to the
notice to comply, such person shall be in violation of this chapter.
§ 17-15. CUTOFF FOR SOUNDING DEVICE. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
Every private or local alarm system which has a sounding device shall be equipped with
a cutoff mechanism which will terminate the sound after 15 minutes.
§ 17-16. APPEALS. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police in the acceptance, denial or
suspension of a registration for a private alarm system or with respect to the installation,
operation or maintenance of any alarm equipment shall have the right of appeal to the
Township Committee. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the Township Clerk,
within 14 days after the notice of the action complained of has been mailed to the
person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for
appeal. The Township Clerk shall schedule such appeal at the next Township Committee
meeting and notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant by certified mail to his
last known address at least three days prior to the date set for hearing. The decision of
the Police Chief shall be affirmed, modified or reversed, and the reasons therefor shall
be set forth in a written communication to the applicant.
§ 17-17. DISCLAIMER OF RESPONSIBILITY. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
The Township of Springfield and the Springfield Police Department shall not assume
any responsibility whatsoever to any licensee, registrant, or other person with respect to
the adequacy, operation or maintenance of any private alarm system or warning device.
No action taken by the Township or the Township's Police Department pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall create any liability upon either the Township or the
Township's Police Department by reason of any failure of any private alarm system
or warning device and any failure to respond to any private alarm system or warning
device. Every registrant who submits a registration for a private or local alarm system or
registers a warning device agrees to hold and save harmless the Township and its Police
Department, their agents and employees from any liability whatsoever in connection
with the alarm system or warning device.
§ 17-18. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2013-12]
a. The Township will allow up to three false/accidental alarm activations without
penalty per calendar year. Penalties for additional false/accidental activations are as
§ 17-14 ALARM SYSTEMS § 17-18
17:11
follows:
1. 4th, 5th and 6th activations - $50 per occurrence.
2. 7th, 8th, and 9th activations - $75 per occurrence.
3. 10th activation and each activation thereafter - $100 per occurrence.
4. Penalty for unregistered alarms - $15. [Amended 10-13-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-23]
b. The above violations are billable offenses by the Police Department/Township.
Failure to remit payment of a bill within 30 days will result in the issuance of a
summons requiring a mandatory appearance in the Springfield Township Municipal
Court.
§ 17-18 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 17-18
17:12
Chapter 18
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 17-18 FIRE PREVENTION § 17-18
18:1

ARTICLE I
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code
§ 18-1. UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY ACT ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 18-1.1. Local Enforcement of Regulations. [1991 Code § 168-1]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383)37, the New
Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Township of Springfield.
§ 18-1.2. Enforcing Agency. [1991 Code § 168-2; Ord. No. 2009-02 § I]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Fire Division of the Township of Springfield,
under the supervision and direction of the Chief of Fire.
§ 18-1.3. Duties of Enforcing Agency. [1991 Code § 168-3]
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the codes
and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and premises within the
established boundaries of Springfield, other than owner-occupied one and two family
dwellings, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 18-1.4. Inspections of Life Hazard uses. [1991 Code § 168-4]
The local enforcing agency established by subsection 18-1.2 shall carry out the periodic
inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the
Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 18-1.5. Appointment of Firefighter/Fire Official. [1991 Code § 168-5; Ord. No.
2002-18; Ord. No. 2007-17 § I(D); Ord. No. 2009-02 § I]
The Firefighter/Fire Official shall be designated by the Township Committee from
among the Fire Division personnel and shall report to the Chief of Fire.
§ 18-1.6. Firefighter/Inspector. [1991 Code § 168-6; Ord. No. 2007-17 § I(B); Ord.
No. 2009-02 § I]
The Firefighter/Inspector shall be designated by the Township Committee from among
the Fire Division personnel and shall report to the Firefighter/Fire Official.
§ 18-1.7. Board of Appeals. [1991 Code § 168-10; Ord. No. 2009-02 § I]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,38 any person aggrieved by
any order of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to appeal to the Construction
Board of Appeals of Union County.
§ 18-1.8. Collection of Registration Fees. [1991 Code § 168-11; Ord. No. 2009-02
37. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq. Section 11 is N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
38. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208.
§ 18-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 18-1.8
18:3
§ I]
All registration fees required pursuant to the Act and the regulations promulgated thereto
shall be collected and accounted for by the Bureau of Fire Safety.
§ 18-1.9. Incorporation of State Law. [Ord. No. 2002-18; Ord. No. 2009-02 § I]
The Uniform Fire Safety Act, Uniform Fire Code and Uniform Construction Code as
currently enacted and as from time to time amended, shall be complied with within the
Township of Springfield, and shall be enforced by the local enforcement agency as set
forth herein.
§ 18-1.10. Non-Life Hazard Uses. [Ord. No. 2008-012 § I; Ord. No. 2009-02 § I;
Ord. No. 2011-28; Ord. No. 2012-33; Ord. No. 2015-08]
In addition to the registrations required by the Uniform Fire Code, the following non-life
hazard uses shall register with the local enforcement agency established herein. These
uses shall be inspected yearly and shall pay an inspection fee as hereinafter set forth,
which fee shall be exclusively for non-life hazard uses as provided for in subchapter 2
of the Uniform Fire Code. The enforcement and penalty provisions which govern life
hazard uses are hereby incorporated herein and any party failing to obtain any inspection
required, failing to furnish requested information, failing to pay inspection fees or failing
to comply with any orders issued as a result of such inspection shall be subject to
the enforcement and penalty provisions. (Fees are to be charged per occupant, unless
otherwise noted.)
a. Assembly.
A-1 Eating establishment under 50 — $42
A-2 Take-out food service (no seating) — $42
A-3 Church or synagogue or other houses of worship — $50
A-4 Recreation centers, multi-purpose rooms, etc. fewer than 50 — $50
A-5 Condominium centers fewer than 50 — $50
A-6 Senior citizen centers fewer than 200 — $50
b. Business/Professional.
B-1 Business/Professional use 1 to 5 story less than 2,500 square feet per
floor -$50
B-2 Business/Professional use 1 to 5 story 2,500 square feet or more, but less
than 5,000 square feet per floor - $75
B-3 Business/Professional use 1 to 5 story 5,000 square feet or more, but less
than 7,500 square feet per floor - $100
B-4 Business/Professional use 1 to 5 story 7,500 square feet or more, but less
than 12,000 square feet per floor - $150
c. Retail (Mercantile).
§ 18-1.8 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 18-1.10
18:4
§ 18-1.11. Other Fees. [Ord. No. 2009-18 § I]
M-1 1 to 5 story less than 2,500 square feet per floor — $50
M-2 1 to 5 story 2,500 square feet or more, but less than 5,000 square feet
per floor $75
M-3 1 to 5 story 5,000 square feet or more, but less than 7,500 square feet
per floor — $100
M-4 1 to 5 story 7,500 square feet or more, but less than 12,000 square feet
per floor — $150
d. Manufacturing (Factory).
F-1 1 to 5 story less than 2,500 square feet per floor — $50
F-2 1 to 5 story 2,500 square feet or more, but less than 5,000 square feet
per floor — $75
F-3 1 to 5 story 5,000 square feet or more, but less than 7,500 square feet
per floor — $100
F-4 1 to 5 story 7,500 square feet or more, but less than 12,000 square feet
per floor — $150
e. Storage.
S-1 1 to 5 story less than 2,500 square feet per floor — $50
S-2 1 to 5 story 2,500 square feet or more, but less than 5,000 square feet
per floor — $75
S-3 1 to 5 story 5,000 square feet or more, but less than 7,500 square feet
per floor — $100
S-4 1 to 5 story 7,500 square feet or more, but less than 12,000 square feet
per floor — $150
f. Residential (Excluding owner-occupied one-family and two-family homes).
R-2 1 to 25 units — $75
R-2 26 to 50 units — $100
R-2 51 to 75 units — $150
R-2 76 to 100 units — $200
R-2 For each additional unit — $2
a. Application for Certification of Smoke Detector, Carbon Monoxide Alarm and
Portable Extinguisher Compliance.
1. If submitted more than 10 business days prior to closing: $50.
2. If submitted fewer than 10 but more than four business days prior to closing:
$70.
3. If submitted four or less business days prior to closing: $125.
§ 18-1.10 FIRE PREVENTION § 18-1.11
18:5
4. Additional fee for field inspection: $50.
§ 18-1.11 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 18-1.11
18:6
ARTICLE II
Fire Zones
§ 18-2. ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE ZONES.
§ 18-2.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 97-11 § 1]
The Fire Department of the Township of Springfield may establish Fire Zones or Fire
Lanes upon all properties with the approval of the Township Committee by resolution.
The number, location, width, length and markings of such Fire Zones or Fire Lanes shall
be determined by the Fire Department with the approval of the Township Committee.
§ 18-2.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 97-11 § 1]
The Fire Zones or Fire Lanes shall be established to insure fire equipment and other
emergency vehicles unobstructed means of ingress and egress to such properties and the
buildings, persons, vehicles, fire hydrants, Fire Department connections and standpipes
thereon in case of fire or other emergency.
§ 18-2.3. Designation. [Ord. No. 97-11 § 1]
A description showing each Fire Zone and Fire Lane shall be filed with the Police
Department and Municipal Clerk and is hereby incorporated into this section. The Fire
Zones or Fire Lanes shall be clearly outlined and marked on the pavement and/or on the
adjoining building wall area. Appropriate signs stating "No Parking, Fire Zone" or "No
Parking, Fire Lane" shall be installed as directed by the Fire Department.
§ 18-2.4. Failure to Implement; Non-Approved Zone. [Ord. No. 97-11 § 1; Ord.
No. 2002-01]
§ 18-3. REGULATIONS.
§ 18-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 97-11 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-01]
As used in this section:
PARKING — Shall mean standing or waiting of a vehicle not actually engaged in
receiving or discharging passengers or merchandise, unless in obedience to traffic
regulations or traffic signs or signals.
STANDING — Shall mean any cessation of movement of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a Police Officer, or traffic control sign or signal.
a. Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with the implementation or
maintenance of a Fire Zone or Fire Lane as directed by the Fire Department shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $200, or to imprisonment not to exceed 10 days,
or both.
b. Any person, firm or corporation that has established a Fire Zone or Fire Lane which
has not been approved by the Township Committee by resolution, shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in paragraph a.
§ 18-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 18-3.2
18:7
§ 18-3.2. No Parking or Standing. [Ord. No. 97-11 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-01]
It shall be a violation of this section for anyone to park or stand a vehicle in or cause an
obstruction to a Fire Zone or Fire Lane.
§ 18-3.3. Snow Clearing. [Ord. No. 2002-01]
The owner or tenant of any real property upon which a fire zone or fire lane has been
established shall, within 12 hours of the daylight hour after a fall or accumulation of
snow, remove such snow from all such Fire Zones or Fire Lanes, and ensure that such
Fire Zones and Fire Lanes shall remain clear of snow at all times thereafter.
§ 18-3.4. Penalty. [Ord. No. 97-11 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-01]
Any person convicted of a violation of this paragraph shall be liable for a penalty of not
more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 18-3.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 97-11 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-01]
The Police Department shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the Fire Department to
enforce the provisions of this Article.
§ 18-3.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 18-3.5
18:8
Chapter 19
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS
§ 19-1. RIGHT OF WAY AND STREET OPENINGS AND SUBSURFACE
DISTURBANCES.
§ 19-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-12]
As used in this section:
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen and unexpected circumstance or occurrence which
immediately threatens public safety or health, causes or threatens imminent danger
to persons or causes or threatens imminent damage to property, and which requires
immediate opening or repair of any street or right-of-way within the Township of
Springfield.[Added 2-11-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-01]
OPENING — Any excavation, tearing up or disturbance of the surface of any street
or right-of-way within the Township of Springfield.[Amended 2-11-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-01]
§ 19-1.2. Permit Required for Opening; Fee. [Ord. No. 2015-12; amended
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24; 2-11-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-01]
a. No person shall make an opening in any street or right-of-way for any purpose
unless such person shall have first obtained from the Department of Engineering,
Construction Services and Code Enforcement (hereinafter referred to in this § 19-1
as "Department") a permit authorizing the opening. Such permit shall remain in
effect for 90 days. An applicant may, prior to the expiration of 90 days, seek to
renew the subject permit for thirty-day increments. Each such incremental renewal
shall be subject to a $10 fee. In the event of an emergency, work may commence
immediately, provided that an application is filed with the Department with the
required fees and with the required performance guarantee within 24 hours and
obtain the permit hereinabove referred to.
b. Nonutility street or right-of-way opening permits: $50.
c. Utility street or right-of-way opening permits: $200.
d. Five-Year Moratorium. No person shall make an opening which would disturb the
pavement of any street or right-of-way until five years after the completion of the
most recent construction, reconstruction or overlay of said street or right-of-way,
except in the event of an emergency or hardship as provided below:
1. Emergency. In the event of an emergency, the procedure for an emergency
under Subsection 19-1.2 (Permit Required for Opening; Fee) must be
complied with. Thereafter, the Department shall review the emergency
opening. If the Department determines that no such emergency existed, then
the person opening the street or right-of-way shall be deemed in violation of
§ 19-1.2.
2. Hardship Condition. In the event that a person claims a hardship condition
§ 18-3.5 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS § 19-1.2
19:1
§ 19-1.3. Inspection Fee. [Ord. No. 2015-12; amended 2-11-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-01]
which requires an opening to any street or right-of-way prior to the expiration
of the five-year period, the Township of Springfield may issue a permit
granting the opening if all the following conditions are met:
(a) A permit authorizing the opening is obtained pursuant to Subsection
19-1.2 and all procedures provided in this chapter are complied with,
except as herein provided; and
(b) A letter addressed to the Department is to be attached to the application
for a permit for opening. The letter is to detail the hardship and necessity
of an opening in lieu of waiting the required five-year period. Undue
hardships shall be approved at the discretion of the Township Engineer.
3. The five-year period is to begin at the start of the month following the most
recent construction, reconstruction or overlay of the street or right-of-way and
run five years thereafter.
e. Street Restoration. In the event that an exception is made under Subsection 19-1.2d
(Five-Year Moratorium), the person shall be responsible for limiting the
disturbance to the street or right-of-way as much as possible and restore the street
or right-of-way to its original condition. The restoration of the street or right-of-way
shall be the full width, curb to curb, pavement replacement of the street or right-ofway.
a. Opening to be closed as soon as possible; inspection fees. When an opening is made
by the applicant or by the applicant's agents or employees, the opening shall be
closed immediately after the purpose for which the opening was made has been
effected and shall in any event be closed without delay. The resurfacing of the
opening shall be done at the direction and under the supervision of the Department,
and the cost thereof shall be deducted from the deposit. An inspection fee of $100
per day shall also be paid by the applicant or permittee until all backfilling is
completed. Inspection fees shall be charged against and deducted from the deposit.
b. Conditions for permanent pavement. Whenever an application for a street opening
is with respect to a street which is paved with asphalt or concrete, or otherwise
paved with a pavement commonly designated as "permanent pavement," then the
work of opening and restoring the area shall be done by or under the direction of
the Department, and the cost shall be deducted from the deposit. After an opening
has commenced, an inspection fee of $100 per day shall also be paid by the
applicant or permittee until the backfill is completed. The inspection fees shall be
charged against and deducted from the deposit.
c. Conditions for tunneling. Whenever a permit is issued for tunneling, the applicant
or permittee shall not do any tunneling or backfilling until notification has been
given to the Department in order that a Township representative may be present
during the tunneling and backfilling. The applicant or permittee shall pay for the
cost of inspection at the rate of $100 per day during the time consumed in tunneling
and the time consumed in backfilling. The inspection fees shall be charged against
§ 19-1.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 19-1.3
19:2
§ 19-1.4. Deposit for Restoration. [Ord. No. 2015-12; amended 12-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-24; amended 2-11-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-01]
The applicant, before making an opening, shall deposit $75 per cubic yard of opening or
$750, whichever is greater, with the Department for each opening to ensure compliance
with the applicable provisions of this section and the complete restoration of the
pavement or surface that may be disturbed. All permittees, including, but not limited to,
public utilities, counties, their contractors or contractors of state or federal agencies, shall
deposit a guarantee as required in Subsection 19-1.2 with the Township of Springfield
in the form of a bond, certified check or bank draft acceptable to the Township. The
deposits required herein shall be held in a separate account by the Township and will
carry no interest to the permittee. One year after final restoration of the work, pending
the approval of the Department, the guarantee shall be returned to the permittee upon the
request in writing by the permittee.
§ 19-1.5. Further Provisions for Deposit; Bond. [Ord. No. 2015-12; amended
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24; 2-11-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-01]
§ 19-1.6. Return of Deposit; Period of Bond. [Ord. No. 2015-12; amended
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24; 2-11-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-01]
After the street, pavement or surface and subsurface backfill has been restored, as
required by Subsection 19-1.7, and after it is maintained by the applicant for one year,
the deposit upon request shall be returned to the applicant, provided that the Director
of the Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code Enforcement is
and deducted from the deposit.
d. Waiving of Inspection Requirement. Inspections may be waived by the Township
in the sole discretion of the Department. Waiver of one inspection shall not
constitute waiver of any other inspections for a given applicant or application.
a. The deposit shall be held to secure, and the bond shall provide for, faithful
compliance with the regulations of this section and with the requirements for proper
restoration of the streets as provided in this section.
b. In the event that the Township is required to spend any moneys to restore the street
or the pavement thereof or has conducted inspections as set forth in Subsection
19-1.3,, the applicant shall, within three days from the date of receipt of notice from
the Department, repay to the Township the amount so expended and/or the
inspection fee so incurred, to the end that the deposit may be kept intact and the full
obligation of the bond be available to the Township on the date of the completion
of the work contemplated by the applicant. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-24; 2-11-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-0139]
c. While the security is maintained in full and the applicant is fully complying with
the provisions hereof, the applicant shall not be obliged to make the deposits called
for in Chapter 19, subsection 19-1.4.
39. Editor's Note: This ordinance also amended the title of this subsection, which was formerly Deposit for Multiple
Openings; Bond.
§ 19-1.3 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS § 19-1.6
19:3
satisfied that the street surface has been restored in the manner provided for in this
section. The obligation of the bond shall be deemed to be effective and binding during
the same period and subject to the same conditions as in the case of a deposit.
§ 19-1.7. Duty of Restoration. [Ord. No. 2015-12]
The permittee shall promptly restore without delay the opening to the condition existing
prior to the making thereof and to complete restoration of the pavement or surface that
may be disturbed. The permittee shall replace the paved surface with the same type
of pavement as that removed, leaving it smooth and level with the adjacent pavement
and completely covering the space from which the former pavement was removed. The
making of the opening and the work of restoration shall be performed in accordance with
the following specifications and regulations:
§ 19-1.8. Lights; Other Safeguards. [Ord. No. 2015-12]
The Police Department shall be contacted at least 24 hours prior to making any openings
and the Police Department shall advise if a police officer will be required for traffic
detail.
§ 19-1.9. (Reserved)
§ 19-1.10. Miscellaneous Regulations. [Ord. No. 2015-12; amended 2-11-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-01]
The following regulations shall apply:
a. In making any opening, no greater portion of the road than is reasonably necessary
shall be opened at any one time.
b. All cuts in permanent pavement shall be 12 inches wider and 12 inches longer than
the excavation proposed to be made in the earth beneath, so that there may be a
shoulder six inches wide on each side and on each end of the excavation.
c. Excavated material cannot be used to fill trenches. Excavated area (s) shall be
backfilled with clean crushed stone or an approved fill material.
d. The material as refilled shall be thoroughly tamped in uniform layers not to exceed
12 inches in thickness.
e. The material as refilled shall be so thoroughly tamped and consolidated that
settlement cannot occur after the pavement has been restored.
f. Trenches finished with a surface treatment of or hot mix asphalt approved by the
Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code. [Amended
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
a. Pipes and Tunneling.
1. Wherever practicable, pipes for making house connections for supplying gas
or water shall be driven under and across the paved portion of the road or rightof-
way without disturbing the surface.
§ 19-1.6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 19-1.10
19:4
2. No tunnel shall be made under or across any road or right-of-way beneath the
pavement for the purpose of installing pipes, conduits or drains at a depth of
less than 12 feet. The backfill in such tunnel shall be made of rammed cement
concrete composed of a mixture of one part portland cement, three parts sand
and six parts gravel or a mixture of one part cement and six parts clean cinders.
b. Insurance Requirements. The applicant must provide to the Township Clerk a
certificate of insurance, acceptable to the Township, indicating liability coverage of
not less than $300,000 for any one person, $1,000,000 for any one incident, and
property damage coverage of not less than $500,000. Said certificate must name the
"Township of Springfield, Union County, New Jersey" as an additional insured.
c. New Jersey One-Call. The applicant shall provide a confirmation number assigned
to the notice of intent to dig within a public right-of-way, issued by New Jersey
One-Call at 1-800-272-1000 and www.nj1-call.org.
d. Bond in Addition to Deposit. Under certain circumstances as deemed appropriate
and memorialized in writing by the Department, based upon the unique nature or
scope of a proposed street opening, tunneling or digging, the Township may require
that, in addition to a deposit, a bond shall be provided by the applicant, to be
conditioned for performance of work in accordance with the provisions of this
section, and the restoration of the street area in compliance therewith, and to include
any other terms which the Department shall consider proper, such bond to be
subject to approval by the Township Attorney.
e. Guarding of Openings. Whenever any opening is made in a street, the applicant
shall properly guard the opening and provide for all adequate and necessary
protection against injuries to persons or damage to property that may in any way
arise as a result of such excavating or opening. The applicant shall abide by all
ordinances, regulations and provisions of the Township and of any state or federal
act or regulation which may govern the subject and shall be answerable for any
damages that may result through negligence or wrongdoing in such opening, or in
the maintenance or refilling thereof, or in any manner proceeding from the work,
and shall agree in the application to do all work in a careful, prudent and lawabiding
manner.
f. Project Abandonment. In the event the applicant and/or permittee shall abandon an
excavated or partially excavated opening, digging or tunneling site and/or fail to
repair and restore any such site to the condition required under this section, then the
applicant/permittee shall surrender its deposit in whole or in part to the Township
in amount equal to the Township's time, material and other costs incurred in
connection with the Township's efforts to provide for the repairs and restoration of
the site. The applicant and/or permittee shall remain responsible to the Township to
reimburse all such costs incurred by the Township in excess of any available
deposits.
g. Documentation. Upon request by the Department, the applicant shall produce
documentation and/or other evidence pertaining to work performed in connection
with the application and compliance with all procedures and other requirements of
this § 19-1 of the Township Code.
§ 19-1.10 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS § 19-2
19:5
§ 19-2. CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATIONS; TRAFFIC
CONTROL.
§ 19-2.1. Legislative Findings. [1991 Code § 247-18; Ord. No. 92-23; Ord. No.
98-19 § I[A][B]]
§ 19-2.2. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways. [1991 Code § 247-19; Ord. No. 92-23]
§ 19-2.3. Preconstruction Meetings. [1991 Code § 247-20; Ord. No. 92-23; Ord.
No. 98-19 § 1[C], [D]; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
a. The Township Committee hereby finds and declares that problems occur with
pedestrian and vehicle traffic flow and control when such traffic must move through
or around street construction, maintenance operations or utility work, above or
below ground, which obstructs the public way or obstructs the normal flow of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic and that such obstructions create dangerous
conditions when not properly controlled.
b. In order to better promote the public health, safety and welfare, it is necessary to
establish controls and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic in, near and through construction and/or
maintenance areas.
c. The scope of regulation is directed at those construction, maintenance and utility
operations that require pedestrian traffic to deviate from the public way; require
vehicular traffic to deviate from marked lanes of travel or to cross the center line of
any roadway; operate at any location where sight distances are effected; or create a
hazardous condition that has an immediate and negative effect on the safety of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic at or near a construction or maintenance area.
a. The Township adopts as a standard the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, hereinafter referred to as "MUTCD," current edition, and as it may be
supplemented and amended. Whenever construction, maintenance operations or
utility work obstructs the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, warning
signs, markings, signals, instructions and any other devices used to assist in guiding
traffic shall conform in all respects to the MUTCD.
b. Any person or entity, natural or legal, contractor or utility that fails to comply with
the applicable provisions of the MUTCD while performing such work is in
violation of this section. For purposes of this section, the person who authorized or
who directed the placement of the nonconforming traffic-regulating devices shall
be deemed to have committed the offense.
a. It shall be the responsibility of the person or entity seeking to conduct work on,
under or above the public way to determine if such operations will fall within the
scope of this section and, if so, to contact the Springfield Police Department at least
96 hours in advance of starting work and arrange for a safety assessment meeting.
b. The safety assessment meeting will result in a recommendation for the minimum
necessary traffic control at the site or sites involved. Any person whose work is
§ 19-2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 19-2.3
19:6
§ 19-2.4. Emergency Contact Phone Numbers. [1991 Code § 247-21; Ord. No.
92-23]
§ 19-2.5. Time Limits. [1991 Code § 247-22; Ord. No. 92-23; Ord. No. 98-19[E];
Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work affecting
vehicular traffic at the below-listed times on the below-listed streets within the
Township, except in an emergency and with the concurrence of the Police Department.
An "emergency" is defined to mean any unplanned, unforeseen event which seriously
impairs the ability of a public utility or public agency to render safe and effective service
to one or more of its customers or users:
§ 19-2.6. Traffic Control. [1991 Code § 247-23; Ord. No. 92-23; Ord. No. 98-19
§ 1[F]]
Vehicular and pedestrian traffic control personnel shall be posted at all construction or
maintenance sites as determined by the Springfield Police Department, either as a result
of the safety assessment meeting or as a result of an on-site inspection after work has
deemed to require traffic control by law enforcement personnel shall provide for
the same by ordering this service through the Police Department.
c. Any person or entity who undertakes work on, under or above the public way
without benefit of a safety assessment meeting and whose work results in an unsafe
condition does so at the person's own risk or peril. If, upon inspection of the work
site, the Police Department deems it advisable to have police vehicular or pedestrian
traffic control at the site, it may order work to be stopped immediately until a safety
assessment meeting is held as provided above.
a. If any construction equipment, debris, signs or markings are to remain on the job
site overnight or after the conclusion of the work day, the person, entity, contractor
or utility shall provide the Police Department with at least two emergency contact
phone numbers to be called in case of an emergency or problem at the construction
or maintenance site.
b. If, for any reason, emergency contacts cannot be reached or if the emergency
contact person does not respond to a call from the Police Department to correct a
hazardous condition, the Township may respond to correct such hazardous
condition. The reasonable fees for such emergency services by the Township shall
be charged to and paid by the person, entity, contractor or utility responsible for
such condition.
a. Between 6:30 a.m. and 9:30 a.m. and between 3:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m. on Mountain
Avenue, South Springfield Avenue, U.S. Route 22, Morris Avenue (New Jersey
Routes 124 and 82), including the one-way section, Springfield Avenue (New
Jersey Route 124), Shunpike Road, Milltown Road, Meisel Avenue, Hillside
Avenue, Maple Avenue and Summit Road.
b. Between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. at any location, unless Chapter BH17 is
complied with.
§ 19-2.3 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS § 19-2.6
19:7
commenced.
§ 19-2.7. (Reserved)
§ 19-2.8. Public Utility/Public Agency Exception. [1991 Code § 247-24; Ord. No.
92-23; Ord. No. 98-19 § 1[G]]
Any public utility company or cable television company authorized pursuant to Title
48 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes and franchised to serve the Township by the
New Jersey State Board of Regulatory Commissioners is exempt from the time-limit
requirement and safety assessment requirement of this section. Agencies and employees
of the Federal, State, County and municipal government, and those contracted to work
for the Township, in the performance of their official duties, are exempt from the timelimit
requirement and safety assessment requirement of this section. All other provisions
of this section remain applicable, including but not limited to the provisions governing
work stoppage by order of the police, and all such work must be performed so as to
ensure public safety.
§ 19-2.9. Stop-Work Orders. [1991 Code § 247-25; Ord. No. 92-23]
The Springfield Police Department shall have the authority to stop any work, including
ordering the removal of equipment, vehicles and stored material within the public way,
the backfilling of open excavations or other related work, in order to abate any nuisance
or safety hazard or for any violation of this section.
§ 19-2.10. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 247-26; Ord. No. 92-23]
§ 19-3. through § 19-7 (RESERVED)
§ 19-8. SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL; OBSTRUCTIONS.
§ 19-8.1. Removal by Owner or Tenant. [1991 Code § 247-1; Ord. No. 2002-01]
The following shall apply:
a. Any person, entity, contractor or utility company who violates this section shall,
upon conviction thereof for a first offense, pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $500 and perform up to 10 days of community service within the Township;
for a second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $250 and
perform up to 20 days of community service within the Township; for a third or
subsequent conviction, pay a fine of not less than $500 and perform up to 30 days
of community service within the Township.
b. Any penalty under this section shall be imposed upon the person, entity, contractor
or utility, as the case may be, upon a finding of guilt.
c. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or part of a day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues for each and every construction or
maintenance site.
a. The owner or tenant of any real property abutting upon a public street in the
§ 19-2.6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 19-8.1
19:8
§ 19-8.2. Removal by Township; Lien for Cost. [1991 Code § 247-2]
If snow, hail or ice is not removed after it has fallen or formed, it shall be removed
under the direction of the Township Engineer or another Township official designated
for that purpose by the Township Committee. The cost incurred and paid in this removal
shall be certified by such officer to the Township Committee. The Township Committee
shall examine the certificate and, if it is found to be correct, shall cause the cost to be
charged against the land abutting or bordering the sidewalk. The amount so charged shall
forthwith become and remain a lien and tax upon lands until paid, shall be added to and
form a part of the taxes next to be levied and assessed against the lands and shall be
enforced and collected with interest by the same officers and in the same manner as other
taxes.
§ 19-8.3. Prohibited Obstructions. [1991 Code § 247-3]
No person shall obstruct or damage any sidewalk or cause or suffer the same to be
encumbered with debris of any kind.
§ 19-8.4. Handicapped Parking Spaces. [Ord. No. 94-28]
§ 19-8.5. Placement of Snow in Street. [Ord. No. 2002-01]
Subsequent to any street, roadway or highway being plowed to remove snow or other
accumulated precipitation, no property owner, tenant, employee, agent, or other person
shall plow, blow, shovel or in any other manner place snow upon the public street, road
or highway so as to block the parking or passage of vehicles, or create ice or other
hazard. It shall be strictly prohibited to plow the snow from a driveway across the width
of the street to be piled on the opposing side of the street.
§ 19-9. SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR.
§ 19-9.1. Responsibility. [Ord. No. 98-21 § 247-13]
Except for damage caused by the Township, its employees or its agents, the owner of
Township shall, within 24 hours of the cessation of a fall or formation of snow, ice
or hail, remove the same from the abutting sidewalk of the street.
b. The cleared portion of the sidewalk shall not be less than 24 inches wide.
c. Ice which is frozen to the sidewalk shall be removed or covered with sand, ashes or
other chemical substance which would prevent slipping.
a. Removal of Snow and Ice. No owner or operator of premises having parking spaces
reserved for handicapped drivers and no tenant, contractor or other person may
block access to such parking stalls reserved for handicapped drivers by the plowing,
piling or placement of snow or ice in such spaces.
b. Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of paragraph a shall upon conviction
thereof, be subject for a first offense to a fine of $100 and for each subsequent
offense to a fine of $500.
§ 19-8.1 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS § 19-9.1
19:9
any property abutting a sidewalk within the right of way, shall be responsible for the
maintenance and repair of such sidewalk.
§ 19-9.2. Inspection. [Ord. No. 98-21 § 247-14]
The Zoning Officer, on a continuing basis or upon specific complaint, shall examine and
inspect all sidewalks in the Township.
§ 19-9.3. Notice; Service; Cost as Lien. [1991 Code § 247-14; Ord. No. 98-21
§ 247-15]
§ 19-9.4. Sidewalk Materials. [1991 Code § 247-16; Ord. No. 98-27 § 1]
In any area in which an existing sidewalk is required to be reconstructed, repaired,
altered, relayed or maintained, or in which a new sidewalk is being constructed, the work
shall be done with concrete, unless all sidewalks abutting the sidewalk on the property in
question are of another material, in which case the material to be used may be concrete
or the other material. All other specifications shall be as designated by the Township
Engineer or other official.
§ 19-10. INGRESS AND EGRESS TO PUBLIC STREETS FROM PRIVATE
PROPERTY.
§ 19-10.1. Crossing Curb Prohibited. [Ord. No. 94-5 § 1]
No vehicle shall enter or leave a public street by crossing the curbline, except through
use of a driveway apron of appropriate width. It shall be a violation of this section for
any tire of a vehicle to travel over the curb while that vehicle is entering or leaving a
public highway.
§ 19-10.2. Joint Liability of Owner and Operator. [Ord. No. 94-5 § 1]
The owner and operator of a vehicle shall be jointly liable for a violation of this section,
unless the owner can show that the vehicle was used without the owner's consent,
express or implied. Any owner who pays any fine, penalty, civil judgment, costs or
a. Upon a determination that any sidewalk requires construction, repair, relaying or
maintenance, a notice shall be served upon the owner of the lands, requiring the
necessary work to the sidewalk be done within a period of not more than 60 days
from the date of service of the notice.
b. Service of such notice shall be made personally, or simultaneously, by regular and
certified mail, return receipt requested. If the owner cannot be found, the notice may
be mailed to a post office address, if it can be ascertained. If a post office address
cannot be ascertained, then the notice may be inserted for two times, once a week,
in the official newspaper of the Township.
c. If the owner does not comply with the requirements of the notice, the Township
may cause the required work to be done. The cost of the work shall be certified by
the Township Engineer to the Township Tax Collector and become a lien upon the
property to the same extent that assessments for local improvements are hens.
§ 19-9.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 19-10.2
19:10
administrative fees in connection with a violation of this section shall have the right to
recover that sum from the operator in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 19-10.3. Penalty. [Ord. No. 94-5 § 1]
A person convicted of a violation of this section, shall be subject, for a first violation,
to a fine of $100; for a second violation, to a fine of $500 and for a third or subsequent
violation, to a fine of $1,000 and, at the discretion of the court, to a period of
incarceration not to exceed 10 days.
§ 19-10.4. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 94-14 § 1]
This section shall not apply to vehicles owned or operated by any employees, agent,
branch or agency of the Federal, State, County or local governments while in the
performance of their official duties.
§ 19-11. DRIVEWAYS.
§ 19-11.1. Driveway Expansion. [Ord. No. 97-22 § 247-27]
In addition to any Zoning, Construction Code or other requirements, no owner, lessor,
renter, agent, employee or other person shall perform work upon, expend or any way
change any driveway upon any property, whether commercial, residential or otherwise,
within the Township, except for repairs, maintenance or other work which in no way
changes the extent or location of the driveway, without first obtaining a permit for such
work.
§ 19-11.2. Fees for Driveway Permit. [Ord. No. 97-22 § 165B]
The Construction Code Official is hereby authorized to charge the following fees:
Driveway Permit (pursuant to subsection 19-11.1) $25
Construction Permit-Fence Only $25
§ 19-12. through § 19-15 (RESERVED)
§ 19-16. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [1991 Code § 247-17; Ord. No. 93-2;
New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 19-10.2 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS § 19-16
19:11

Chapter 20
SEWERS
§ 19-16 SEWERS § 19-16
20:1

ARTICLE I
Sanitary Sewers40
§ 20-1. SEWERAGE AUTHORITY. [1991 Code §§ 104-1 through 104-3;
amended 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 20-1.1. Intent to Establish; Participating Municipalities.
The Township, acting in concert with and upon the consideration of the adoption
of parallel ordinances by the governing bodies of Garwood, Kenilworth and Roselle
Park, Rahway, Westfield, Cranford, Clark and Woodbridge, respectively, all being
municipal corporations of New Jersey and all being situate in the County of Union,
except Woodbridge, which is situate in the County of Middlesex, shall join with such
municipal corporations in the formation of a Sewerage Authority.
§ 20-1.2. Creation; Powers and Duties.
§ 20-1.3. Membership; Compensation.
The RVSA shall consist of nine members. One shall be appointed by the Township
Committee and one by the governing body of each of the other municipal corporations
named in Subsection 20-1.1. The members shall serve for terms as provided by the
Sewerage Authorities Law. Compensation shall be as determined by ordinance.
§ 20-2. PURPOSE. [1991 Code § 241-1; amended 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
a. Pursuant to the provisions of the Sewerage Authorities Law, N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et
seq., there is hereby created a public body corporate and politic under the name and
style of the "Rahway Valley Sewerage Authority," hereinafter referred to in this
section as the "RVSA." The district of the RVSA, as defined in the Sewerage
Authorities Law, shall consist of the areas within the territorial boundaries of the
Township and the municipal corporations named in Subsection 20-1.1.
b. The Rahway Valley RVSA hereby created is a sewerage authority as contemplated
and provided for by the Sewerage Authorities Law and shall have and exercise all
the powers and perform all the duties provided for by the statute and any other
statutes heretofore or hereafter enacted and applicable thereto.
a. To provide for the method and manner of connection with the Township sanitary
sewer system, to provide fees, to provide for regulation of use thereof and for
equitable charges to nonresidential users based on quantity and quality of
wastewater discharged in compliance with Federal Regulation 18 CFR 60134 dated
July 2, 1970, and 39 F.R. 35.925.11 dated February 11, 1974.
b. To prohibit the discharge or inflow of nonwastewater ("clearwater") into the
Township's sanitary sewer system because clearwater unnecessarily increases the
cost of wastewater treatment to the Township and occupies valuable space in the
sewer lines and at the treatment plant.
40. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2006-18, Section I(C) designated §§ 20-1 through 20-16 to become Article I, Sanitary
Sewers.
§ 20-1 SEWERS § 20-3
20:3
§ 20-3. DEFINITIONS. [1991 Code § 241-2; amended 7-17-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-13]
As used in this chapter:
AUTHORITY — The Rahway Valley Sewerage Authority and, when the context
requires, shall mean the supervising engineer or his authorized authority, agent, or
representative.
BOD (denoting "BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — The certificate issued by the Township setting
forth that, based upon at a minimum a visual inspection, there are no known clearwater
inflow connections into a sewer lateral or the sanitary sewer system from the specific
property that is being sold, transferred or leased.
CLEARWATER — Any stormwater, natural precipitation, surface flow, roof runoff,
surface runoff, subsurface drainage, and such water conveyed via downspouts, eave
troughs, rainspouts, yard drains, sump pumps, foundation drains, yard fountains, ponds,
cistern overflows, pools, water discharged from any air-conditioning unit or system, and
other drainage that does not contain any sewerage or waste.
DEVELOPER — Any person and/or entity that seeks to construct commercial or
industrial building(s) and/or seeks to construct three or more residential units on property
in the Township.[Added 6-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10]
INFLOW — Clearwater that enters a sanitary sewer system intended for wastewater
flows through connections, such as uncapped lateral cleanouts and openings in manhole
covers and illicit connections, such as area drains, sump pumps, catch basins and
foundation and roof drains.
NONRESIDENTIAL USER — Any user of the Township of Springfield sanitary sewer
system other than a residential property, apartment house or apartment complex,
condominium, townhouse or tax-exempt property.
NONRESIDENTIAL WASTEWATER — Wastewaters generated by all users of the
Township sanitary sewer system other than wastewaters generated by residential
properties, apartments, condominiums, townhouses and tax-exempt properties.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in moles
per liter of solution.
RUNOFF — Precipitation and other surface drainage that is not infiltrated into or
otherwise retained by the soil, concrete, asphalt or other surface upon which it falls.
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A system of all piping, lines, sewers, laterals and
connections thereto, which carries or transports wastewater within the Township to trunk
lines owned and maintained by the RVSA to a destination at the RVSA's plant for
wastewater treatment.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of
sewage.
§ 20-3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 20-3
20:4
SEWER LATERAL—Any pipe, line or sewer running across, through or from any real
property and connecting to any portion of the sanitary sewer system.
SLUG—Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which, in concentration of
any given constituent or in quantity of flow, either exceeds for any period of duration
longer than five minutes or is equivalent to the following: more than five times the
average twenty-four-hour flow or five times the average annual flow (read in gallons per
minute for a five-minute period), whichever is the smaller.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension
in water, sewage or other liquids.
§ 20-4. SEWER LATERAL CONNECTIONS AND USAGE. [1991 Code §§ 241-3
through 241-11; Ord. No. 98-21 § 1 [B]; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A); amended 5-24-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-12; 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-1312-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-24; 6-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-10; 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-12;
3-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-05]
§ 20-4.1. Connections Required. [Added 3-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-05]
Except in cases of extreme impracticality or excessive cost, as determined by the
Engineering Department and subject to review by the Township Committee, all houses
and other buildings located along the lines of any sewer lateral constructed for the
purpose of carrying off sewage matter in any of the streets of the Township shall be
connected with the sanitary sewer system by the owner thereof. The owner of each
property which is so connected shall be responsible for the repair and maintenance of the
full length of the sewer lateral to its connection at the sewer main.
§ 20-4.2. Permit Required. [Added 3-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-05]
No person shall make any connection with the sanitary sewerage system unless and
until a permit for that purpose has been obtained from the Construction Official. An
application for a permit shall be made in writing, signed by the applicant, to the
Construction Official, setting forth the date, the name of the owner and location of the
premises, and such other information deemed necessary by the Construction Official.
§ 20-4.3. Fees. [Added 3-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-05]
There shall be assessed with each application a fee established by ordinance for each
separate connection with the sewerage system, and the Construction Bureau shall turn
over the fees to the Treasurer within 72 hours.
a. In addition to any other applicable fees, charges and costs otherwise set forth or
referred to in the Code of the Township of Springfield or otherwise imposed by law,
there shall be imposed a one-time sewer connection fee for each house, building or,
in the case of a multiunit building, for each individual unit, residential or
nonresidential, to be serviced by any new connection to the public sewer system.
These fees are in addition to all fees imposed by the Rahway Valley Sewerage
Authority. This fee shall be assessed at the time the permit is approved, and
payment shall be due before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the subject
property.
§ 20-3 SEWERS § 20-4.3
20:5
§ 20-4.4. Manner of Making Connections. [Added 3-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-05]
All connections shall be made according to standard plumbing procedures found in the
National Standard Plumbing Code (the most current edition adopted by the State of New
b. The purpose of such sewer connection fee is to provide for a fair payment toward
the capital cost of the public sewer system pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-11, et
seq., and, as permitted by law, to fund or offset the purchase of flow rights by the
Township at the Rahway Valley Sewerage Authority.
c. Determination of Fees.
1. The fee per each house, building or, in the case of a multi-unit building, each
unit, residential or nonresidential, shall be determined according to Schedule
A, which is attached to and made a part of this chapter.
2. The fees set forth in Subsection 20-4.3c1 of this section shall be reduced for
eligible projects as set forth in, and subject to the requirements of, N.J.S.A.
40A:26A-11.3.
d. Payment shall be made in full to the Township of Springfield prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy or, when such certificate has already been issued or is
not required, prior to making a connection to the sewerage system. In the event a
connection is made without prior payment thereof for any reason, the sewer
connection fee shall constitute a first lien upon the benefitted property and shall
bear interest, as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-12 and as otherwise provided by law.
This shall be in addition to any violations, penalties or other remedies otherwise
provided for.
e. A change of usage as per Subsection 12-1.13 of the Municipal Code will precipitate
a change of sewer fee as per the change of use. This also applies to additions
/changes of use for nonresidential buildings and modifications to existing
residential dwellings which will increase the number of bedrooms when the existing
residential dwelling has less than three bedrooms (i.e., increasing the number of
bedrooms from one to two or more, or from two to three or more).
f. There shall be created by the Township's Chief Financial Officer a dedicated
account into which all funds derived from the fees established by this Subsection
20-4.3 shall be deposited. All such funds shall be expended only for the purpose of
defraying the cost of developing, maintaining, repairing, replacing and/or otherwise
improving or modifying the Township's sewerage conveyance infrastructure,
including capital costs, reserves, insurance, principal and interest on any bonds, and
to maintain reserves or sinking funds therefor as may be required under the bond
covenants or any contracts and, as permitted by law, to fund or offset the purchase
of flow rights by the Township at the Rahway Valley Sewerage Authority.
g. At least once each year the Township shall review the sewer connection fee
schedule (Schedule A),41 and revise such fee schedule as necessary by way of
resolution of the Township Committee, in accordance with the standards and
procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-11 et seq.
41. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 20-4.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 20-4.4
20:6
Jersey).
§ 20-4.5. Notice by Construction Official. [Added 3-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-05]
It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to serve or cause to be served a notice
upon the owner of any premises in the Township which shall not have connected with
the sewerage system, directing the owner to cause the connection to be made within
30 days from the date of mailing of the notice. The owner shall, within the thirty-day
period, cause the premises to be connected with the sewerage system in accordance with
the provisions of this section. The notice shall be served upon the owner in the manner
provided by law.
§ 20-4.6. Separate Connections. [Added 3-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-05]
Each building fronting on any street in which a sanitary sewer system has been or shall
be laid shall be separately connected with the sewer lateral, provided that the buildings
on the rear of the lot may be connected with the house connections.
§ 20-4.7. Discharge of Certain Wastes Forbidden. [Added 3-10-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-05]
§ 20-4.8. Prohibited Connections and clear water Discharges. [Added 3-10-2020
by Ord. No. 2020-05]
a. It shall be unlawful to discharge into the sewer lateral connection or permit to be
discharged into the sewer connection waste containing gasoline, naphtha or other
volatile or explosive substances or liquids, or any waste containing antiseptic
properties, or any liquid or solid substances or any other substances which may tend
to clog, destroy or otherwise injuriously affect the sewer lateral connection or
sanitary sewerage system.
b. It shall be unlawful to have connected to the sewerage system, or use or operate,
any device, equipment or system which will or may be used to grind, pulverize,
either in a dry, wet or mixed state, or liquefy any garbage, offal, refuse, meats,
bones, vegetables or other waste.
a. It shall be unlawful to connect any cellar drain, subsoil drain or surface water drain
of any kind or description, steam exhaust, blowoff, drip pipe, rainwater conductor,
swimming pool, garbage disposal device or equipment or system of any kind or
description or oil pipe with the house connection or sewer lateral connection, or
otherwise permit any subsoil waters or surface waters to flow into the house
connection or sewer lateral connection or sewer lateral directly.
b. No person shall directly or indirectly discharge, or permit to be discharged, clear
water into the sanitary sewer system.
c. In addition to the connections prohibited in Subsection 20-4.8a above, no person
shall tie into a connection between any conductor used to carry clear water, such as,
without limitation, a sump pump, roof drain, foundation drain, or other surface
drain (collectively "device"), and the sanitary sewer system.
§ 20-4.4 SEWERS § 20-4.9
20:7
§ 20-4.9. Cesspools and Privies Prohibited. [Added 3-10-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-05]
No person shall maintain or use any cesspools, privies, privy vaults or septic tanks on
any premises located in the Township abutting upon a street in which a sewer lateral has
been or shall hereafter be laid.
§ 20-4.10. Inspections. [Added 3-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-05]
§ 20-5. TRANSFER OR LEASE OF PROPERTY.42 [Added 7-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-13
§ 20-5.1. Certificate of Compliance.
a. The Township, by and through the Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Subcode
Official, Plumbing Subcode Official and/or any other person or employee duly
appointed (collectively, "Inspector"), may undertake inspections or tests as the
Inspector deems necessary and appropriate to determine whether clear-water is
being discharged into the sanitary sewer system. This includes the Fire
Department's inspection for certification of smoke detector, carbon monoxide alarm
and portable fire extinguisher compliance for the sale of property. Tests or
inspections shall be conducted on weekdays, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
4:00 p.m. or by appointment.
b. The Inspector shall be permitted immediate entry onto real property to undertake
inspections or tests for clear-water if, in the sole opinion of the Inspector, an actual
emergency exists tending to create an immediate danger to the public health and
safety.
c. The owner of the property shall make all areas of the building to be tested or
inspected available to the Inspector.
d. If, in the sole opinion of the Inspector, any clear-water is found, the sources of the
clear-water into the sanitary sewer system shall be eliminated at the owner's
expense, with the appropriate permits. Such corrective work shall be completed
within 15 days of the date the Township notifies the owner of the deficiency, in
writing, mailed to the address of the property owner in violation.
e. In the event clear-water is identified, the Township shall reinspect the property
either upon notice from the owner that the deficiency has been corrected or within
30 days from the date of the notice of deficiency, whichever first occurs.
f. If the property owner fails to undertake such corrective work within the times
specified herein, the Township shall be authorized and permitted to take all legal
means necessary to obtain compliance.
a. No owner shall sell, transfer or lease real property, which is improved with a
building, without first obtaining from the Township, as part of the Township's
certificate of occupancy procedure, a certificate of compliance that certifies that no
42. Editor's Note: Former § 20-5, Sewerage Utility of the Township of Springfield, created by Ordinance No. 2010-23, was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2010-41.
§ 20-4.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 20-5.1
20:8
§ 20-6. through § 20-8 (RESERVED)
§ 20-9. NONRESIDENTIAL WASTE.
§ 20-9.1. Liquid Waste Discharges. [1991 Code § 241-12]
No liquid waste shall be discharged into the sewer system of the Township unless
it is amenable to secondary or biological treatment processes. No toxic materials or
wastes containing explosive or flammable substances which would be detrimental to
the collection system, including pumping stations and all treatment plant facilities and
equipment or treatment processes, shall be permitted to be discharged into the collection
system.
§ 20-9.2. Application for Connection by Nonresidential User. [1991 Code
§ 241-13]
Every nonresidential user connected with or proposing to connect with the Township
sewer system and to discharge waste into same shall submit a complete quantitative
chemical analysis of the waste, including biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical
oxygen demand (COD), suspended solids, chlorine demand, phosphates, nitrates,
arsenic, barium, cadmium, chlorides, copper, cyanides, fluorides, iron, lead, manganese,
nickel, selenium, sulfates, zinc and other waste characteristic required by the Rahway
Valley Sewerage Authority and the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 20-9.3. Preliminary Treatment of Nonresidential Waste. [1991 Code § 241-14]
device is connected to the sanitary sewer system. No purchaser, transferee or tenant
shall purchase, occupy or rent such real property unless the owner has provided the
purchaser, transferee or tenant with the required certificate of compliance prior to
closing of the sale or transfer, or finalization of the rental. This provision does not
apply to a change in the tenancy of an individual unit of a multiunit dwelling.
b. Applications for a certificate of compliance shall be filed with the Township's
Construction Bureau within the Department of Engineering, Construction Services
and Code Enforcement by the owner of the real property at least 10 days prior to
the transfer of ownership, by deed, land contract sale, beginning of the lease term
or otherwise. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
c. Upon receipt of a completed application, the inspector shall, at a minimum, conduct
a visual inspection of the property in order to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. If a violation is discovered during the inspection, the
property owner shall be mailed a notice within five business days of the inspection,
which notice shall describe the violation and the action needed for compliance.
d. Nothing in this chapter shall amend, reduce or remove any other Township
requirements for a certificate of occupancy pursuant to any other ordinances
applicable to the transfer, to the sale or lease of real property in the Township. The
issuance, or a failure to issue a certificate of compliance, shall not relieve a property
owner of its continuing obligation to comply with all provisions of this Chapter 20.
§ 20-5.1 SEWERS § 20-9.3
20:9
§ 20-9.4. Annual Charge Payable to Township. [1991 Code § 241-15; Ord. No.
a. The Township reserves the right to reject wastes, to require control over quantities
and rates of discharge or to require preliminary treatment where the characteristics
of the existing or proposed wastes make such preliminary treatment desirable or
mandatory for the protection of the sewerage works, sewers, equipment or receiving
water or for the protection of the safety, health or welfare of the citizenry.
Determination of the requiring of preliminary treatment shall be made by the
Township Engineer. Some of the characteristics which may dictate preliminary
treatment are listed below:
1. Five-day BOD in excess of 350 milligrams per liter.
2. Suspended solids in excess of 350 milligrams per liter.
3. Presence of arsenic, barium, cadmium, chloride, copper, cyanide, fluoride,
iron, lead, manganese, nickel, nitrate, selenium, sulfate or zinc.
4. pH below or above the allowable limits set by the Authority.
5. A chloride demand in excess of 40 milligrams per liter.
6. Substances listed in Subsection 20-11.4.
b. In such instances where it is agreed that the nonresidential waste will be received
following preliminary treatment, drawings and specifications shall be submitted for
approval to the Township, showing all pertinent details for the construction
proposed to accomplish the preliminary treatment. The pretreatment facility shall
be approved by the State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection,
and a copy of the approved plans, specifications, application, engineer's report and
all other allied data shall be filed with the Township Engineer prior to construction
of the facility.
c. Where preliminary treatment facilities are required, they shall be provided and
continuously maintained in satisfactory and effective operating conditions at all
times, at the expense of the owner, and operated by a sewer treatment plant operator
duly licensed by the State of New Jersey. Such operator's name, address, phone
number and a copy of the license shall be filed with the Township Clerk.
d. Each owner connected shall be responsible for maintaining a quality of effluent
from its premises which conforms to the standards established in this chapter.
Sampling and analysis shall be done to conform to accepted practices and in
accordance with the current edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water,
Sewage and Industrial Wastes, published by the American Public Health
Association, or any modified standards accepted by the Township.
e. The Township Engineer or his authorized representative shall have authority to
enter upon and examine such pretreatment facility with or without notice.
f. Users not initially required to install a pretreatment facility may, at the discretion of
the Township Engineer, be required to provide a control manhole within the
sidewalk area which shall be provided with adequate and safe access manhole
covers, though access may be had by Township personnel at all times.
§ 20-9.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 20-9.4
20:10
91-20]
a. Every nonresidential user connected to the Township system shall pay an annual
charge to the Township to cover the cost of treatment and related costs. Such charge
shall be calculated by the Township Engineer in accordance with the following
procedures:
1. The total annual cost of nonresidential wastewater treatment shall be
determined as the remainder of total annual Township cost for flow, BOD and
suspended solids, as furnished by the Authority, less deductions for flow, BOD
and suspended solids attributable to all waste connections other than
nonresidential waste connections plus infiltration-inflows. Also, any credits
applicable from the previous year extended by the Authority shall be deducted
prior to computing the nonresidential waste rate.
2. Costs attendant to flow, BOD and suspended solids quantities generated by
individual nonresidential users for whom actual qualitative and quantitative
use data is supplied by the Authority shall be determined on the basis of
Authority unit costs, and each user shall be charged his pro rata share of the
total nonresidential cost. Charges so determined shall be deducted from the
total used in determining the charges to be paid by nonresidential users for
whom no actual qualitative and quantitative use data is available.
3. Nonresidential users for whom actual qualitative and quantitative use data is
not available shall be charged on the basis of annual water consumption
(except insofar as individual users can demonstrate that water consumptions
exceed flows).
4. Any nonresidential user desiring to provide qualitative and quantitative
wastewater data shall provide such data to the Township Engineer no later than
August 31 of the year for which charges are being computed. Such data may,
if acceptable to the Township Engineer, be the basis of calculating the unit
costs for that user.
5. The initial $20 of the total annual charge as calculated by the Township
Engineer for each nonresidential user shall be considered as a credit on each
annual bill.
6. In applying the foregoing, the Township Engineer shall be authorized, if the
total nonresidential water consumption significantly exceeds total
nonresidential flow, to make appropriate pro rata adjustments in the amount of
water consumption for which each nonresidential user will be charged.
7. The procedures for billing, forms of bills and due dates for payment of
assessed charges shall be determined by the Township Engineer after
consultation with and approval of the Township Tax Collector and Auditor.
8. The measuring year shall be from October 1 through September 30 of the
following year.
b. The Township of Springfield reserves the right to include additional charges for
ascertaining non-residential waste characteristics as may be imposed by the
§ 20-9.4 SEWERS § 20-9.4
20:11
§ 20-9.5. Sampling and Testing of Waste. [1991 Code § 241-16]
The Township may undertake periodic sampling and testing of the waste to determine
both volume and strength or waste characteristics.
§ 20-9.6. Application Procedure. [1991 Code § 241-17; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
§ 20-9.7. Prohibited Wastes. [1991 Code § 241-18; amended 7-17-2018 by Ord.
Authority to the Township of Springfield.
a. Formal Written Agreement. The Township will accept nonresidential wastes into
the sanitary sewerage system upon execution of a formal written agreement and
under and subject to the provisions appearing in the agreement and this chapter. The
agreement will set out in detail the characteristics of the wastes, the flow conditions
which shall govern and the conditions with respect to the physical connection or
connections. It shall be the policy of the Township to consider each application on
its own merits and to establish specific conditions applicable to the particular
situation for each agreement. No connection shall be made prior to execution of the
agreements.
b. Review Process. All new nonresidential connections and any material changes in
the quantity or quality of existing nonresidential connections must be approved by
the Township and the Authority.
For purposes of review, an application shall be submitted to the Township Engineer
for initial evaluation. The application shall include the following:
1. Average, maximum and minimum rates of flow to be expected daily and
seasonally.
2. Flow diagram, showing points of applications of chemicals, type and quantity
of each chemical used per day and per shift, a schedule of operations, expected
chemical characteristics of the untreated wastes and the point or points of
connection to the sewerage system. The normal situation will require the
separation of and separate point of connection for domestic sewage and
nonresidential waste.
3. Chemical analysis and waste characteristics of liquid nonresidential waste to
be discharged into system.
4. Separate clean water discharge connections to other than sanitary sewers, as
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection or other local
authority.
c. The application shall, after approval by the Township Engineer, be submitted by
the applicant to the Authority.
d. Upon receipt of Authority approval, the application shall be submitted to the
Planning Board of the Township for review and approval if the application is
consistent with existing Township contractual limitations concerning wastewater
disposal and plans for future Township development.
§ 20-9.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 20-9.7
20:12
No. 2018-13]
Wastes containing the following substances or possessing the characteristics listed below
shall not be accepted:
§ 20-9.8. (Reserved)
§ 20-9.9. Nonresidential Waste Meters and Waste Samples. [1991 Code § 241-19;
Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
a. Any vapors or steam.
b. Any fluids with temperature in excess of 150° F.
c. Any fluid wastes which contain in excess of 100 parts per million of fat, oil or
grease, either vegetable or mineral.
d. Any volatile, explosive or flammable substances such as benzene, gasoline,
naphtha, fuel oil or similar substances.
e. Any solids or viscous matter which may contain any ashes, cinders, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, hair
or similar substances.
f. Any fluid wastes having a pH value less than 5.5 or in excess of 9.0 or possessing
other properties capable of causing damage or hazard to sewer laterals, structures,
treatment process, equipment or operating personnel.
g. Any wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient concentration to
interfere with the sewage treatment process or cause injury to animals or persons or
to create an unacceptable condition in the receiving streams.
h. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance which causes a public nuisance.
i. Any water or waste containing fats, grease, wax or oils, whether emulsified or not,
in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing substances which may solidify
or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F.
j. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated
plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
k. Any other waste containing antiseptic properties, or any liquid, solid or other
substances which may tend to clog, destroy or otherwise injuriously affect the sewer
lateral connection or sanitary sewer system.
a. Where the owner provides its own water supply entirely separate from that supplied
by the public utility serving the Township or provides from its own sources a
portion of the water consumed on the premises which eventually finds its way into
the sewerage system of the Township, the owner shall certify to the Township the
volume of water so provided, which volume shall have been computed by means
acceptable to the Township.
b. The Township Engineer or a representative shall have access at reasonable times to
all nonresidential establishments and to any meters used to determine volume of
§ 20-9.7 SEWERS § 20-9.9
20:13
§ 20-9.10. Prohibited Connections. [1991 Code § 241-20; amended 7-17-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 20-9.11. Domestic Sewage. [1991 Code § 241-21]
A separate connection shall be provided for domestic sewage and the waste shall not
be commingled with the nonresidential waste of the use. The Township shall determine
the equivalent household connections from the discharge of domestic sewage from each
nonresidential user. This shall be determined by dividing the average daily domestic
sewage flow by 300 gallons per day, the latter representing the average household
domestic sewage discharge. The annual rate for discharge of domestic sewage into the
Township sewer system shall be computed by multiplying the number of equivalent
units, as determined by the formula above, times the annual sewer charge applied to each
household unit, presently $15 per year.
§ 20-9.12. Payments. [1991 Code § 241-22]
§ 20-10. CONNECTIONS MANDATORY; SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS. [1991
water used or to determine waste volumes discharged into the sewer system or
excluded from the sewer system.
a. Under no circumstances may any of the following be connected to the sanitary
sewer system, directly or indirectly:
1. Floor drain, area drain or yard drain.
2. Rain conductor or downspout.
3. Grease pit.
4. Air-conditioning equipment.
5. Stormwater inlets or catch basins; and
6. Any other device conveying or otherwise used to carry clearwater.
b. Drains from piece of equipment or manufacturing process, except when specifically
authorized under the provisions of this chapter.
a. The rates and charges fixed by the Township shall be in lieu of and in substitution
for any other sewer charges heretofore made by any other agency for such quarter
of any succeeding period.
b. Bills for the charges and rents shall be rendered to the owner of each premises
quarterly in advance as soon as may be practicable after the beginning of each
quarter and may be rendered with the tax bills covering real estate, and the charges
and rents shall become due and payable as herein prescribed.
c. The charges and rents shall draw interest and be a lien upon the premises until paid,
and the Township shall have and exercise the remedies for the collection thereof
with interest, costs and penalties provided in N.J.S.A. 40:63-8 and as it has by law
for the collection of taxes upon real estate.
§ 20-9.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 20-10
20:14
Code §§ 241-23 through 241-25; amended 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 20-10.1. Connections for Available Sewerage Facilities.
Except as otherwise provided herein, each owner of premises located on streets in which
sewer laterals are available shall connect all sewerage facilities on the premises to the
sewer system immediately upon the sewerage facility's becoming available and use the
sewerage facilities at all times for sewage disposal therefrom.
§ 20-10.2. Connections by Authorized Representatives of Township.
No alteration or repair to any part of the sanitary sewer system or any connection thereto
shall be made, except by duly authorized representatives or employees of the Township,
without application for such having been made to the Township and approved and upon
compliance with the rules and regulations of the Township relating thereto.
§ 20-10.3. Connections Excluded.
No cesspool, privy vault, subsoil or cellar drains, rainwater or surface drains, nor any
other connection described in Subsections 20-4.8 and 20-9.10, shall be connected with
the sanitary sewer system or any part thereof. Only the sewerage system of the premises
shall be so connected.
§ 20-11. PUBLIC SEWERS.
§ 20-11.1. Waters Excluded From Sanitary Sewers. [1991 Code § 241-26;
amended 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water,
groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer system.
§ 20-11.2. Discharges to Storm Sewers or Natural Outlets. [1991 Code § 241-27]
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Township
Engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the Engineer, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
§ 20-11.3. Discharge of Certain Wastes and Waters Prohibited. [1991 Code
§ 241-28]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following-described
waters or wastes to any public sewers:
a. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid,
solid or gas.
b. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in
sufficient quantity, either along or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
§ 20-10 SEWERS § 20-11.3
20:15
§ 20-11.4. Waste Which May be Excluded. [1991 Code § 241-29]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following-described substances,
materials, waters or waste if it appears likely in the opinion of the Township that such
wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property or constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the Township will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors.
The substances prohibited are:
animals or create a public nuisance.
c. Any waters or wastes having a corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
d. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of
the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
a. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar
objectionable or toxic substances in excess of limits established by authority, or
having a pH outside of maximum and minimum limits established by the Authority,
or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement.
b. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the
Authority as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the
requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction over
such discharge to the receiving wastes.
c. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed
limits established by authority in compliance with applicable State or Federal
regulations.
d. Materials which exert or cause:
1. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not limited to
fuller's earth, lime, slurries and lime residues, or of dissolved solids, such as
but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.
2. Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions.
3. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs, as
defined herein.
e. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or
§ 20-11.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 20-11.4
20:16
§ 20-12. through § 20-15 (RESERVED)
§ 20-16. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 241-30; amended 7-17-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-13]
§ 20-17. through § 20-18 (RESERVED)
reduction by sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment
only to such degree that the sewage treatment plan effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters.
a. When the inspector determines that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter, written notice of the violation shall be given to the owner and any
occupant of the property by mail. The violator(s) shall be given 10 days from the
date of mailing of the notice in which to remedy the violation or contact the
Construction Bureau within the Department of Engineering, Construction Services
and Code Enforcement to set up a timetable for compliance. [Amended 12-18-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-24]
b. If the violation is not remedied within the ten-day period, the violator shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $250, plus costs for this first violation. Each date
on which such violation occurs or exists shall constitute a separate violation of this
chapter.
c. Repeat offenses under this chapter shall be subject to increased fines as provided
for below. As used in this section, "repeat offenses" means a second or subsequent
violation of the same requirement or provision of this chapter for which the person
admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for
repeat offenses shall be as follows:
1. The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be $500, plus
costs; and
2. The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent
repeat offense shall be $750, plus costs.
d. In addition to other remedies under this chapter, the Township may bring an action
against the owner of the property for which the violation exists for the costs
incurred in cleaning up and abating the offending condition. In any such action, the
Township shall be entitled to recover its costs of suit, together with reasonable
attorneys' fees, experts' fees and costs of suit, if applicable.
§ 20-11.4 SEWERS § 20-17
20:17

ARTICLE II
Storm Sewers
§ 20-19. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(C)]
The purpose of this Article is to prohibit illicit connections to, and to prohibit spilling,
dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater into the Township separate
storm sewer system, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare.
§ 20-20. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(C); amended 5-24-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-10]
As used in this article for the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text
of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural
number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE—Waste and wastewater from humans or household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that discharges
domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater, or other industrial
waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Township, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the
Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852).
Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows
into the municipal separate stormwater system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to those
pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b) or (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act [33
U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b) and (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is owned or
operated by the Township or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature for the
purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact with any raw material,
intermediate product (other than heat) or finished product. Noncontact cooling water
may however contain algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as
heat exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or
political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material,
§ 20-19 SEWERS § 20-20
20:19
intermediate product, finished product, byproduct, or waste product. Process wastewater
includes, but is not limited to leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling
water.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect stormwater
runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet,
and combination inlet.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that
runs off land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm
sewers or other sewerage of drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams and
bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of
the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 20-21. ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. [Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(C); amended
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-10]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit connection to
the Springfield municipal separate stormwater sewer system any domestic sewage,
noncontact cooling water, process wastewater or other industrial waste, other than
stormwater.
§ 20-22. IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE. [Ord. No. 2006-18 § I(C);
amended Ord. No. 2006-18 ]
§ 20-22.1. Prohibited Conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater into the Township
separate storm sewer system, and the spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants into the
Township separate storm sewer system, are prohibited.
§ 20-22.2. Exceptions.
a. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
b. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or basement sump
pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising groundwaters).
c. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling water).
d. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
e. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir discharges and
diverted stream flows.
f. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool discharges.
g. Sidewalk, driveway and street washwater.
h. Flows from firefighting activities.
§ 20-20 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 20-22.2
20:20
§ 20-23. RETROFITTING OF CERTAIN EXISTING STORM DRAIN INLETS.
[Added 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-10]
§ 20-23.1. Prohibited Conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one singlefamily
house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of individual
potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a
thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact
with an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 20-23.2. Design Standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in Section III44 above shall comply with the following
standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets.
For purposes of this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard
see Subsection c below.
i. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water: beach
maintenance equipment immediately following their use for their intended purposes
and equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials immediately
following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water,
all residual salt and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g.,
shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing equipment is limited to exterior, undercarriage
and exposed parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
a. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid and floatable
materials; or
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Section V43 below prior to the
completion of the project.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they use a grate
in pavement or another ground surface to collect stormwater from that surface into
a storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate,
which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
2. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area of no
more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the
smallest dimension. Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates
43. Editor's Note: So in original.
44. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 20-22.2 SEWERS § 20-23.2
20:21
§ 20-23.3. Enforcement. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
This article shall be enforced by the Department of Engineering, Construction Services
and Code Enforcement of the Township of Springfield and by the Department of Public
Works of the Township of Springfield.
§ 20-23.4. Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $100 for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to
meet the design standard.
of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces
of roads (including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas,
sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in that curb
opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or more clear
spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
c. This standard does not apply:
1. Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would cause
inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably be overcome by
using additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting
facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is
designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials
that could not pass through one of the following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide (this option
does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with oneinch
spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection determines,
pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes
an encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed
historic property.
§ 20-23.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 20-23.4
20:22
Chapter 21
WATER
§ 21-1. WATER EMERGENCY.
§ 21-1.1. Declaration of Water Emergency. [1991 Code § 284-1]
Whenever the Governing Body shall be satisfied and finds that a water emergency exists
in the municipality, it may adopt a resolution declaring that a water emergency exists in
the municipality. Such resolution shall be adopted by the Governing Body at any regular,
special, adjourned or emergency public meeting of the Governing Body. Such resolution
shall identify that portion of the municipality affected by the water emergency, which
may include the entire municipality, and shall specify which of the water use regulations
contained in subsection 21-1.2 is being imposed as well as any exemptions as may be
authorized. Such resolution shall be effective immediately upon publication according to
law and shall continue in effect for 90 days, unless extended or repealed as set forth in
subsection 21-1.3. For this purpose of this section, a water emergency shall exist if, for
any of the following reasons:
§ 21-1.2. Water Use Restrictions. [1991 Code § 284-2]
a. The public utility providing water service to all or a portion of the municipality has
adopted water use restrictions and has notified the municipality, the New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities and the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, as well as any other State, County or local agency entitled to notice of
such restrictions, and such restrictions are not overruled or declared invalid by any
State, County or local agency having the jurisdiction and power to do so; or
b. The governing authority is otherwise satisfied that a water emergency exists in the
municipality.
a. Upon adoption by the Governing Body of a resolution declaring that a water
emergency exists in the municipality in accordance with subsection 21-1.1, all
citizens shall be urged to observe voluntary indoor conservation measures and any
of the following water use restrictions shall be imposed and shall be applicable to
all residents and tenants, except where a bona fide health emergency exists, and to
exempt businesses, as specified herein during the water emergency.
1. The complete ban and prohibition of outside water usage, including the
watering of lawns and plants, the filling of pools and the washing of cars; or
2. Outside water usage on alternate days, allowing outside water usage by
persons or businesses having even house or box numbers on even days and
those having odd house or box numbers on odd days, with outside water usage
being completely banned and prohibited on the 31st day of any month during
the water emergency; or
3. Any other water use restriction specified by the Governing Body in the
resolution required by subsection 21-1.1 which is reasonable under the
circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water emergency.
§ 20-23.4 WATER § 21-1.2
21:1
§ 21-1.3. Duration of Restrictions. [1991 Code § 284-3]
The resolution of the Governing Body required by subsection 21-1.1 shall, in addition
to complying with subsection 21-1.1, provide a period of time during which the water
use restrictions imposed shall be applicable, which shall be no longer than reasonably
necessary to abate the water emergency under the circumstances considering the nature
and extent of the water emergency. At the expiration of the time period specified in the
resolution, the water use restriction shall lapse and be inapplicable and unenforceable.
If the Governing Body shall be satisfied that the water emergency has been abated prior
to the expiration of the time period specified in the resolution, it shall adopt a resolution
declaring the water emergency ended and the water use restrictions inapplicable. If, at
the expiration of the time period specified in the resolution, the Governing Body shall
be satisfied that the water emergency continues to exist, it may adopt a resolution in
accordance with the requirements of this section continuing the water use restrictions.
§ 21-1.4. Enforcement of Restrictions. [1991 Code § 284-4]
The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this section shall be enforced during a
water emergency by the local authorized official. Whenever a local authorized official
shall find a violation of the water use restrictions, such authorized official shall give
the violator a written warning and explain the penalties for a second and third offense
as provided by subsection 21-1.6. The local authorized official shall keep such records
as may be reasonable and necessary for the purpose of determining the persons and
businesses who have been warned upon a first offense. The local authorized official is
hereby empowered to write summonses for the violation of the water use restrictions
imposed pursuant to this section.
§ 21-1.5. (Reserved)
§ 21-1.6. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 284-5]
After a first offense in accordance with subsection 21-1.4, any person or business who
thereafter violates the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this section shall be
fined or imprisoned in accordance with this section. For a second offense, the fine
imposed shall be $500 or imprisonment for 10 days, or both. For a third and subsequent
offense, the fine imposed shall be $1,000 or imprisonment for 30 days, or both.
b. Any water restriction imposed pursuant to this section shall be limited in
application to that portion of the municipality, which may include the entire
municipality, identified as being affected by the water emergency in the resolution
of the Governing Body adopted in accordance with subsection 21-1.1.
§ 21-1.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 21-1.6
21:2
Chapter 22
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 22-1. RECYCLING.45
§ 22-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-26]
CLEAN AND UNCONTAMINATED — Shall mean any recyclable material or
commingled recyclable materials that are free of residue to the maximum extent practical
such that the designated material(s) would not be considered unacceptable for recycling
by the current recycling market(s). Residue may include but is not limited to food
waste, grease, nondesignated plastics, non-designated glass and other nondesignated
materials. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall determine what constitutes "clean
and uncontaminated" pursuant to subsection 22-1.1.
COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Shall mean retail,
wholesale, restaurants, taverns, schools, institutions including government, warehouses,
construction sites, factories, offices, etc., but specifically excludes fairs, parks, concerts,
and other outdoor events.
COMMINGLED — Shall mean a combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
COVERED ELECTRONIC DEVICE — Shall constitute a subset of electronic waste
which shall include only the following: a computer central processing unit of a laptop
computer or desktop computer, a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube device, a flat panel
display or similar video display device with a screen that is greater than four inches
measured diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards, including a television,
and cell phones.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean those clean and
uncontaminated materials designated below that shall be source separated for the
purpose of recycling. These materials include:
Designated Materials for Residential Waste Generators:
1. Clean aluminum, tin, steel.
2. Uncontaminated corrugated cardboard.
3. Uncontaminated glass containers.
4. Grass, brush.
5. Household batteries.
6. Leaves.
7. Uncontaminated mixed paper.
8. Used motor oil.
a.
45. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1991 Code §§ 176-1 — 176-8.3 and Ordinance Nos. 92-98,
2001-25, 2001-27 and 2007-23.
§ 21-1.6 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT § 22-1.1
22:1
9. Used motor oil filters.
10. Uncontaminated newspaper.
11. Uncontaminated office paper.
12. Uncontaminated plastic containers (#1 and #2).
13. Tires.
14. Vehicle batteries.
15. White goods (washers/dryers, refrigerators).
16. Wood.
Source Separation and Recycling Requirements for Commercial, Institutional and
Industrial Waste Generators:
1. Clean aluminum, tin, and steel.
2. Covered electronic computers and peripherals.
3. Uncontaminated corrugated cardboard.
4. Fluorescent bulbs.
Food waste (for institutional, commercial and industrial facilities serving 500
or more meals per day and major food processors).
5.
6. Uncontaminated glass containers.
7. Grass, brush.
8. Household batteries.
9. Leaves.
10. Uncontaminated mixed paper.
11. Masonry (asphalt, brick, block, concrete).
12. Used motor oil.
13. Used motor oil filters.
14. Uncontaminated newspaper.
15. Uncontaminated office paper.
16. Uncontaminated plastic containers (#1 and #2).
17. Tires.
18. Vehicle batteries.
19. White goods (washers/dryers, refrigerators).
b.
§ 22-1.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 22-1.1
22:2
FOOD WASTE — Required for all institutional, commercial and industrial facilities
serving 500 or more meals per day as well as major food processors. The Municipal
Recycling Coordinator shall determine what constitutes food waste.
MIXED PAPER — Shall mean and include magazines, direct mails, glossy catalogs,
coupon inserts, envelopes, color news inserts, sweepstakes forms, phone books,
construction paper, mail, white and color office paper, computer paper, and photocopy
paper and fax paper.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean any building or structure, or complex of
buildings in which five or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or rented or leased,
or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes (see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a.) and
shall include hotels, motels, or other guest houses serving transient or seasonal guests
as those terms are defined under subsection (j) of section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Law," P.L. 1967, c. 76 (C.55:13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — Shall mean the person or persons
appointed by the Municipal Governing Body and who shall be authorized to, among
other things, enforce the provisions of this section, and any rules and regulations which
may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — Shall mean all solid waste
generated at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the municipality of Springfield.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Shall mean those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed and returned
to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
SOURCE SEPARATION — Shall mean the process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid waste for the
purposes of recycling.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean recyclable
materials which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from
solid waste for the purposes of recycling, including, where applicable, universal waste.
UNIVERSAL WASTE — Shall mean a specific hazardous waste stream that has been
designated by EPA or those waste streams identified in the New Jersey Universal Waste
Rule (N.J.A.C. 7:26A-7). Only the following materials may be managed as universal
waste:
20. Wood.
a. Rechargeable batteries and button cell batteries;
b. Mercury containing equipment, including thermometers and thermostats;
c. Pesticides;
d. Fluorescent lamps (light bulbs);
e. Electronic waste; and
f. Oil-based paints and finishes.
§ 22-1.1 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT § 22-1.2
22:3
§ 22-1.2. Source Separation: Exemption from Source Separation Requirements.
[Ord. No. 2010-26]
§ 22-1.3. Municipal Collection of Recyclable Materials. [Ord. No. 2010-26]
a. Mandatory Source Separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners,
tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential premises, which shall include
but not be limited to retail and other commercial locations, as well as government,
schools and other institutional locations within the Township of Springfield to
separate designated recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated recyclable
materials shall be deposited separate and apart from other solid waste generated by
the owners, tenants, or occupants of such premises and shall be placed separately at
the curb or other location(s) in a manner and on such days and times as may be
hereinafter established by regulations promulgated by the Recycling Coordinator of
the Township of Springfield.
b. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the governing body of a
municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or institutional premises
within its municipal boundaries from the source separation requirements of the
ordinance which requires persons generating municipal solid waste within its
municipal boundaries to source separate from the municipal solid waste stream, the
specified recyclable materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an exemption
pursuant to this section, a commercial or institutional generator of solid waste shall
file an application for exemption with the Springfield Recycling Coordinator on
forms to be provided for this purpose. The form shall include, at a minimum, the
following information: the name of the commercial or institutional entity; the street
address location and lot and block designation; the name, official title and phone
number of the person making application on behalf of the commercial or
institutional entity; the name, address, official contact person and telephone number
of the facility which provides the service of recycling those designated recyclable
materials, and a certification that the designated recyclable materials will be
recycled, and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling service provider or
commercial/institutional generator shall provide written documentation to the
municipal recycling coordinator of the total number of tons collected and recycled
for each designated material.
§ 22-1.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 22-1.3
22:4
§ 22-1.4. Residential Dwelling Compliance Requirements. [Ord. No. 2010-26]
a. There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of the following
designated recyclable materials from residential solid waste by the occupants of the
premises within the Township of Springfield and the separate disposal of the same.
The curbside residential municipal recycling collection program shall include the
following materials:
1. Commingled glass, tin, aluminum, steel and #1 and #2 plastics;
2. Mixed paper/newspaper;
3. Corrugated cardboard.
The Township's Recycling Newsletter shall annually set forth the designated
items for curbside collection.
b. All containers containing recyclable materials shall be placed, prior to collection,
between the curb and the sidewalk, where such receptacles shall be readily
accessible to the collector without providing obstruction to pedestrians. Receptacles
or other items to be recycled shall be placed any time after 6:00 p.m. of the day
immediately preceding the day of collection, but no later than 6:00 a.m. of the day
of collection.
c. All receptacles shall be kept clean and maintained in accordance with the Health
Code of the Township.
a. The owner of any residential property shall be responsible for compliance with this
section. Citizens are responsible for source separating mandated items according to
this municipal ordinance and delivering them to the municipal collection system
(curbside). These items must be source separated; no mandated recyclables are
permitted in the garbage put out for collection; no garbage is permitted in
recyclables placed in the municipality's collection system.
b. For multifamily units, the owner or manager is responsible for the following:
1. The property owner/management is responsible for ensuring that a recycling
system is established and that it is operated in compliance with the
requirements of this municipal ordinance. The property owner/management is
responsible for setting up and maintaining the recycling system. The property
owner/management is responsible for receiving and responding to warnings,
notices of violation, and penalty assessments and for correcting violations. The
property owner/management will be expected to correct violations promptly
and to make necessary direct contacts with residents.
2. Drop-off centers for source-separated recyclable materials, if in use, must be
established and maintained so that they are conveniently accessible to
residents. Curbside collection may be made available in place of, or in
conjunction with, these drop-off centers. The recycling system must provide
for all designated recyclables in the residential waste stream. The recycling
system may utilize separate containers for each recyclable material or it may
provide for commingled materials to be placed in one container provided the
§ 22-1.3 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT § 22-1.4
22:5
§ 22-1.5. Commercial and Institutional Establishment Compliance Requirements.
[Ord. No. 2010-26]
recycling hauler can take the materials commingled. Containers must be
clearly marked and the area neatly maintained. Container capacity must be
adequate to hold the amount of materials generated between pick-ups. It must
be clear to an inspector that the system is being serviced.
3. The recycling area or the bins or containers placed therein shall be designed so
as to provide protection against adverse environmental conditions which might
render the collected materials unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are
used for the collection of recyclable paper or cardboard shall be equipped with
a lid or otherwise covered so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
4. It must be clear that the system is being used properly by employees and
tenants. There must not be garbage in the recycling containers or recyclables
in the garbage containers. The property owner/management is responsible for
resolving problems which may arise from the improper use of containers and
for training employees and tenants to properly understand and use the
recycling system.
5. Notification and collection rules shall be issued by the management to new
tenants when they arrive and to all residents every three months. Copies of
these notices, or other proof of distribution of the notices, must be sent to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator at the time of each mailing or distribution.
6. The property owner/management is responsible for arranging to have
recyclables picked up and for resolving any problems with the transporter of
recyclables.
7. The property owner/management must arrange to obtain documentation in
order to report the tonnages of materials recycled at least once per year or else
he/she must arrange to have the collector provide that documentation directly
to the municipality. Deadline to report the previous year's annual tonnage is
March 1. Arrangements with recycling companies or with haulers handling
recyclables should include provisions for obtaining this information.
Documentation must be maintained by the management. When the
municipality provides recyclables collection service, reporting and proof are
not needed.
8. Single/Dual Stream Recycling. Multi-family locations may opt to collect their
recyclables in a single stream or dual stream (fiber, commingled) provided the
Material Recovery Facility (MRF) that receives the material has certified that
they have the ability to separate and maximize the capture rate of the
designated recyclables. The UCUA Division of Solid Waste Management will
compile and maintain an updated list of those facilities.
a. The owner/operator (or in case of construction, the contractor), is responsible for
ensuring that a recycling system is established and that it is operated in compliance
with the requirements of this municipal ordinance. The owner/operator/contractor
is responsible for setting up and maintaining the recycling system. The owner/
§ 22-1.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 22-1.5
22:6
operator/contractor is responsible for receiving and responding to warnings, notices
of violation, and penalty assessments and for correcting violations promptly.
b. The recycling system must be established and maintained so that it is conveniently
accessible to users. The recycling system must provide for all designated
recyclables in the commercial/institutional waste stream. The recycling system may
utilize separate containers for each recyclable material or it may provide for two or
more materials to be placed in one container provided the recycling hauler can take
the materials commingled. Containers must be clearly marked and the area neatly
maintained. Container capacity must be adequate to hold the amount of materials
generated between pick-ups. It must be clear to the inspector that the system is
being serviced.
c. The owner/operator/contractor must ensure that the system is being used properly
by employees, customers or tenants. There must not be garbage in the recycling
containers or recyclables in the garbage containers. The owner/operator/contractor
is responsible for resolving problems which may arise from the improper use of
containers and for instructing employees, tenants, and customers to understand and
use the recycling system.
d. If patrons, customers or employees are involved in the waste disposal process (i.e.
fast food stores or company cafeteria), the recycling system must allow for this and
include notice to customers as to their responsibilities.
e. The owner/operator/contractor is responsible for arranging for recyclables to be
removed from the premises and for assuring that they go into the recyclables
market. The owner/operator/contractor may make arrangements to deliver the
recyclables to the municipal collection system (curbside collection) if permitted by
the municipality. Otherwise, the owner/operator/contractor is responsible for
arranging to have recyclables picked up and for resolving any problems with the
transporter of recyclables.
f. The owner/operator/contractor must arrange to obtain documentation in order to
report the tonnages of materials recycled at least once per year or else he/she must
arrange to have the collector provide that documentation directly to the
municipality. Deadline to report the previous year's annual tonnage is March 1.
g. Single/Dual Stream Recycling. Commercial and institutional establishments may
opt to collect their recyclables in a single stream or dual stream (fiber, commingled)
provided the Material Recovery Facility (MRF) that receives the material has
certified that they have the ability to separate out and maximize the capture rate of
the mandated recyclables. The UCUA Division of Solid Waste Management will
compile and maintain an updated list of those facilities.
h. Recycling Containers. Commercial and institutional establishments that have
outdoor garbage containers for their customers must also have outdoor recycling
containers. There must be sufficient recycling containers for any mandated
recyclables in the commercial/institutional waste stream.
i. All schools must provide written notice at the beginning of each school year, to all
students, teachers, and other staff on the recycling requirements. The notice must
contain a contact number to call if they observe any problems associated with
§ 22-1.5 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT § 22-1.5
22:7
§ 22-1.6. Compliance Requirements for Fairs, Parks, Concerts, Streets, and other
Outdoor Events. [Ord. No. 2010-26]
recycling or if recycling is not properly occurring.
j. Single Stream Recycling of Mixed Classes of Construction Recyclables.
Construction/demolition sites may opt to collect all recyclables in one container
provided there are no other materials (including garbage) in that container. To
qualify for this provision, recyclables must go to a Transfer Station/MRF that is
properly permitted by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and
has certified that they have the ability to separate out and maximize the capture rate
of the mandated materials. The specific materials that may be commingled together
will be determined by the provisions in the receiving Transfer Station/MRF's
permit.
k. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in addition to
compliance with all other recycling requirements, be required to recycle grease and/
or cooking oil created in the processing of food or food products, and maintain such
records as may be prescribed, for inspection by any Code Enforcement Officer.
l. All recycling collection/hauling companies, commercial recycling facilities
(including metal and auto scrap yards), and demolition companies operating within
the Township shall submit documentation of recycling activity performed on behalf
of residents, businesses, institutions and governments to the Recycling Coordinator
of the Township of Springfield by March 1 of each year.
a. The organizer/owner/contractor of the location must provide a recycling system that
is operated in compliance with the requirements of this section.
b. The recycling system must provide for any mandated recyclables generated at the
event. It must be clear to an inspector that the system is being serviced: i.e.,
containers must be clearly marked and the area neatly maintained; there must not
be garbage in the recyclables or recyclables in the garbage; container capacity must
be adequate to hold materials between pick-ups. There must be sufficient recycling
containers for any mandated recyclables generated at the event.
c. The organizer/owner/contractor of the location is responsible for arranging for
recyclables to be removed from the premises and for ensuring that they are taken to
an approved recyclables market. The owner/operator/contractor may make
arrangements to deliver the recyclables to the municipal collection system (drop-off
center or curbside collection) if permitted by the municipality. Otherwise, the
owner/operator/contractor is responsible for arranging to have recyclables collected
and transported and for resolving any problems with the transporter of the
recyclables.
d. The recycling system must be made accessible and available to all patrons,
customers, and employees. Notice/signs must be provided to ensure all are aware
of their responsibilities.
e. The owner/operator/contractor of the location is responsible for obtaining pertinent
documentation in order to report the tonnages of materials recycled at least once per
year no later than March 1 or else he/she must arrange to have the collector provide
§ 22-1.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 22-1.6
22:8
§ 22-1.7. New Developments of Multi-Family Residential Units or Commercial,
Institutional, or Industrial Properties (Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and
99.16c.). [Ord. No. 2010-26]
§ 22-1.8. Prohibition of the Collection of Solid Waste Mixed with Recyclable
Materials. [Ord. No. 2010-26]
that documentation directly to the municipality.
f. Single/Dual Stream Recycling. The recycling system may utilize separate
containers for each recyclable material or it may provide for two or more materials
to be placed in one container. Establishments may opt to collect their recyclables in
a single stream or dual stream (fiber, commingled) provided the MRF that receives
the material has certified that they have the ability to separate out and maximize the
capture rate of the mandated recyclables.
a. Any application to the Planning Board of the Township of Springfield for
subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of 25 or more units of multifamily
residential housing, single-family developments of 50 or more units, or any
commercial, institutional, or industrial development proposal for the utilization of
1,000 square feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan compliant. This
plan must contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of solid waste
and recyclables generated at the proposed development and;
2. Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide for
convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and occupants. The
recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient location and contain other
attributes (signage, lighting, fencing, etc.) as may be determined by the
designated Municipal Recycling Coordinator(s).
b. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Township of Springfield,
the owner of any new multi-family housing or commercial, institutional, or
industrial development must supply a copy of a duly executed contract with a
hauling company for the purposes of collection and recycling of source-separated
recyclable materials, in those instances where the municipality does not otherwise
provide this service.
c. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and pickup of
solid waste, to be approved by the municipal engineer.
a. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that is mixed
with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable materials. It is also unlawful
for solid waste collectors to remove for disposal those bags or containers of solid
waste which visibly display a warning notice sticker or some other device
indicating that the load of solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly segregate the
uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling. Allowing such unseparated
solid waste and recyclables to accumulate will be considered a violation of this
article and the local sanitary code.
§ 22-1.6 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT § 22-1.8
22:9
§ 22-1.9. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2010-26]
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator(s), local Code Enforcement Officials, the
Department of Health Inspectors, the Property Maintenance Official, the Housing
Officer, the Union County Office of Health Management and the Union County Utilities
Authority are hereby individually and severally empowered to enforce the provisions
of this section. An inspection may consist of, but is not limited to, sorting through
containers and opening of solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of
any recyclable material.
§ 22-1.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-26]
Any person who provides solid waste collection services in the Township of Springfield
is prohibited from collecting solid waste containing recyclable materials as designated in
this section.
Any person or entity that violates or fails to comply with any provision of this section or
any of the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punishable by a fine not less than $100. Each day for which a violation of this section
occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be immediately
deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund (or equivalent).
§ 22-1.11. Severability, Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2010-26]
§ 22-2. YARD WASTE COLLECTION.
§ 22-2.1. Collection System Established. [1991 Code § 176-9; Ord. No. 2005-17
§ II]
There is hereby established a program for collection of yard waste from residential
premises within the Township of Springfield. Yard waste shall include grass clippings,
leaves and other organic material of a similar nature. The proper disposal of yard waste
from residential properties other than through this program and for all nonresidential
properties, shall be the responsibility of the property owner or tenant thereof.
§ 22-2.2. Separation of Yard Waste from Other Waste. [1991 Code § 176-11; Ord.
No. 2005-17 § II]
Yard waste shall be kept from and not mixed with trash and household solid waste.
c. Once placed in the location identified by this section, or any rules or regulations
promulgated pursuant to this section, no person, other than those authorized by the
municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove, or otherwise handle designated
recyclable materials.
a. In the event that it is determined, by a Court of competent jurisdiction, that any
provision or section of this section is unconstitutional, all other sections and
provisions shall remain in effect. This section shall take effect immediately, unless
otherwise provided by resolution of the Governing Body.
§ 22-1.8 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 22-2.3
22:10
§ 22-2.3. Prohibition. [Ord. No. 99-35 § 1[B]; Ord. No. 2005-17 § II]
No person shall place or allow to be placed at a designated collection location, for
purposes of collection pursuant thereto, yard waste obtained or gathered from any
property other than the individual residential premises in which they live or in which
they have an ownership interest. This section shall not restrict an individual property
owner from placing yard waste obtained or gathered on that person's property at the
collection site for an adjoining property with the permission of the adjoining property
owner or occupant.
§ 22-2.4. Collection Regulations. [Ord. No. 2005-17 § II]
§ 22-2.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2005-17 § II]
The Zoning Officer, Recycling Coordinator and Police Department are authorized to
enforce this section.
§ 22-2.6. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 176-12; Ord. No. 93-2; New; Ord.
No. 99-35 § 1[A]; Ord. No. 2005-17 § II]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5; and provided, further, that the
penalty for a first offense under this section, except for subsection 22-2.3, shall not
exceed a fine of $100; and provided further that the penalty for a first offense under
subsection 22-2.3 shall be not less than a fine of $100.
§ 22-3. SOLID WASTE COLLECTION REGULATIONS.46
§ 22-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2003-01 § I; Ord. No. 2007-23 § I(C)]
As used in this section:
BULKY WASTE — Shall mean larger household waste, including but not limited
a. Grass clippings shall not be placed for collection before the first Monday in April
of each year. All such clippings, except as hereafter set forth, shall be placed at the
curb in a suitable container or bag and shall not be placed at the curb loose.
b. Loose yard waste collection shall begin on or about November 1 of each year, and
may include grass clippings. No yard waste may be placed at the curb prior to
November 1, unless in a suitable container or bag.
c. No owner or resident, or person on their behalf, shall place new unbagged yard
waste for collection within the five days immediately following the collection of
unbagged yard waste from any location.
d. No yard waste may be placed for collection after December 31 of each year.
e. Specific schedules and additional regulations may be established by the Department
of Public Works in conjunction with the Township Engineer or a designee.
46. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1991 Code § 200-10 and Ordinance Nos. 2001-25 and
2001-27.
§ 22-2.3 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT § 22-3.1
22:11
to: ashes, broken crockery, old clothing, scraped-off wallpaper, old floor covering,
cardboard or containers made of papers, discarded household utensils, items such as
household furniture, appliances, light brush not over six feet in length and bundled and
tied, not to exceed 75 pounds, but specifically excluding tires, construction materials
and debris, concrete and large rocks, logs of greater than six-inch diameter, recyclables,
computer components and video game consoles, and all hazardous waste. It shall be
considered to include any article or refuse material discarded by a household in the usual
and ordinary course of living, whether same be metal or wood, provided however, that
same must be properly broken up and placed in containers or bundles for convenient
handling by one person.
HOLIDAYS—Shall mean a regularly scheduled collection day on which the authorized
Disposal Facilities are closed, including: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE — Shall mean solid waste type 10, municipal waste, not
including recyclables, hazardous waste, white goods or bulky waste.
RECYCLABLES — Shall mean all items designated in the within section, or otherwise
by the Township, as subject to mandatory separation from solid waste for the purpose of
recycling.
WHITE GOODS — Shall mean refrigerators (without Freon), air conditioners (without
Freon), washers, dryers and dishwashers.
§ 22-3.2. Household Garbage. [Ord. No. 2003-01 § I; Ord. No. 2007-23 § I(D), (E)]
a. Except as otherwise set forth hereafter, or pursuant to a private collection contract,
occupants of all residential units within the Township (except those located in
buildings also containing nonresidential uses) shall place all household garbage in
suitable containers along the curb of a public street bordering their property, for
pick-up on days designated by the Township. Each residence shall be limited to
two, 30 gallon containers per pickup.
b. No person shall place or allow to be placed on or adjacent to their property any
garbage or container earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day preceding the collection day
for such property.
c. All persons placing any container shall be responsible for the removal of the empty
containers by no later than 8:00 p.m. of the collection day for such property.
d. No garbage or receptacles of any kind shall be placed for collection on a holiday.
e. Paragraphs a through d shall also apply to businesses along Mountain Avenue,
South Springfield Avenue, and along Morris Avenue, between the streets of
Springfield Avenue and Caldwell Place, until March 31, 2008, after which time
such pick-up shall no longer be provided. Paragraphs a through d shall also apply
to nonprofit businesses along the entire length of Mountain Avenue and South
Springfield Avenue until December 31, 2008, after which time such pick-up shall
no longer be provided.
f. The regulations herein shall apply to apartments, planned unit developments, and
condominiums, unless such properties are subject to private collection or dumpster
§ 22-3.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 22-3.2
22:12
§ 22-3.3. Bulky Waste and White Goods Collection. [Ord. No. 2003-01 § I]
§ 22-3.4. Limitation on Operating Hours for Private Collection. [Ord. No. 2003-01
§ I]
At any location within 200 feet of any property either partly or fully within a residential,
affordable housing, or PUD zoning district, or used solely for residential purposes,
collection and removal shall not be permitted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
§ 22-3.5. Industrial and Commercial Buildings Excluded. [Ord. No. 2003-01 § I]
Except as previously designated, no businesses, industrial, or commercial buildings or
enterprises shall place any household garbage, bulky waste, white goods, or refuse of
any kind, for curbside pickup.
§ 22-3.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2003-01 § I]
Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalties stated
in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
service has been arranged pursuant to the Township garbage collection contract.
a. Except as otherwise set forth hereafter, or pursuant to a private collection contract,
occupants of all residential units within the Township shall place all bulky waste
and white goods along the curb of a public street bordering their property, for pickup
on days designated by the Township.
b. No person shall place or allow to be placed on or adjacent to their property any
bulky waste or white goods earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day preceding the
collection day for such property, or later than 7:00 a.m. on the collection day. All
such waste shall be clearly separated from household garbage and recyclables.
c. No bulky waste or white goods shall be placed for collection on a holiday.
d. Refrigerators with magnetic sealed doors may be placed at the curb intact.
Refrigerators with pull-clasp release door handles must have the door completely
removed from the unit prior to placement outside the residence.
§ 22-3.2 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT § 22-3.6
22:13

Chapter 23
PERSONNEL POLICIES
Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2014-12, adopted October 14, 2014, repealed Chapter 23
and replaced it in entirety. Prior ordinances that adopted and/or amended the
prior personnel regulations include 1991 Code Chapter 77; 1996 Code §§ 23-1 —
23-6.5; Ordinance Nos. 95-25, 95-26, 98-28, 99-14, 99-25, 2000-04, 2000-21, 2002-24,
2002-28, 2003-07, 2003-08, 2003-15, 2008-8, 2008-18, 2008-25, 2009-26.
§ 23-1. PERSONNEL REGULATIONS.
§ 23-1.1. General Policies. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.1]
§ 23-1.2. Appointments. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.2; amended 5-17-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-08]
§ 23-1.3. Application for Appointment. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.3]
Applicants for Township employment shall apply on forms provided by the Township
Clerk and which have been designed to obtain pertinent information concerning the
applicant's education, training, experience, character and other factors necessary to
determine his/her fitness and qualifications for service to the Township. All applications
shall be filed with the Township Clerk.
§ 23-1.4. Processing Applications. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.4]
Administration shall be charged with processing all applications for appointment to
vacancies or new positions and reporting thereon to the Township Committee. Where it
appears that an applicant is otherwise qualified for Township employment, the Township
may require that the applicant be examined by a physician selected by the Township, at
the Township's expense, indicating that the applicant is physically fit for the position for
a. Employment in the Township shall be based on merit and fitness, free of personal
and political considerations.
b. Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions shall be on a merit basis.
c. Qualified Township personnel shall be given first consideration for vacancies and
promotions.
a. All employees, officers and department heads of the Township shall be appointed
and promoted according to the procedure set out in Ch. 2, Article II, § 2-12.5f of
the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Springfield.
b. Original appointments to fill vacancies or for new positions shall be limited to
qualified persons who have been interviewed or tested concerning such factors as
education, experience, aptitude, knowledge, character and physical and mental
fitness.
c. Within 60 days of employment by the Township, any new employee shall be
subject to both a criminal background check and a fingerprint check.
§ 22-3.6 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-1.4
23:1
which he/she seeks employment.
§ 23-1.5. Grounds for Rejection of Applicant. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.5;
amended 5-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
An applicant for Township employment may be rejected if the applicant:
§ 23-1.6. Probation. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.6]
Every person appointed to a new position shall be deemed to be on probation in the
position to which such person shall have been appointed for a period of not less than
six months nor more than one year, at the discretion of the Township Committee.
Prior to the completion of the probationary period, such employee or officer shall be
evaluated by the Township Department Head with recommendations to the Township
Administrator as to his or her permanent or seasonal or part-time status. The Township
Administrator shall require a written report and recommendation from the immediate
superiors and department heads for this purpose. The Township Committee will make
the final determination in granting or denying the permanent appointment based upon
the written report and recommendations.
§ 23-1.7. Personnel File. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.7]
The Township Clerk shall initiate a personnel file for each new employee of the
Township, and all records of such employees concerning qualifications, permanent
status, work history, accumulated vacation and sick leave, leave time and the like shall
be maintained for such employee in such file. The Township Clerk shall make such files
available for inspection by the employee on a reasonable basis.
a. Is not qualified by training, skill and experience for appointment to the position for
which the person has applied, or another applicant for the same position is
considered to be more qualified;
b. Is not physically, psychologically or emotionally fit to perform the duties of the
position for which the person has applied;
c. Is addicted to the habitual or excessive use of drugs or intoxicants;
d. Has been convicted of any crime or offense involving moral turpitude, including
disorderly person offenses;
e. Has been dismissed from previous employment for delinquency, insubordination or
misconduct;
f. Has practiced or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in the application or
in furnishing other evidence of eligibility for appointment; or
g. Is not within the age limits that have been established for the position for which the
person seeks appointment (e.g., public works employees must possess a
commercial driver's license; accordingly, the applicant should be denied as a public
works employee if he/she has not attained the age to possess a commercial driver's
license).
§ 23-1.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 23-1.8
23:2
§ 23-1.8. Holidays For All Full-Time Non-Seasonal, Non-Department Head, Non-
Temporary Employees. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.8]
§ 23-1.9. Vacation for Non-Department Heads Only. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.9]
a. The following official holidays with pay shall be observed by the Township on the
dates each year designated by the appropriate Federal authority:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Jr. Day
President's Day
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Fourth of July
Labor Day
Columbus Day
General Election Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas Day
** One Floater Holiday in place of Lincoln's Birthday (must be used in current
year)
b. Full-time non-seasonal hourly wage personnel shall be paid for the above holidays
at their current rate per hour times their usual hours of employment.
c. All salaried full-time employees shall not be paid extra for the above holidays since
their annual salary will incorporate all the above holidays.
d. Full-time police officers who have obtained a rank exceeding that rank of a
lieutenant shall not be paid extra for the above listed holidays since their annual
salary will incorporate all of the above holidays.
e. Full-time firefighters who have obtained a rank exceeding that rank of a captain
shall not be paid extra for foregoing holidays since their annual salary will
incorporate all of the above holidays.
f. If a holiday falls on a weekend, then the Township shall follow the protocol of the
State of New Jersey.
g. Part-time employees not covered by a collective negotiations agreement, full-time
seasonal employees and temporary employees are not entitled to holiday pay.
h. Part-time employees covered by a collective negotiations agreement shall be paid
in accordance with the terms of their agreement.
§ 23-1.8 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-1.9
23:3
a. Only full-time, non-seasonal, non-temporary, non-bargaining unit personnel shall
be entitled to paid vacation time in accordance with the following schedule:
1. Full-time, non-seasonal, personnel whose length of continuous service is less
than 12 full months shall be:
Entitled to paid vacation computed at the rate of a half day per month of
vacation for every full month of employment.
2. Full-time, non-seasonal, personnel whose length of continuous service
exceeds 12 full months but less than 120 months shall be entitled to paid
vacation for 12 days annually (computed at the rate of one day of paid vacation
for every full month of employment).
Any and all monies paid to the full-time, non-seasonal employee labeled as
vacation and not earned shall be considered an advance and be reduced from
his/her last paycheck in cases of early separation for any reason.
3. Full-time, non-seasonal, personnel whose length of continuous service
exceeds 120 months but less than 180 months shall be entitled to 15 paid
vacation days annually (computed at the rate of 1.25 days of paid vacation for
every full month of employment).
Any and all monies paid to the full-time, non-seasonal employee labeled as
vacation and not earned shall be considered an advance and be reduced from
his/her paycheck in cases of early separation for any reason.
4. Full-time, non-seasonal, personnel whose length of continuous service
exceeds 180 months but less than 240 months shall be entitled 20 paid vacation
days annually (computed at the rate of 1.6666 days of paid vacation for every
full month of employment).
Any and all monies paid to the full-time, non-seasonal employee labeled as
vacation and not earned shall be considered an advance and be reduced from
his/her paycheck in cases of early separation for any reason.
5. Full-time, non-seasonal, personnel who have completed more than 240 months
of continuous service, shall be entitled to 25 paid vacation days annually
(computed at the rate of 2.0822 days of paid vacation for every month of
employment).
Any and all monies paid to the full-time, non-seasonal employee labeled as
vacation and not earned shall be considered an advance and be reduced from
his/her paycheck in cases of early separation for any reason.
b. Full-time, non-seasonal, non-bargaining unit employees with at least three years of
continuous service may accumulate and carry over up to 10 vacation days to be
taken by March 31 of the following year an additional extension to no later than
December 31 may be granted with written consent of the Administrator.
c. Full-time, non-seasonal, non-bargaining unit employees, at age 60, may accumulate
five days per year, not to exceed a twenty-five-day maximum, to be paid out upon
retirement as long as the employee is in good standing with written consent from
§ 23-1.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 23-1.9
23:4
§ 23-1.10. Sick Leave. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.10]
the Administrator.
d. All part-time employees, not covered by a collective negotiations agreement will
not earn vacation time.
e. Full-time, non-seasonal, non-department heads who are not members of a collective
negotiations agreement and who were employed prior to November 1, 2014 shall
retain vacation benefits the same as those of a department head.
a. Paid Sick Leave.
1. Unless otherwise afforded by a collective bargaining agreement, paid sick
leave shall only be afforded to full-time non-seasonal employees including
Department Heads of the Township (Part-time employees, and full-time
temporary and seasonal employees are not eligible for paid sick leave as
defined by ordinance). Sick leave may be used by full-time non-seasonal, nonbargaining
unit employees who are unable to work because of:
(a) Personal illness or injury; or
(b) Exposure to contagious disease; or
(c) Care for a reasonable period of time, of a seriously ill member of the
employee's immediate family.
2. Employees absent on sick leave for three or more consecutive working days
must submit a licensed physician verification of illness or injury for the
employee and/or immediate family member. After the 12th day of absence of
sick leave in one calendar year, licensed physician verification must be
submitted for all sick leave absences, regardless of duration. Prior to the return
to work, the Township may require an employee to be examined by a
physician designated by the Township to verify fitness for duty. An employee
will not be permitted to return to work until the verification is received. If an
employee's pattern of sick time use suggests an abuse of this benefit, the
Township Administrator reserves the right to require a doctor's note for
absences of any duration or to send the employee for examination by the
Township's physician, in its discretion.
3. All full-time, non-seasonal, non-bargaining unit employees of the Township
will receive a sick leave credit of not less than one working day for each
completed month of service. Any time used but not earned prior to an
employee leaving the employ of the Township shall be reimbursed by the
employee.
The maximum amount of sick time earned in any twelve-month period shall
not exceed 12 days or 84 hours.
4. All accrued sick time not to exceed 240 days, earned but not paid by December
31st may be carried forward to the ensuing year subject to the following:
(a) Written verification by the Administrator, Department Head, Clerk and
§ 23-1.9 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-1.10
23:5
employee. Written verification shall include but not be limited to
transfers, adjustments, and paid amounts.
5. Upon retirement from the Township of Springfield in good standing, all fulltime,
non-seasonal, non-bargaining unit employees shall be paid for his/her
accumulated unused sick time in an amount not to exceed $8,000. Eligible sick
time payout shall be calculated based on the following formula:
(a) Sick time expressed in days multiplied by $100 per day shall be
multiplied by 1/3 the result of which shall be compensation owed to the
employee not to exceed $8,000 or an amount pursuant to State law.
6. All full-time, non-seasonal, non-bargaining unit employees terminated from
employment for cause from the Township shall not be afforded any sick-time
payout. Moreover, full-time, non-seasonal, non-bargaining unit employees
who resign or retire from the Township of Springfield with less than 10 years
of service with the Township shall not be afforded any sick-time payout.
b. Verification for Carryover Time.
1. Not later than January 31st of the ensuing year, the amount of sick time in
hours/days must be verified in writing. The employee shall be provided written
verification by February 15th of the ensuing year. The verification shall
include approval from: (1) Township Administrator; (2) Department Head; (3)
Employee; and (4) Clerk's Office.
c. Donated Sick Leave Program.
1. A permanent, full-time, non-seasonal, non-bargaining unit employee
(excluding all employees within a collective negotiations agreement) is
eligible to receive donated sick leave if the employee:
(a) Has completed at least one year of continuous employment in good
standing with the Township; and
(b) Has exhausted all accrued sick, vacation and personal leave, all sick leave
injury benefits, if any, and all compensatory time off; and
(c) Has not, in the two-year period immediately preceding the employee's
need for donated sick leave, been disciplined for chronic or excessive
absenteeism, chronic or excessive lateness or abuse of leave; and
(d) Either (i) suffers from a catastrophic health condition or injury; or (ii) is
needed to provide care to a member of the employee's immediate family
who is suffering from a catastrophic health condition or injury; or (iii)
requires absence from work due to the donation of an organ (which shall
include, for example, the donation of bone marrow).
2. As used herein, a "catastrophic health condition or injury" means:
(a) With respect to an employee, (i) a life-threatening condition or
combination of such conditions; or (ii) a period of disability required by
his or her mental or physical health and necessitating the care of a
§ 23-1.10 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 23-1.10
23:6
physician who provides a medical verification of the need for the
employee's absence from work for 45 or more calendar days.
(b) With respect to an employee's immediate family member, (i) a lifethreatening
condition or combination of such conditions; or (ii) a period
of disability required by his or her mental or physical health and
necessitating the care of a physician who provides a medical verification
of the need for the family member's care by the employee for 45 or more
calendar days.
3. An employee must receive the final consent and approval of his or her
participation in the program as a leave recipient or leave donor from the
Township Administrator.
(a) The employee requesting acceptance as a sick leave recipient shall submit
to the Township Administrator medical verification from a physician or
other licensed health care provider concerning the nature and anticipated
duration of the disability resulting from either the catastrophic health
condition or injury, or the donation of an organ, as the case may be.
(b) When the Township Administrator has approved an employee as a leave
recipient, the Township, with the employee's consent, will post the
employee's name along with those of other eligible employees on bulletin
boards within the workplace to encourage the donation of leave time, and
will provide a copy of the employee's list to the Township's employees. If
the employee is unable to consent to this posting, the employee's family
may consent on his or her behalf.
4. A leave recipient must receive at least five sick, vacation or personal days or a
combination thereof from one or more leave donors to participate in the
donated leave program. A leave recipient shall receive no more than 180 days
during the entire length of employment with the Township, and shall not
receive any such days on a retroactive basis.
5. A leave donor shall donate only whole sick days, whole vacation days or
whole personal days and may not donate more than 10 such days to any one
recipient per calendar year. A leave donor must have remaining, after the
donation, at least 20 days of accrued sick leave if donating sick leave and at
least 10 days of accrued vacation leave if donating vacation leave. A leave
donor may not revoke the leave donation. Employees desiring to donate leave
shall complete a donated leave form satisfactory to the Township. (All union
employees are excluded from donating sick leave.)
(a) If any employee donates time of any sort to another employee, the
following rules shall govern:
(1) The hours donated must be documented and verified by the Clerk's
office and approved by the Township Administrator.
(2) The hours donated will be subtracted from the donor's employee
card and added to the donee's employee card.
§ 23-1.10 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-1.10
23:7
6. Any unused, donated leave shall be returned to the leave donors on a prorated
basis upon the leave recipient's return to work, except that if the proration of
leave days results in less than one day per donor to be returned, that leave time
shall not be returned. No donated leave shall be converted upon retirement into
additional compensation.
7. Employees are prohibited from threatening or coercing or attempting to
threaten or coerce another employee for the purpose of interfering with rights
involving donating, receiving or using donated leave time. Such prohibited
acts shall include, but not be limited to, promising to confer or conferring a
benefit such as an appointment or promotion or making a threat to engage in,
or engaging in, an act of retaliation against an employee.
8. The Township reserves the right to suspend or terminate the donated leave
program at any time upon 30 days' written notice of such suspension or
termination to affected employees.
9. Donated leave used by a recipient will count against any leave entitlement to
which the recipient is eligible under the Federal Family and Medical Leave
Act and, when taken to care for a member of the employee's immediate family,
that Act and the New Jersey Family Medical Leave Law.
d. All sworn police, firefighters and any other union employee are not eligible for sick
leave and/or the donated sick leave program except those employees not covered
by a collective negotiations agreement.
e. Periods of Leave without Pay.
1. Employees shall not accrue sick, vacation, or personal leave during any period
of leave without pay excluding any period of time designated as FMLA/
NJFLA. Moreover, employees shall not be paid for holidays during any
periods of unpaid leave.
f. Prolonged Illness/Injury Benefit.
Only full-time, non-seasonal employees who are in good standing and have been
employed for at least 366 consecutive calendar days shall be entitled to this
Prolonged Illness/Injury Benefit ("PIIB"). This PIIB benefit may not pertain to
workers' compensation injuries or any injury sustained while working. The
Township shall provide a PIIB benefit to any full-time, non-seasonal employee, in
good standing who was injured or has sustained an illness for a period greater than
three consecutive days. Employees on PIIB may shall not be employed by any other
employer or self-employed other than the Township of Springfield while on PIIB.
1. The illness or injury must be documented by a licensed physician. Only upon
written confirmation of the illness/injury and after the three consecutive days
of illness/injury, the employee's compensation shall be computed at a rate not
to exceed 40% of pensionable base salary during the period of illness.
2. The Township shall purchase insurance, with short term disability or salary
continuation insurance at a rate not to exceed 60% of pensionable base for a
period from the 31st day of documented illness/injury to the 365th day of
§ 23-1.10 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 23-1.10
23:8
§ 23-1.11. (Reserved)
§ 23-1.12. Salaries and Compensation. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.12]
documented illness/injury to which the employee shall be entitled from the
insurance carrier. The salary continuation plan is contingent upon the final
approval of the insurance carrier and may not be appealed nor grieved.
3. In no event shall the Township be liable to continue paying the employee
compensation at 40% of pensionable base for a period greater than 365
calendar days. The PIIB benefit shall never exceed 365 calendar days for the
entire length of employment.
4. Employees are required to use all types of accumulated leave from the date of
injury/illness to the 31st day when insurance coverage will commence. During
the period of prolonged illness/injury, the employee shall not earn or accrue
any sick, personal or vacation days excluding any time counted as FMLA/
NJFLA.
a. Salaries and compensation for all employees shall be paid biweekly. All attorneys
who work for the Township of Springfield shall not be considered employees unless
they meet the mandates of the State Comptroller's Office.
b. Employees covered by a collective negotiations agreement shall be paid in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the respective agreement to which the
employee is a member. The overtime rate unless specified in the agreement shall be
paid at a rate of 1 1/2 times the employee's base rate and using a base of 2,080
annual hours if not specified.
c. Employees not covered by a collective negotiations agreement shall be paid at a
rate set by ordinance or resolution. Overtime shall be computed based upon the
excess of hours worked in one calendar week over a forty-hour calendar week.
Except as required by law, Management and Department Heads shall not be paid
overtime except the Foreman and Administrative Assistant in the Department of
Public Works shall be entitled to overtime computed at 1.5 times their hourly base
rate using a base of 2,080 annual hours.
d. Longevity shall only be earned by full-time non-seasonal employees who were
hired prior to January 1, 2004. Longevity shall be computed as follows: A
percentage of base pay (pensionable base exclusive of stipends and college
stipends) based upon the date of hire and continued retention.
1. Full-time non-seasonal employees hired before January 1, 1999 shall be paid
longevity rates based upon the following:
Years of Service Percentage of Longevity
5 2%
9 4%
13 6%
17 8%
§ 23-1.10 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-1.12
23:9
Years of Service Percentage of Longevity
19 10%
21 12%
2. Full-time non-seasonal employees hired after January 1, 1999 but before
January 1, 2004 shall be paid longevity rates based upon the following:
Years of Service Percentage of Longevity
5 2%
10 4%
15 6%
20 8%
3. All employees hired before January 1, 1977 shall be paid longevity at the rate
of 15%.
Unless the date of hire was post July 1st, all longevity rates shall be computed
as of January 1st of the year in which the employee completed the above years
of service. For all dates of hire which were after June 30th, the longevity rates
shall be computed as of January 1st of the subsequent year.
e. Sworn police officers are permitted to earn additional compensation defined as
outside overtime or outside employment. The payment to the police officer is
contingent upon the receipt of funds from a vendor. The police officer should not
be engaged to perform the duties until receipt of funds from the vendor has been
acknowledged by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police is permitted three
exceptions to the above rule: (1) emergency situations, (2) services performed for
the Motor Vehicle Commission and (3) certain grant applications. The rates for the
vendors are set by mutual agreement between the Township and the Union.
f. Stipend. Unless defined elsewhere in a collective negotiations agreement, the term
stipend shall be defined as a fixed sum of money awarded by resolution and/or
contract to an employee. A stipend shall not be considered part of pensionable base
for an employee except for the following:
1. College Stipends for Police and Firefighters; and
2. EMT Fire Stipend; and
3. First Responder Stipend; and
4. Fire Inspector Stipend; and
5. Any additional stipends considered pensionable as determined by the New
Jersey Division of Pensions and Benefits.
A stipend shall not be increased by cost of living increases awarded to
employees unless specifically stated in the resolution and/or collective
negotiations agreement.
§ 23-1.12 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 23-1.12
23:10
§ 23-1.13. through § 23-1.14 (Reserved)
§ 23-1.15. Employee Benefits for Department Heads. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.15]
g. Rates of Pay.
1. Certain non-bargaining unit employees might be compensated based upon the
terms of a grant. Under no circumstances shall a non-bargaining unit employee
be compensated at a rate which exceeds the pay rate defined in the grant.
2. Non-bargaining unit employees shall be paid overtime rates based upon 1.5
times their base rate using a base of 2,080 annual hours.
a. Department Heads are defined as described in Township of Springfield Ordinance
No. 2012-34. (See Subsection 2-11.2)
Fringe benefits for all full-time Department Heads ("DH") not covered by
bargaining units shall be as follows:
1. Sick leave - See Subsection 23-1.10.
2. Five personal days required to be used by December 31st of current year.
Personal time, sick time and vacation time do not accrue or are not earned
during periods of unpaid/non-FMLA prolonged illnesses or injury. Prolonged
illnesses or injury is defined as any unpaid/non-FMLA absence from work
in excess of 29 calendar days confirmed by written documentation from a
licensed physician. Prolonged illness is considered a break in service.
3. Coverage of all medical benefits in accordance with the Federal and State
Laws.
(a) For all full-time Department Heads the Township shall pay the premium
for certain health care coverages: a vision plan, a dental plan and major
medical (including prescription) plan. These plans shall be approved and
authorized by the Township Committee via resolutions at the
reorganization meeting each year.
(1) The full-time Department Heads may elect coverages based upon
their legal status such as single, couple (spouse and/or civil union
partner), parent and child, or family. The Department Heads are
required to contribute to the cost of these various medical coverages
based upon formulas determined by State law or Federal law or
resolutions authorized by the Township Committee.
The Township always reserves the right to change insurance carriers
and types of insurance coverage.
4. Vacation based upon years of service as follows:
(a) Department Heads whose length of service is less than 48 months of
continuous service but greater than one year, shall earn 1.33 days of paid
vacation for every full month of employment.
§ 23-1.12 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-1.15
23:11
(b) Department Heads whose length of service is less than 168 months of
continuous service but greater than 60 months shall earn 2.083 days of
paid vacation for every full month of employment.
(c) Department Heads whose length of service exceeds 168 months of
continuous service shall earn 2.666 days of paid vacation for every full
month of employment.
(d) Full-time, non-seasonal, non-bargaining unit employees, at age 60, may
accumulate five days per year, not to exceed a twenty-five-day maximum,
to be paid out upon retirement as long as the employee is in good standing
with written consent from the Administrator.
In determining length of continuous service, all months of employment
with Springfield shall be considered, regardless of the status of
Department Head or Non-Department Head.
Personal time, sick time and vacation time do not accrue or are not
earned during periods of unpaid/non-FMLA prolonged illnesses or injury.
Prolonged illnesses or injury is defined as any absence from work in
excess of 29 calendar days confirmed by written documentation from a
licensed physician. Prolonged illness is considered a break in service.
Personnel who were hired prior to January 1, 2010 and were classified as
Department Heads by the Township Committee shall retain all benefits
described in this section.
Department Heads are entitled to bank vacation days based upon the
terms and conditions listed in non-Department Heads section.
Department Heads are entitled to carry over 10 vacation days to be taken
by March 31 of the following year, an additional extension to no later
than December 31 may be granted with written consent of Administrator.
5. The following paid holidays:
(a) New Year's Day.
(b) Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday.
(c) President's Day.
(d) Good Friday.
(e) Memorial Day.
(f) Fourth of July.
(g) Labor Day.
(h) Columbus Day.
(i) Veterans Day.
(j) November Election Day (only).
§ 23-1.15 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 23-1.15
23:12
(k) Thanksgiving Day and day after.
(l) Christmas Day.
(m) Floating Holiday.
No additional compensation shall be paid to Department Heads caused by
the holidays listed above because Department Heads' annual base pay
incorporates the paid time off.
6. All full-time Department Heads who have completed at least 25 years of
continuous service with the Township of Springfield shall be entitled to
terminal leave. Terminal leave shall be calculated as follows: Four biweekly
payments of their most recent compensation including longevity. Excluding
all collective bargaining units. (Exclusive of Military Service)
7. Longevity Increments.
(a) All full-time, non-seasonal Department Heads hired prior to January 1,
1999, shall be entitled to longevity based on the following schedule:
Years of Service Percentage
5 2%
9 4%
13 6%
17 8%
19 10%
21 12%
Any full-time, non-seasonal employee covered by this section who as
of December 31, 1998 had longevity greater than 12% shall retain that
longevity increment during continued employment.
(b) All full-time, non-seasonal Department Heads covered by this section
first hired by the Township on or after January 1, 1999 shall be paid in
addition to the rates of pay set forth, a longevity increment based upon
years of service within the Township in accordance with the following
schedule:
Years of Service Percentage
5 2%
10 4%
15 6%
20 8%
(c) All periods of employment shall be computed from January 1 of the year
of taking office, appointment or employment, unless the date of hire was
subsequent to June 30, in which case the calculation shall be computed
§ 23-1.15 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-1.15
23:13
from January 1 of the year following. In the event of retirement or death,
the employee or his/her estate shall receive his/her earned longevity pay.
(d) All employees hired after December 31, 2003 shall not be entitled to
longevity payments.
8. For All Full-Time Non-Seasonal Department Heads.
Upon retirement of an employee who is single and in good standing and
who has successfully completed 25 years of continuous service without a
break in service, with the Township of Springfield, the Department Head
shall be afforded medical coverage for his and/or her life from the Township.
The Township shall pay the cost of the premiums based upon single status
only for medical coverage limited to: major medical (including prescription),
vision care and dental coverage. The medical coverage shall consist of: vision
care, dental care and major medical (including prescription) care. Any and
all plans are subject to limitations such as deductibles, co-pays, reasonable
and customary charges for a specific region. The Township of Springfield's
liability to any retiree shall never exceed the premiums paid to the carrier
for providing the coverage. The Township of Springfield reserves the right to
change insurance carriers and types of insurance coverage at any time for the
retirees.
If the retiree, who has successfully completed 25 years of continuous service
with the Township of Springfield, is married and/or civil unioned at time of
retirement, the Township of Springfield shall pay the premium for his or her
spouse/civil union partner for the same levels of coverage mentioned above.
The Township of Springfield reserves the right to change insurance carriers
and types of insurance coverage at any time for the retirees and their respective
spouses and/or civil union partners. If the retiree marries or enters into a civil
union after retirement, the Township does not afford the retiree any additional
medical coverage other than single coverage. The Township of Springfield's
liability to any retiree's spouse shall never exceed the premium paid to the
carrier for providing the coverage.
If the retiree, who has successfully completed 25 years of continuous service
with the Township of Springfield, has children, adopted and/or natural, at the
time of retirement, and if the children are deemed to be eligible dependents
of retiree, as defined by the retiree's insurance carrier, then the Township of
Springfield will pay the premiums for the retiree's children at the same levels
of coverage's mentioned above. The Township of Springfield reserves the
right to change insurance carriers and types of insurance coverage at any time
for the retirees and their eligible dependents. The Township of Springfield's
liability to any retiree's eligible dependents shall never exceed the premium
paid to the carrier for providing the coverage.
Certain insurance carriers will require that their participants join Medicare
or its equivalent at certain times during the participant's coverage. Any and
all current or future stipulations or limitations required by the then insurance
carrier providing coverage to the retiree and/or spouse and/or children must be
adhered to. If lack of compliance with the limitations or stipulations causes a
§ 23-1.15 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 23-1.15
23:14
§ 23-1.16. Retirement Benefits. [Added 5-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-08]
§ 23-1.17. Restrictions on Financial Interests. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.17]
Employees including Township officials must conduct business according to the highest
ethical standards of public service. Employees are expected to devote their best efforts
to the interests of the Township. The Township recognizes the right of employees to
engage in outside activities that are private nature and unrelated to Township business.
decrease in coverage, then the Township of Springfield shall be held harmless.
The Township of Springfield will reimburse the retiree for his/her share of
Medicare premiums which is required by Medicare or its equivalent.
The retiree shall be afforded the same level of medical coverage as the active
employees.
9. Certificate of Retirement. All full-time, non-seasonal Department Heads who
have successfully completed 25 years of continuous service with the Township
of Springfield shall be supplied by the Township a Certificate of Retirement
not later than their last day of employment. A sample Certificate of Retirement
shall be as follows:
Whereas, (Employee Name) has successfully completed () years of continual
service with the Township of Springfield or () years of continual service with
the Township of Springfield Police Department and now desires to retire.
Whereas, (Employee Name), has requested that the Township of Springfield
provide medical coverage for (Employee Name), and (Employee Spouse
Name), and (Employee Dependent Name).
Now be it resolved that the Township of Springfield awards a certificate of
medical coverage to: (Employee Name), and (Employee Spouse Name), and
(Employee Dependent Name).
This certificate and all of its limitations are included in the "Certificate of
Medical Coverage".
10. The benefits of the prolong illness or injury rule as defined in Subsection
23-1.10f are incorporated in this Subsection [Benefits for Department Heads]
by reference.
a. Special circumstances regarding all full-time nonseasonal employees not covered
by a collective bargaining agreement.
b. Any full-time nonseasonal employee not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement, having successfully completed at least 22 years of continuous service,
without a break in service, with the Township of Springfield and reaching 65 years
of age may make application to the Township Committee to be awarded lifetime
medical benefits as if he/she had completed 25 years of continuous service without
a break in service. A determination of award shall be made by the Township
Committee on a case-by-case basis in its sole discretion based on exceptional
service to the Township.
§ 23-1.15 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-1.17
23:15
However, business dealings that appear to create a conflict between the employee and
the Township's interests are unlawful under the New Jersey Local Government Ethics
Act. Under the Act, certain employees and officials are required to annually file with
the Township Clerk a state mandated disclosure form. The Township Clerk will notify
employees and Township officials subject to the filing requirements of the Act.
A potential or actual conflict of interest occurs whenever an employee including a
Township official is in a position to influence a Township decision that may result
in a personal gain for the employee or an immediate relative including a spouse or
significant other, child, parent, stepchild, sibling, grandparents, daughter-in-law, sonin-
law, grandchildren, niece, nephew, uncle, aunt, or any person related by blood or
marriage residing in an employee's household. Employees are required to disclose
possible conflicts so that the Township may assess and prevent potential conflicts.
If there are any questions whether an action or proposed course of conduct would
create a conflict of interest, immediately contact the Township Administrator to obtain
clarification.
Employees are allowed to hold outside employment as long as it does not interfere
with their Township responsibilities. Employees are prohibited from engaging in outside
employment activities while on the job or using Township time, supplies or equipment in
the outside employment activities. The Township Administrator may request employees
to restrict outside employment if the quality of Township work diminishes. Any
employee who holds an interest in, or is employed by, any business doing business with
the Township must submit a written notice of these outside interests to the Township
Administrator.
Employees may not accept donations, gratuities, contributions or gifts that could be
interpreted to affect their Township duties. Under no circumstances accept donations,
gratuities, contributions or gifts from a vendor doing business with or seeking to do
business with the Township or any person or firm seeking to influence Township
decisions. Meals and other entertainment valued in excess of $5 are also prohibited.
Employees are required to report to the Township Administrator any offer of a donation,
gratuity, contribution or gift including meals and entertainment that is in violation of this
policy.
§ 23-1.18. Restriction on Employee Work Outside the Township. [Ord. No.
2014-12 § 23-1.18]
No employee shall be assigned, transferred or otherwise directed, to work outside the
direct, day to day supervision and authority of the Township of Springfield, unless
authorized to do so by the Township Committee upon the prior request of the employee's
department head, which request shall include all pertinent information concerning same.
In no event shall the term of employment which causes the employee to be relocated
outside the borders of the Township of Springfield exceed 366 days without the
expressed written consent of the Township Committee. The Township of Springfield
and the entity which has agreed to utilize the employee must have a written agreement
defining all terms and conditions of employment including but not limited to overtime,
regular pay, regular hours, progress reports, workers compensation, liability insurance,
risk facts, etc.
§ 23-1.17 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 23-1.19
23:16
§ 23-1.19. Compensatory Time. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.19]
Compensatory time can only be earned by full-time non-seasonal employees and any
employee whose collective negotiations agreement provides for compensatory time.
Pursuant to the Fair Labor Standards Act, under certain prescribed conditions,
employees who are afforded compensatory time in lieu of overtime pursuant to a
collective negotiations agreement or written Township policy may receive compensatory
time off, at a rate not to exceed 1 1/2 hours for each overtime hour worked, instead of
cash overtime pay. Law enforcement, fire protection, and emergency response personnel
and employees engaged in seasonal activities may accrue up to 480 hours of
compensatory time; all other local government employees may accrue up to 240 hours.
However, the Township reserves its right to pay out employees for their unused
compensatory time at any time. An employee must be permitted to use compensatory
time on the date requested unless doing so would "unduly disrupt" the operations of
the Department or Township. Compensatory time shall be defined as time earned by
an employee for additional time in excess of the employee's work day incurred by the
employee and not compensated within the same pay period.
§ 23-1.20. Employee Classification. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.20]
a. Non-Bargaining Unit Employees.
The Court Administrator and/or Administrator and/or Municipal Clerk may permit
and award compensatory time to an employee for his/her working additional hours
in one pay period but paid in a subsequent pay period. This compensatory time shall
never exceed 240 hours in any calendar year. By way of example only, the clerk
may award compensatory time to an employee for his or her working additional
time for elections. All compensatory time shall not cause an employee to be paid at
overtime rates but to be compensated as paid time off.
All compensatory time must be documented and approved by the Administrator and
communicated to the Chief Financial Officer by the Department Head as soon as it
is earned.
Compensatory time shall be paid upon retirement as the rate which the employee
is currently earning. The hourly rate is computed as follows: pensionable base
divided by 2,080 hours. All compensatory hours must be calculated, approved and
in writing by December 31st annually by the Administrator and Department Head.
All overtime must be approved in advance.
a. Full-time, non-seasonal employee shall be considered to be: any employee who
works at least 35 hours per week for a continuous period of 52 weeks within a
calendar year, exclusive of vacation, sick, or personal time.
b. Full-time, seasonal employee shall be considered to be: any employee who works
at least 35 hours per week for a period of time less than 52 weeks within a calendar
year.
c. Part-Time: The definitions of part-time employees are:
1. Tier 1: An employee who works an average of more than 10 hours but less
§ 23-1.19 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-1.20
23:17
§ 23-1.21. Retiree Medical Coverage. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.21]
Retiree Medical Coverage shall be defined as follows:
than 25 hours per week and 52 weeks per year and the position is covered
by a collective negotiations agreement, examples include but not limited to:
Accounts Payable; Assistant to Registrar (Clerks Office); Assistant to Fire
Chief; Assistant to Fire Prevention; Assistant to Tax Assessor.
2. Tier 2: An employee who works an average or more than 10 hours but less
than 25 hours per week but not 52 weeks per year and whose position is not
covered by a collective negotiations agreement, examples include but not
limited to: Crossing Guards.
3. Tier 3: An employee who works an average of less than 20 hours per week and
52 weeks per year and not covered by a collective negotiations agreement,
examples include but not limit to: Public Works; Building Grounds or Sewer.
4. Tier 4: An employee who works an average of less than twenty (20) hours per
week and for 52 weeks per year and not covered by a collective negotiations
agreement, examples include but not limited to: Jitney Driver; Senior Citizens
Bus Driver.
5. Tier 5: An employee who works an average of less than 40 hours per week but
greater than 35 hours per week and an average period of 12 weeks to 16 weeks
per calendar year and not covered by a collective negotiations agreement,
examples include but not limited to: Pool Laborers; Pool Lifeguard; Personnel
in Day Camp or Recreation.
6. Tier 6: An employee who works an average of less than 10 hours per week less
than 52 weeks per year and not covered by a collective negotiations agreement,
examples include but not limited to: Plumbing Inspectors; Sub Code Officials;
Personnel in Recreation (Teen Center).
a. For all full-time, non-seasonal employees excluding members of a collective
bargaining unit:
Upon retirement of a full-time, non-seasonal employee in good standing and who
has successfully completed 25 years of continuous service with the Township
of Springfield, the employee shall be afforded medical coverage for his and/or
her life by the Township paying the cost of the premiums for medical coverage
limited to: major medical (including prescription), vision care and dental coverage.
The medical coverage shall consist of: vision care, dental care and major medical
care (including prescription). Any and all plans are subject to limitations such as
deductibles, co-pays, reasonable and customary charges for a specific region. The
Township of Springfield's liability to any retiree shall never exceed the premium
paid to the carrier for providing the coverage. The Township of Springfield reserves
the right to change insurance carriers and types of insurance coverage at any time
for the retirees.
If the retiree is married and/or civil unioned at time of retirement, the Township
of Springfield shall pay the premium for his or her spouse/civil union partner
§ 23-1.20 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 23-1.21
23:18
§ 23-1.22. Jury Duty. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-1.22]
An employee required to render jury service shall be entitled to be absent from work
during that service and will be paid the difference between any payment received for
jury duty and the employee's regular salary.
§ 23-1.23. Township Personnel Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2014-12
§ 23-1.23]
All employees shall be governed by the Personnel Ordinances unless the employee is
for the same levels of coverage mentioned above. The Township of Springfield
reserves the right to change insurance carriers and types of insurance coverage at
any time for the retirees and their respective spouses and/or civil union partners. If
the retiree marries or enters into a civil union after retirement, the Township does
not afford the retiree any additional medical coverage other than single coverage.
The Township of Springfield's liability to any retiree's spouse shall never exceed
the premium paid to the carrier for providing the coverage.
If the retiree has children, adopted and/or natural, at the time of retirement, and
if the children are deemed to be eligible dependents of retiree, as defined by the
retiree's insurance carrier, then the Township of Springfield will pay the premiums
for the retiree's children at the same levels of coverage mentioned above. The
Township of Springfield reserves the right to change insurance carriers and types
of insurance coverage at any time for the retirees and their eligible dependents.
The Township of Springfield's liability to any retiree's eligible dependents shall
never exceed the premium paid to the carrier for providing the coverage. In no
event, will coverage be afforded to eligible dependents beyond the age of 26. Any
individual who is dependent of an employee and has been determined by Federal
government or State or insurance carrier to be a person with special needs shall
remain a dependent of the employee, regardless of age.
Certain insurance carriers will require that their participants join Medicare or its
equivalent at certain times during the participant's coverage. Any and all current or
future stipulations or limitations required by the then Insurance Carrier providing
coverage to the retiree and/or spouse and/or children must be adhered to. If lack of
compliance with the limitations or stipulations causes a decrease in coverage, then
the Township of Springfield shall be held harmless.
The Township of Springfield will reimburse the retiree for his/her share of
Medicare premiums which is required by Medicare or its equivalent.
1. For all full-time, non-seasonal employees who are members of a collective
bargaining unit:
Upon retirement of a full-time, non-seasonal employee who is a member
of a collective negotiations agreement, and who has successfully completed
the required years of service with the Township pursuant to their collective
negotiations agreement, the employee shall be afforded health benefit
coverage in accordance with the terms and conditions as listed in the
respective collective negotiations agreement.
§ 23-1.21 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-1.23
23:19
a member of a collective negotiations unit. The terms of the collective negotiations
agreement shall take precedent over the terms of the personnel ordinances in matters of
conflict.
§ 23-2. RETIREMENT BENEFITS.
§ 23-2.1. (Reserved)
§ 23-2.2. Termination Benefit for Non-members of Bargaining Units. [Ord. No.
2014-12 § 23-2.2]
All continuous full-time, non-seasonal employees of the Township of Springfield who
are not members of bargaining units organized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 34:13A-1 et seq.
after 25 years or more of full-time service to the Township of Springfield, shall be
entitled, upon regular retirement in good standing, to a termination benefit of four
biweekly pays of their most recent compensation including longevity upon retirement.
§ 23-2.3. Retroactive Pay Increases. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-2.3]
Unless mandated by a collective negotiations agreement or pursuant to an individual
employment contract, no employee shall be entitled to any pay increase which is enacted
subsequent to their last day of actual employment, regardless of effective date.
§ 23-3. MANDATORY TESTING OF EMPLOYEES REQUIRED TO HAVE A
COMMERCIAL LICENSE.
§ 23-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-3.1]
Pursuant to administrative rules enacted by the Federal Highway Administration,
effective January 1, 1996, all employers having 49 or less drivers who are required to
have a commercial driver's license (CDL), including local governments, must implement
mandatory alcohol and controlled substance testing for such driver. The purpose of this
section is to comply with that requirement.
§ 23-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-3.2]
Unless otherwise set forth in this section, the definitions set forth in the Federal Highway
Administration regulations (49 CFR Park 382, § 382.107) shall apply herein.
§ 23-3.3. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-3.3]
The provisions of this section shall apply to all current employees, as well as all persons
hereafter applying for or hired for employment by the Township, whose job requires the
holding of a commercial driver's license (hereinafter "Driver").
§ 23-3.4. Prohibitions. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-3.4]
No CDL driver shall:
a. Report for duty or remain on duty requiring the performance of safety-sensitive
functions while having an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater; or
§ 23-1.23 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 23-3.4
23:20
§ 23-3.5. Test Required. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-3.5]
b. Be on duty or operate any Township motor vehicle while the driver possesses
alcohol, unless the alcohol is manifested and transported as part of a shipment; or
c. Use alcohol while performing safety-sensitive functions; or
d. Perform safety-sensitive functions within four hours after using alcohol; or
e. Use alcohol for eight hours following any accident requiring a post-accident alcohol
test, or until the driver undergoes a post-accident alcohol test, whichever occurs
first; or
f. Refuse to submit to any required test; or
g. Report for duty or remain on duty requiring the performance of safety-sensitive
functions when the driver uses any controlled substance, except when the use is
pursuant to the instructions of a physician who has advised the driver that the
substance does not adversely affect the driver's ability to safely operate a
commercial motor vehicle; or
h. Refuse to inform the driver's supervisor of any therapeutic drug use, if requested to
do so; or
i. Report for duty, remain on duty or perform a safety-sensitive function, if the driver
tests positive for controlled substances.
a. Prior to the first time a newly-employed driver performs safety-sensitive functions,
the driver shall undergo testing for controlled substances, unless otherwise
excepted.
b. As soon as practicable following an accident involving a commercial motor vehicle,
as a result of which there is either the loss of human life, or the driver receives a
summons for a moving traffic violation, the driver shall undergo testing for alcohol
and controlled substances.
c. All drivers shall be subject to yearly random testing, which actual testing to be of
25% of all drivers for alcohol and 50% of all drivers for controlled substances or as
established by Federal regulation.
d. Any driver concerning whom the driver's supervisor has a reasonable suspicion to
believe that the driver violated any of the prohibitions set forth in Subsection
23-3.4a, c, d or e, shall undergo an alcohol test.
e. Any driver concerning whom the driver's supervisor has a reasonable suspicion to
believe that the driver has violated any of the prohibitions set forth in Subsection
23-3.4g or i, shall undergo a controlled substance test.
f. Any driver relieved of duty under the procedures set forth hereunder, shall undergo
an appropriate alcohol or controlled substance test prior to returning to duty.
g. Any driver determined to be in need of assistance in resolving problems associated
with the use of alcohol or a controlled substance shall be subject to unannounced
follow-up testing as directed by a substance abuse professional.
§ 23-3.4 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-3.6
23:21
§ 23-3.6. Retention of Records. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-3.6]
The Township Administrator, or designee, shall be responsible for compliance with
the provisions concerning retention of records concerning the programs and testing
hereunder. All such records shall be maintained in a single, secure location with
controlled access. The Township Administrator, or designee, shall be responsible for
collection and submission of all results required to be reported.
§ 23-3.7. Other Alcohol Related Conduct. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-3.7]
No driver tested hereunder who is found to have an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or
greater but less than 0.04 shall perform or continue to perform safety-sensitive functions
until the start of the driver's next regularly scheduled duty period, but not less than 24
hours following administration of the test.
§ 23-3.8. Establishment and Promulgation of Policy. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-3.8]
§ 23-3.9. Training for Supervisors. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-3.9]
All persons designated to determine whether reasonable suspicion exists to require a
driver to undergo testing shall be required to take at least 60 minutes of training on
alcohol misuse and take at least an additional 60 minutes of training on controlled
substance use, as designated by the Township Administrator.
§ 23-3.10. Referral, Evaluation and Treatment. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-3.10]
Any driver who has engaged in conduct prohibited by this section shall be advised of the
resources available to the driver in evaluating and resolving problems associated with
the misuse of alcohol and use of controlled substances, shall be required to be evaluated
by a substance abuse professional who shall determine what assistance, if any, the driver
needs to resolve such problems, and shall fulfill any rehabilitation program determined
thereby.
§ 23-4. ANTI-NEPOTISM.
a. There shall be established by the Township Committee, as approved by resolution,
a formal policy for the Township of Springfield, to effectuate the terms of this
section and the administrative rules enacted by the Federal Highway
Administration.
b. Copies of the formal policy shall be distributed to each currently employed driver
prior to the start of any testing as well as to each driver subsequently hired or
transferred into a position subject to testing.
c. The formal policy and notification shall include at minimum the information set
forth in the Federal Highway Administration regulations (49 CFR Part 382,
§ 382.601(b)).
d. Each driver shall sign a statement certifying to the receipt of a copy of the formal
policy, which original shall be retained by the Township with a copy provided to
the driver.
§ 23-3.6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 23-4.1
23:22
§ 23-4.1. Definition. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-4.1]
As used in this section:
ELECTED OFFICIAL — Shall mean all current members of the Governing Body.
RELATIVE — Shall mean spouse, child, parent, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, aunt,
uncle, niece and nephew, as well as all in-laws of the same degree of kinship.
SUPERVISOR — Shall mean any employee having either direct or indirect supervisory
duties as concerns another position, including the authority to supervise, appoint,
remove, discipline or evaluate the performance of the other.
§ 23-4.2. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-4.2]
This section shall apply only to employee positions and shall not apply to appointments
to various boards, commissions, committees and authorities within the Township.
§ 23-4.3. Application, Hiring, Promotion and Transfer Policy. [Ord. No. 2014-12
§ 23-4.3]
§ 23-4.4. (Reserved)
§ 23-4.5. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-4.5]
This policy is solely intended to eliminate the potential for preferential treatment of the
relatives of governmental personnel.
§ 23-5. (RESERVED)
§ 23-6. NEW JERSEY DEFINED CONTRIBUTIONS RETIREMENT
PROGRAM.
§ 23-6.1. Preamble. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-6.1]
Whereas the State of New Jersey adopted Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A.
43:15C-I et seq.) creating the Defined Contribution Retirement Program, to provide
a. No person shall be eligible for employment or be hired, promoted or transferred to
an employment position with the Township when such action would result in one
relative being in a supervisory capacity as concerns another relative. This
prohibition shall not apply in the case of seasonal part-time employment whose
length of employment is less than 90 days.
b. No person who is a relative of an elected official of the Township or of the
Township Administrator shall be hired for employment with the Township. This
provision shall not apply to any person who is employed by the Township prior to
the elected official being sworn into office. This prohibition shall not apply in the
case of seasonal part-time employment whose length of employment is less than 90
days.
c. No elected official or supervisor shall participate in any way in the hiring or
promotion process as concerns any relative of such person.
§ 23-4.1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-6.1
23:23
retirement benefits to various County and municipal officers; and
Whereas, N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2 required the Governing Body of each County, municipality,
and other local entity to adopt, as appropriate, either a resolution or ordinance to
determine the positions that are substantially similar in nature to the advice and consent
of the Senate for appointments by the Governor of the State, pursuant to guidelines
and policy established by the Local Finance Board in the Department of Community
Affairs, and for which officials appointed to such positions shall be eligible for and shall
participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement Program subject to the provisions of
law.
Therefore, having considered the guidelines issued by the Local Finance Board, the
Township Committee of the Township of Springfield does hereby enact this section with
the purpose of complying therewith.
§ 23-6.2. Eligible Positions. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-6.2]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be eligible for and
shall participate in the Defined Contribution Program:
§ 23-6.3. Exempt Positions. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-6.3]
The following positions are exempt from the Defined Contribution Retirement Program,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:1-15C-2:
§ 23-6.4. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-6.4]
a. Township Administrator.
b. Department Heads.
The exemption shall only exist if the position is performed by a full-time employee.
a. Tax Collector;
b. Chief Financial Officer;
c. Construction Code Official;
d. Tax Assessor;
e. Registered Municipal Clerk;
f. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
g. Superintendent of Public Works.
a. This section shall not apply to any position eligible for membership in the Police
and Fire Retirement System or public employment retirement system.
b. This section shall not apply to any person with service commencing prior to July 1,
2007.
c. This section designates positions which are subject to DCRP and does not deter the
§ 23-6.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 23-6.4
23:24
§ 23-6.5. Local Pension Certifying Official. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-6.5]
The Springfield Local Pension Certifying Officer shall be the duly appointed Chief
Financial Officer, or a designee.
§ 23-7. BEREAVEMENT. [Ord. No. 2014-12 § 23-7]
In the event of a death in the immediate family (mother, mother-in-law, father, father-inlaw,
stepchild, grandparent, brother or sister, son-in-law or daughter-in-law or brotherin-
law or sister-in-law) of an employee such employee shall be granted leave with pay
from the date of death up to and including the day of the funeral, not to exceed five
business days. In the event of a death of a spouse or child/children, 10 business days
shall be granted.
eligibility for enrollment of any individual for future employment. Upon future
appointment of an individual to be an eligible position, it will be determined on a
case-by-case basis if such individual shall be enrolled in PERS, DCRP or is exempt
from enrollment.
§ 23-6.4 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 23-7
23:25

Chapter 24
RECREATION BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 24-1. BACKGROUND CHECK FOR GOVERNMENTAL PURPOSES. [Ord.
No. 2015-02]
Pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 199 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.4), the Township Administrator or
his/her designee is authorized to request a criminal history background check of any
person for an official governmental purpose including without limitation, employment,
licensing, the procurement of services, and leadership roles in any youth program.
§ 24-2. BACKGROUND CHECK FOR PERSONS IN LEADERSHIP ROLES IN
ANY YOUTH PROGRAMS. [Ord. No. 2015-02]
Any person 18 years of age or older at the time of commencement of a leadership role
in any youth activity regardless of the capacity (whether a volunteer director, coach,
or an employee) for any program that is (a) organized by the Township of Springfield;
(b) sponsored by the Springfield Recreation Department or Springfield Community
Pool; or (c) considered an independent youth recreation sports club by the Township of
Springfield, and that utilizes Township facilities, must undergo a mandatory background
record check. Each person shall file an application for the criminal background check
with the State Police via its authorized vendor, submit to fingerprinting, and bear any
and all costs involved with obtaining the criminal background check unless reimbursed
by the Township of Springfield or a youth recreation sports club.
§ 24-3. RECORDS AVAILABLE. [Ord. No. 2015-02]
The records which the Township Administrator or his/her designee is authorized to
request and receive from an employee or volunteer shall be the criminal history record
information from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Section, and the
State Police Bureau of Identification; provided, however, that in the case of youth
program volunteers and employees, neither the entity coordinating the program, if the
Township should employ such, nor the Township shall receive a copy of the detailed
criminal record but will, instead receive from the State Police notification that the
background check revealed information which would serve to disqualify the person who
may then file an appeal pursuant to Section 24-10 hereof.
§ 24-4. GROUNDS FOR DISQUALIFICATION. [Ord. No. 2015-02]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-3, a person may be disqualified from
serving as an employee or volunteer of a youth-serving organization if that person's
criminal history record background check reveals a conviction of any of the following
crimes and offenses:
a. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
1. Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and disorderly persons
offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.;
§ 23-7 RECREATION BACKGROUND CHECKS § 24-4
24:1
§ 24-5. REQUESTS SUBMITTED TO THE STATE BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION. [Ord. No. 2015-02]
In order to obtain detailed criminal history record information, the Township
Administrator or his/her designee shall request that the prospective employee or
volunteer submit the required application, fee, and fingerprint data to the State Bureau of
Identification via its authorized vendor. The State Bureau of Identification shall receive
all criminal history record information from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and
shall disseminate that information directly to the applicant.
§ 24-6. RECOGNITION OF COMPARABLE PROGRAMS. [Ord. No. 2015-02]
Any person who has undergone a background check that meets the same standards as
those conducted by the State Police, through its authorized vendor, who can provide
proof of the background check and results, is exempt from the requirements contained
herein, until three years have elapsed since the most current background check, so
long as the most current background check is within six months from the date of their
application in a comparable background check program and further provided that it
meets the threshold standards of the program utilized by the Township of Springfield.
§ 24-7. TERM OF EFFECTIVENESS. [Ord. No. 2015-02]
Each person who is required to submit to a background check in accordance with this
chapter must submit to a new criminal background record check every three years if the
person wishes to continue as a volunteer or employee with the youth programs within
the Township. Background record checks subsequent to the initial one may or may not
involve fingerprinting.
§ 24-8. EXEMPTIONS. [Ord. No. 2015-02]
Any celebrity guests will be allowed to participate in youth programs within the
Township as long as they are under the supervision of an approved background check
participant. Further, this section does not apply to volunteers and employees of teams
and/or organizations that are not based in the Township of Springfield.
§ 24-9. OVERSIGHT. [Ord. No. 2015-02]
The Chief of Police or his designated representative shall work with the Township
Administrator, the Director of Recreation, or any other organization in administering this
2. Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq.;
3. Involving theft as set forth in chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes;
4. Involving any controlled dangerous substance analog as set forth in chapter 35
of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes except paragraph (4) of subsection a of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
b. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New Jersey, would
constitute any of the crimes or disorderly persons offenses described in paragraph a
of this subsection.
§ 24-4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 24-9
24:2
program.
§ 24-10. APPEALS. [Ord. No. 2015-02]
a. Any person who feels that he or she has been erroneously or wrongly prohibited
from participation in any activities covered by this section may appeal to both the
Township Administrator and the Director of Recreation, in the case of volunteer
and paid participation in youth programs; or to the Township Administrator in all
other cases. The decision of the Township Administrator and/or the Director of
Recreation, as the case may be, shall be final.
b. A person may challenge the accuracy of the criminal history record. The challenge
shall be filed with the Township Administrator, or his/her designee, who may
request that the applicant follow the procedure outlined in Section 24-3, to obtain a
detailed criminal history check for the appeals process. The challenge may be
coordinated with the Chief of Police.
c. A person may claim to be rehabilitated. The claim shall be filed with the Township
Administrator, or his/her designee, who may request that the applicant follow the
procedure outlined in Section 24-3, to obtain a detailed criminal history check for
the appeals process. The claim may be coordinated with the Chief of Police. In
determining whether a person has affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation, the
following factors shall be considered: (a) The nature and responsibility of the
position that the convicted person would hold, or has held, as the case may be; (b)
The nature and seriousness of the offense; (c) The circumstances under which the
offense occurred; (d) The date of the offense; (e) The age of the person when the
offense was committed; (f) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated one; (g)
Any social conditions that may have contributed to the offense; (h) Any other
evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or the community,
counseling or psychiatric treatment received, acquisition of additional academic or
vocational schooling, successful participation in correctional work-release
programs, or the recommendations of those who have had the person under their
supervision. If it has been determined by an Appeals Committee (which Committee
shall consist of the Chief of Police, the Director of Recreation and/or the Township
Administrator, and the Township Attorney), that the disqualified person has been
successfully rehabilitated, the person shall be included on the list of qualified
employees and volunteers.
d. No person may appeal a disqualification on the ground of rehabilitation if the
person has been rejected because that person has been convicted, adjudicated
delinquent, or acquitted by reason of insanity of aggravated sexual assault; sexual
assault; aggravated criminal sexual contact; kidnapping pursuant to paragraph (2)
of subsection c of N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1; endangering the welfare of a child by engaging
in sexual conduct which would impair or debauch the morals of the child pursuant
to subsection a of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to
paragraph (4) of subsection b of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; luring or enticing pursuant to
section (1) of P.L. 1993, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 2C:13-6); criminal sexual contact pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3b if the victim is a minor; kidnapping pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:13-2, or false imprisonment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-3 if the victim is a
minor and the offender is not the parent of the victim; knowingly promoting
prostitution of a child pursuant to paragraph (3) of paragraph (4) of subsection b of
§ 24-9 RECREATION BACKGROUND CHECKS § 24-10
24:3
§ 24-11. PENALTY. [Ord. No. 2015-02]
§ 24-12. PRIVACY. [Ord. No. 2015-02]
N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1; or an attempt to commit any of these enumerated offenses.
a. Failure to comply with this chapter may result in the Township withholding funding
for the youth-serving organization, prohibiting the use of facilities, withholding
funding for facility maintenance, or expulsion from all coaching and employment
opportunities.
b. Any individual who has been advised, verbally or in writing, of his/her
disqualification to participate and continues to participate, may be subject to a fine
of not less than $250 and not more than $2,000. Each continuing violation shall
constitute a separate offense. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
a. Access to criminal history record information shall be limited in accordance with
law, including N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq.
b. The results of any and all criminal background checks supplied to the Township of
Springfield shall be filed and maintained in a secure cabinet or room, and shall not
be made available to the public. Appropriate steps must be taken to safeguard such
records. The records shall be exempt from public disclosure under the common law
or the New Jersey right to know law. The records shall only be retained for such
period of time as is necessary to serve their intended and authorized purpose, and
thereafter shall be destroyed.
c. Criminal history record information shall be limited in use solely by the
individual(s) for which it was obtained, and shall not be disseminated to persons or
organizations not authorized to receive the records. This information shall be
limited solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given and it shall not be
disseminated to any unauthorized persons. Any person violating federal or state
regulations governing access to criminal history records information may be subject
to criminal and/or civil penalties.
§ 24-10 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 24-12
24:4
Chapter 25
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 24-12 CABLE TELEVISION § 24-12
25:1

ARTICLE I
Suburban Cablevision
§ 25-1. DEFINITIONS. [1991 Code § A328-1]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or definition of terms is
supplemental to those definitions of the Federal Communications Commission, FCC
Rules and Regulations, as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et
seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the Federal or
State definitions.
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Shall mean Chapter 186 of the General Laws
of New Jersey, 1972, Section 48:5A-1 et seq.
BOARD — Shall mean the Board of Public Utilities.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Township of Springfield; County of Union, in the
State of New Jersey.
§ 25-2. PURPOSE. [1991 Code A328-2]
The municipality hereby grants to Suburban Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to
place in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways and public places in the municipality poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary
for the maintenance and operation in the municipality of a cable television system and
cable communications system.
§ 25-3. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [1991 Code § A328-3]
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Suburban was held after
proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act. The hearing having
been held as above stated and the hearing having been fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received at the hearing all comments regarding the qualifications of
Suburban to receive this consent, the municipality hereby finds that Suburban possesses
the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications.
§ 25-4. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [1991 Code § A328-4]
The consent herein granted shall expire 10 years from the date of the expiration of the
existing certificate of approval.
§ 25-5. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [1991 Code § A328-5]
The consent granted under this chapter to the renewal of the franchise shall apply to
the entirety of the municipality and any property annexed hereto and shall be subject to
Section 25-7.
§ 25-6. FRANCHISE FEE. [1991 Code § A328-6]
Suburban shall, during each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay
to the municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the nature
§ 25-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 25-6
25:3
of subscription fees paid by subscribers to its cable television reception service in the
municipality or such greater increased fees as may be permitted by law.
§ 25-7. AVAILABILITY OF SERVICE. [1991 Code § A328-7]
Suburban shall be required to proffer service to any person's residence or business
located in the municipality, in accordance with any line extension policy set forth in
Suburban's application or as the same hereafter may be amended.
§ 25-8. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
§ 25-8.1. Restoration. [1991 Code § A328-8A]
In the event that Suburban or its agents shall disturb any pavement, street surfaces,
sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces in the natural topography, Suburban shall at its
sole expense restore and replace such place or things so disturbed in as good condition
as existed prior to the commencement of the work.
§ 25-8.2. Relocation. [1991 Code § A328-8B]
If at any time during the period of this consent the municipality shall alter or change the
grade of any street, alley or other way or place, Suburban, upon reasonable notice by the
municipality, shall remove, relay and relocate its equipment at the expense of Suburban.
§ 25-8.3. The Removal or Trimming of Trees. [1991 Code § A328-8C]
During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this franchise Suburban shall have
the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in
contact with the wires and cables of Suburban. Such trimming shall be only to the extent
necessary to maintain proper clearance for Suburban's facilities. Any damages caused by
Suburban shall be the responsibility of Suburban. By accepting this franchise, Suburban
agrees to indemnify and hold the Township harmless from any damage claims of any
type.
§ 25-9. REGIONAL BUSINESS OFFICE. [1991 Code § A328-9]
During the term of this franchise and any renewal thereof, Suburban shall maintain a
regional business office or agent for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving
all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar
matters. Such regional business office shall be open during normal business hours and
in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. In addition, any
emergency telephone numbers shall be published by Suburban for use when its offices
are not open.
§ 25-10. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [1991 Code § A328-10]
The Office of Cable Television of the Board, Two Gateway Center, Newark, New
Jersey, is hereby designated as the complaint officer of the municipality pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall be received and processed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 14:17.7.1 or as needed.
§ 25-6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 25-11
25:4
§ 25-11. PERFORMANCE BOND. [1991 Code § A328-11]
During the life of the franchise, Suburban shall provide a bond to the municipality which
shall be in the amount of $25,000 and shall be in the form described in Suburban's
application. Such bond shall be to ensure the faithful performance of all undertakings of
Suburban as represented in its application for municipal consent.
§ 25-12. PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENTAL USE OF
CHANNELS. [1991 Code § A328-12]
Suburban shall provide channel capacity for public, educational or governmental use to
the extent set forth in its application.
§ 25-13. EQUIPMENT AND PERSONNEL. [1991 Code § A328-13]
In the event that the municipality determines that it is necessary and feasible for it to
contract with Suburban for the purpose of providing additional equipment or specific
services to the municipal government or its agencies, Suburban shall be required to apply
to the Board, and if necessary the FCC, for approval to enter into and establish the terms
and conditions of such a contract. All costs related to such application to the Board
and to the FCC shall be allocated and paid in a manner agreeable to Suburban and the
municipality, subject to approval of the Board.
§ 25-14. EMERGENCY USES. [1991 Code § A328-14]
Suburban shall be required to have the capability at the head end to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency messages by
the municipality. Suburban shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the municipality or any other person during an emergency. The municipality shall also
establish reasonable procedures for such uses.
§ 25-15. LIABILITY INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY. [1991 Code § A328-15]
Suburban shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability insurance policy
with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability for any death, personal injury,
property damages or other liability arising out of its construction and operation of the
cable television system, and an excess liability (or "umbrella") policy as set forth in its
application. Suburban further agrees to indemnify and hold the Township harmless from
any claims of any type arising out of or in connection with the business of Suburban or
Suburban's activities in the Township.
§ 25-16. SERVICE STANDARDS. [1991 Code § A328-16]
Suburban, during the period it exercises privileges herein granted, shall maintain and
operate its system according to the highest current prevailing operating rules or
regulations promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission or the Office of
Cable Television, in such manner as to provide its subscribers the highest possible level
of quality and reliability.
§ 25-11 CABLE TELEVISION § 25-17
25:5
§ 25-17. INCORPORATION OF APPLICATION. [1991 Code § A328-17]
All of the written commitments contained in the written applications of Suburban and
its representatives at the public meeting, except as modified herein, are to be considered
to be binding upon the applicant as the terms and conditions of this consent. The
application shall be made a part hereof by reference, provided that any provisions of the
application in conflict with the provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984, 47 USC § 521 et seq., or as amended, Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et
seq., and/or FCC Rules and Regulations shall not be construed as effective under the
terms of this chapter and such provisions shall be considered unenforceable.
§ 25-17 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 25-17
25:6
ARTICLE II
Comcast Cablevision of New Jersey, Inc.
§ 25-18. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 1]
The Township hereby grants to Comcast Cablevision of New Jersey, Inc. renewal of
its nonexclusive Municipal Consent to place in, upon, along, across, above, over and
under highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public places in
the Township, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television
conductors, fixtures, apparatus and equipment as may be necessary for the construction,
operation and maintenance in the Township of a cable television and communications
system.
§ 25-19. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 2; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or definition of terms is
supplemental to those definitions of the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC")
rules and regulations 47 C.F.R. subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications
Policy Act 47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq. and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict
with the Federal or State definitions:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Shall mean Chapter 186 of the General Laws
of New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, Section 48:5A-1 et seq.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Shall mean any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD OR BPU — Shall mean the Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — Shall mean the grantee of rights under this Article and is known as
Comcast Cablevision of New Jersey, Inc.
FCC — Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
MUNICIPALITY OR TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Springfield, County
of Union, State of New Jersey.
OFFICE — Shall mean the Office of Cable Television (OCTV) of the Board of Public
Utilities.
§ 25-20. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 3]
Public hearings conducted by the Township concerning the renewal of Municipal
Consent herein granted to the Company were held after proper public notice pursuant to
the terms and conditions of the Act and the regulations of the Board adopted pursuant
thereto. The hearings, including the Hearing on the Application, have been fully open
to the public and the Township, having received at the public hearings all comments
regarding the qualifications of the Company to receive this renewal of Municipal
Consent, the Township hereby finds that the Company possesses the necessary legal,
technical, character, financial and other qualifications and that the Company's operating
and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 25-18 CABLE TELEVISION § 25-21
25:7
§ 25-21. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 4]
The nonexclusive consent granted herein shall expire 10 years from the date of
expiration of the previous Certificate of Approval as issued by the Board of Public
Utilities.
§ 25-22. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 5]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during each year
of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the Township 2% of the gross
revenues from all recurring charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers
to its cable television reception service in the Township or any higher amount permitted
by the Cable Television Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ 25-23. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 6]
The consent granted under this Article to the renewal of the franchise shall apply to the
entirety of the Township and any property subsequently annexed thereto.
§ 25-24. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 7]
Comcast shall be required to proffer service along any public right-of-way to any
person's residence or business located in all areas of the franchise territory as described
herein, at tariffed rates for standard and non-standard installations.
§ 25-25. SYSTEM UPGRADE. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 8]
Comcast shall have completed an upgrade of the cable television distribution system
serving the Township no later than December 31, 1997. The upgraded system shall be a
hybrid fiber optic/coaxial cable system following a "fiber to the node" architecture. The
upgraded system shall provide improved picture quality, enhanced signal reliability and
increased channel capacity.
§ 25-26. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 9]
Restoration: In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface in the natural topography, the
Company shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such places or things so disturbed
in as good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of work.
Relocation: If at any time during the period of this consent, the Municipality shall alter
or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the Company, upon
reasonable notice by the Municipality, shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at
the expense of the Company.
Removal or Trimming of Trees; During the exercise of its rights and privileges under
this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public places of the Municipality so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cable of the Company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for the
Company's wires and cables, and upon reasonable notice to the Township, except in an
emergency.
§ 25-21 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 25-27
25:8
§ 25-27. CUSTOMER SERVICE. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 10]
In providing services to its customers Comcast shall comply with N.J.A.C. 14:18 and
all applicable State and Federal Statutes and regulations. Comcast shall strive to meet
or exceed all voluntary company and industry standards in the delivery of customer
service and shall be prepared to report on same to the community upon written request
of Township Administrator or Clerk.
§ 25-28. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 11]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the Complaint Officer for
the Township of Springfield pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5a-26(b). All complaints shall be
received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The Municipality shall
have the right to request copies of records and reports pertaining to complaints by
Township customers from the OCTV.
§ 25-29. LOCAL OFFICE. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 12]
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company shall maintain
a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving
all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar
matters. Such local business office shall be open during normal business hours, and in
no event less that 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Telephone response
for such purposes as mentioned herein will be provided by the Company's employees,
representatives or agents 24 hours per day. The telephone number and address of the
local office shall be listed in applicable telephone directories and in correspondence from
the Company to the customer. The telephone number for the local office shall utilize an
exchange which is a non-toll call for Township residents.
§ 25-30. PERFORMANCE BONDS. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 13]
During the life of the franchise the Company shall give to the Municipality a bond in
the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of all
undertakings of the Company as represented in its application for municipal consent
incorporated herein.
§ 25-31. SUBSCRIBER RATES. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 14]
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by Federal and State
law.
§ 25-32. PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS. [Ord.
No. 97-25 § 15]
a. The Company shall continue to provide one dedicated, system-wide public access
channel, to be utilized by qualified individuals and organizations, for the purpose
of cable casting noncommercial access programming in conformance with the
Company's published public access rules.
b. Upon reasonable request, the Company shall conduct training in basic television
production for potential access users including any such group which may be
§ 25-27 CABLE TELEVISION § 25-32
25:9
§ 25-33. COMMITMENTS BY THE COMPANY. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 16]
organized by the school district or municipality.
c. The Company shall continue to maintain three dedicated municipal access
channels, one of which shall continue to be utilized by consortium of five
municipalities, including the Township of Springfield, currently known as
Communities on Cable.
d. Comcast shall provide the Township with a one-time grant in the amount of
$35,000 within 12 months of receipt of a Renewal COA, for the purchase of video
production equipment or to be otherwise used in support of access programming or
as the Township deems appropriate.
e. Within 12 months of receipt of a Renewal COA, Comcast shall provide the
Township with a new computer-based character generator or the cash equivalent of
$5,000 at the option of the Township.
a. The Company shall provide free standard installation and expanded basic service
monthly on up to 10 outlets in each school in the Township, public and private,
elementary, intermediate and secondary, provided the school is within 200 feet of
active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid
for by the school requesting service, on a materials plus labor basis. Monthly
service charges shall be waived on all additional outlets.
b. The Company shall provide free standard installation and expanded basic service
monthly on one outlet to each police, fire, first aid, emergency management facility,
public library and community center in the Township at no charge, provided the
facility is located within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional
outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for by the Township on a materials plus labor
basis. Monthly service charges shall be billed at the regular tariffed rates for any
additional outlets.
c. The Company shall provide free basic Internet access via high-speed cable modem
to one non-networked personal computer in each school in the Township, public
and private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, at no charge, provided the
facility is located within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant.
d. The Company shall provide free basic Internet access via high-speed cable modem
on one non-networked personal computer in each public library in the Township, at
no charge, provided the facility is located within 200 feet of active cable plant.
e. The Company shall provide the Township Committee with an annual written report,
no later than February 1, of each year, regarding changes in rates and programming,
service enhancements and compliance with this Article and other such matters
which may be of interest to the Township.
f. The Company shall make every effort to deploy advanced technology in the
Township as the technology becomes commercially available and economically
feasible. That technology shall include, but not be limited to: digital video
compression; digital audio services; Internet access and the interactive program
guides.
§ 25-32 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 25-34
25:10
§ 25-34. TWO-WAY SERVICES AND INTERCONNECTION. [Ord. No. 97-25
§ 17]
In the event that the Township determines that it is necessary and feasible for it to
contract with the Company for the purpose of providing two-way or interconnection
services, the Company shall be required to apply to the BPU for approval to enter into
and establish the terms and conditions of such contract. All costs for such application to
the BPU shall be borne by the Township.
§ 25-35. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 18]
Upon activation of the State's Emergency Alert System ("EAS"), the Company shall be
required to have the capability to override at the head end a portion of the system in order
to permit the cablecasting of urgency messages. The Company's participation in the EAS
shall be in compliance with applicable State and Federal Statutes and regulations. The
Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the Municipality or
any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason the Municipality is unable to
make full use of the cable television as contemplated herein.
§ 25-36. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 19]
The Company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its sole expense
at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability insurance naming the
Municipality as an insured and insuring against loss by any such claim, suit, judgment,
execution or demand in the minimum amounts of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death
to one person, and $100,000 for property damage resulting from one accident.
§ 25-37. INCORPORATION OF THE APPLICATION. [Ord. No. 97-25 § 20]
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Municipality by the Company except as modified
herein, are binding upon the Company as terms and conditions of this consent. The
application and any other relevant writings submitted by the Company shall be annexed
hereto and made a part hereof by reference as long as it does not conflict with State or
Federal law.
§ 25-34 CABLE TELEVISION § 25-37
25:11

ARTICLE III
Cable Television
§ 25-38. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
The Township hereby grants to Comcast of New Jersey II, LLC renewal of its
nonexclusive Municipal Consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public places in the
municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television
conductors, fixtures, apparatus and equipment as may be necessary for the construction,
operation and maintenance in the Township of a cable television and communications
system.
§ 25-39. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or definition of terms is
supplemental to those definitions of the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC")
rules and regulations (47 C.F.R. Subsection 76.1 et seq.), the Cable Communications
Policy Act (47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq., as amended) and the Cable Television Act
(N.J.S.A. 48:5A-I et sea.), and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict
with the Federal and State definitions:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Shall mean Chapter 186 of the General Laws
of New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1, et seq.
APPLICATION — Shall mean the Company's Application for Renewal of Municipal
Consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Shall mean any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD OR BPU — Shall mean the Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — Shall mean the grantee of rights under this Ordinance and is known as
Comcast of New Jersey II, LLC.
FCC — Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE OR OCTV — Shall mean the Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA OR PSA — Shall mean and consist of the area of the
municipality currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map annexed to the
Company's Application for Municipal Consent.
TOWNSHIP OR MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Township of Springfield, County
of Union, State of New Jersey.
§ 25-40. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
Public hearings conducted by the Township, concerning the renewal of Municipal
Consent herein granted to the Company were held after proper public notice pursuant to
the terms and conditions of the Act and the regulations of the Board adopted pursuant
thereto. Said hearings, having been fully open to the public, and the Township, having
received at said public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the
§ 25-38 CABLE TELEVISION § 25-40
25:13
Company to receive this renewal of Municipal Consent, the Township hereby finds
that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and
other qualifications and that the Company's operating and construction arrangements are
adequate and feasible.
§ 25-41. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
The nonexclusive Municipal Consent granted herein shall expire 15 years from the date
of expiration of the previous Certificate of Approval issued by the Board.
In the event that the Township shall find that the Company has not substantially
complied with the material terms and conditions of this Ordinance, the Township shall
have the right to petition the OCTV, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate
action, including modification and/or termination of the Certificate of Approval;
provided however, that the Township shall first have given the Company written notice
of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an opportunity to cure same within 90
days of that notification.
§ 25-42. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during each year
of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the Township 2% of the gross
revenues from all recurring charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers
for cable television reception service in the Township or any higher amount permitted
by the Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ 25-43. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
The consent to the renewal of the franchise granted under this Ordinance shall apply to
the entirety of the Township and any property subsequently annexed thereto.
§ 25-44. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
The Company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or business along
any public right-of-way in the Primary Service Area, as set forth in the Company's
application. The Company's Line Extension Policy, as set forth in the Company's
application, shall govern any extension of plant beyond the Primary Service Area.
Comcast will comply with all lawful rules and regulations governing the operation of
its cable television system and cable communications system within the Township. If
any referenced regulations are deemed unlawful by a court of competent jurisdiction or
superseded by a duly enacted State or Federal statute or regulation, Comcast will not
be bound by such regulation, nor will the Company be bound by any provision of the
Municipal Consent Ordinance or Renewal Certificate of Approval with regard to same.
Comcast reserves the right to seek administrative or judicial review of the validity of any
statute, regulation or ordinance.
§ 25-45. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
a. Restoration. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface in the natural topography, the
§ 25-40 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 25-45
25:14
§ 25-46. CUSTOMER SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
In providing services to its customers, the Company shall comply with N.J.A.C. 14:18-1
et seq. and all applicable State and Federal statutes and regulations. The Company shall
strive to meet or exceed all voluntary company and industry standards in the delivery
of customer service and shall be prepared to report on it to the Township upon written
request.
§ 25-47. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the Complaint Officer for the
Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall be received and
processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The Township shall have the right to
request copies of records and reports pertaining to complaints by Municipality customers
from the OCTV.
§ 25-48. LOCAL OFFICE. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company shall maintain
a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:18-5.1 for the purpose of
Company shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such places or things so
disturbed in as good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
b. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the Township shall alter
or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place the Company, upon
reasonable notice by the Township, shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment,
at the expense of the Company.
c. Removal or Trimming of Trees. During the exercise of its rights and privileges
under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places of the Township so as
to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and
cable of the Company. Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to
maintain proper clearance of the Company's wire and cables.
a. The Company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable State and Federal
statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the reporting of same to
regulatory agencies and notification of same to customers.
b. The Company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable State and Federal
statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for the hearing
impaired and the notification of same to customers.
c. The Company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed voluntary
standards for telephone accessibility developed by the National Cable Television
Association (NCTA).
d. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the Township to express
any comment with respect to telephone accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or
impair the right of the Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under
law.
§ 25-45 CABLE TELEVISION § 25-48
25:15
receiving, investigating and resolving all local complaints regarding the quality of
service, equipment malfunctions, and similar matters. Such a business office shall have
a publicly listed toll-free telephone number and be open during standard business hours,
and in no event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ 25-49. PERFORMANCE BOND. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
During the life of the franchise the Company shall give to the Township a bond in
the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of all
undertakings of the Company as represented in its application for municipal consent
incorporated herein.
§ 25-50. SUBSCRIBER RATES. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by Federal and State
law.
§ 25-51. PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS. [Ord.
No. 2008-9 § I]
a. The Company shall continue to provide a system-wide public access channel
maintained by the Company. Qualified individuals and organizations may utilize
public access for the purpose of cablecasting non-commercial access programming
in conformance with the Company's published public access rules.
b. The Company shall continue to provide a system-wide leased access channel
maintained by the Company for the purpose of cablecasting commercial access
programming in conformance with the Company's guideline and applicable State
and Federal statutes and regulations.
c. The Company shall continue to provide a shared local access channel to be
maintained by the Company and operated by the Township's access or PEG
designee (so long as that organization or its successor continues to be the
Township's access or PEG designee), for the purpose of local governmental and
educational access programming in conformance with the Company's guidelines
and applicable State and Federal statutes and regulations. If the shared local access
channel (currently channel 36) goes black or is devoid of all programming and
ceases to be used for a period of 10 consecutive weeks, the Township shall not
object to foregoing its right to use the shared local access channel and, thereafter,
Comcast, in its full discretion, shall be entitled to utilize the channel without
restriction.
d. The Company shall provide a dedicated digital local access channel and return line
maintained by the Company for the purpose of cablecasting noncommercial access
programming in conformance with the Company's guideline and applicable State
and Federal statutes and regulations. A digital converter or cable card is required to
view this channel.
e. The Company shall take any steps that are necessary to ensure that the signals
originated on the access channels are carried without material degradation, and with
§ 25-48 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 25-51
25:16
§ 25-52. COMMITMENTS BY THE COMPANY. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
a signal whose quality is equal to that of the other standard channels that the
Company transmits.
a. The Company shall provide standard installation and basic cable television service
on one outlet, at no cost, to each school in the Township, public and private
elementary, intermediate and secondary, provided the school is within 200 feet of
active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be
charged on a materials, equipment and plus labor basis. Monthly service charges
shall be waived on all additional outlets. Conversion of non-Company authorized
outlets to Company standards, including wiring, equipment and installation charges
shall also be charged on a material plus labor basis.
b. The Company shall provide standard installation basic cable television service at no
cost on one outlet each, at each police, fire, first aid, emergency management,
Department of Public Works, recreation center and town-operated community
center facility, as well as two additional outlets at the public library in the
Township, provided the facility is located within 200 feet of active cable
distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a
materials, equipment and plus labor basis by the Township. Monthly service
charges shall be waived on all additional outlets. Conversion of non-Company
authorized outlets to Company standards, including wiring, equipment and
installation charges shall be paid by the Township.
c. The Company shall continue to provide one free non-networked high speed Internet
connection and service (one outlet at each location) at public library buildings and
all public and private schools. Connections are to be located in areas accessible to
student and community use, and cannot be restricted to administrative use. All
facilities must be located within 200 feet of active cable plant.
d. The Company shall provide an additional fiber optic local access return with
transmitter, receiver and monitor outlet (monitor not provided by Company) at a
location of the Township's choosing within one year of written request from the
Township. Location must be within 200 feet of active cable plant.
e. The Company shall provide a second dedicated digital access channel when the
Township demonstrates programming on the first digital access channel equal to 20
hours of unduplicated original programming per week for a period of 13
consecutive weeks and exclusive of regularly scheduled statutory meetings of
official municipal bodies, i.e. Township Committee, Planning Board, Zoning Board
of Adjustment and School Board of Education. Availability of the second channel
shall be completed within one year after the end of the demonstration period and
shall be located on a channel number consecutive to the first digital access channel.
Within six months of the issuance of a renewal Certificate of Approval (COA)
by the Board (NJ BPU office of Cable TV), the Company shall provide to the
Township a onetime grant for local access related needs in the amount of $60,000.
f. The Company shall make available to the Township on an availability and
scheduled basis, a mobile production vehicle for the purpose of producing
§ 25-51 CABLE TELEVISION § 25-52
25:17
§ 25-53. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
The Company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS") rules in
accordance with applicable State and Federal statutes and regulations. The Company
shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the Township or any other
person, during an emergency, if for any reason the Township is unable to make full use
of the cable television system as contemplated herein.
§ 25-54. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
The Company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability insurance
policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability for any death, personal
injury, property damages or other liability arising out of its construction and operation of
the cable television system, and an excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount
of $5,000,000, naming the Township as an additional insured on each policy.
§ 25-55. INCORPORATION OF THE APPLICATION. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or annexed thereto
and incorporated therein, and any amendments thereto, except as modified herein, are
binding upon the Company as terms and conditions of this consent. The application and
other relevant writings submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a
part hereof by reference provided same do not conflict with applicable State or Federal
law.
§ 25-56. COMPETITIVE EQUITY. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
Should the Township grant a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable
television system to any other person, corporation or entity on terms materially less
burdensome or more favorable than the terms contained herein, the Company may
substitute such language that is more favorable or less burdensome for the comparable
provision of this Ordinance subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ 25-57. THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES. [Ord. No. 2008-9 § I]
Nothing in this Franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to confer thirdparty
beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce the terms of such
agreements or Franchise.
noncommercial community governmental or educational access programming,
consistent with company's written rules and regulations on use of said vehicle. The
Company shall provide basic training to uses of production vehicle and will provide
other technical assistance and training upon written request for local residents for
the purpose of producing PEG access programming, to the extent that the Company
offers such technical assistance and training.
g. The Company shall make every effort to deploy new or advanced technology and/
or services which are commercially available, technically feasible and
economically practicable.
§ 25-52 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 25-57
25:18
Chapter 26
(RESERVED)
§ 25-57 (RESERVED) § 25-57
26:1

Chapter 27
PARKS, POOL AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
[Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1991 Code §§ 222-3
and 222-4 and Ordinance No. 93-2.]
§ 27-1. DEFINITIONS; PARK HOURS.
§ 27-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2012-20]
As used in this chapter:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean any officer of the Springfield Township
Police Department, Springfield Township Auxiliary Police, Director of Recreation or
recreation employee or park staff.
IMPERMISSIBLE CONDUCT — Shall mean behavior that is not permitted at a
recreation facility.
IMPERMISSIBLE USES — Shall mean activities prohibited at a recreation facility.
NUDITY — Shall mean a naked or unclothed person.
PARK FACILITIES — Shall mean any Township park or playground.
PUBLIC INDECENCY—Shall mean the deliberate exposure in public or in view of the
general public by a person of a portion or portions of his or her body, in circumstances
where the exposure is contrary to local moral or other standards of appropriate behavior.
RECREATION FACILITIES — Shall mean all land, improvements and equipment
owned by the Township of Springfield used for active and passive recreation activities.
WHEELED MOTORIZED VEHICLE — Shall mean a self-propelled vehicle or
machine which rolls on wheels. This definition does not include mowers, trucks,
maintenance vehicles owned, leased and operated by the Township.
§ 27-1.2. Park Hours. [Ord. No. 2012-20]
§ 27-2. PROHIBITED USES; PERMITS.
a. Hours of Closing; Special Permits. No person or group of persons shall occupy or
use any public park or playground or any portion thereof for any purpose between
the hours of (i) 7:00 p.m. to sunrise from November 1 through March 31 and (ii)
9:00 p.m. to sunrise from April 1 through October 31, except upon prior application
for a special permit, upon good cause shown therefor, directly to the Township
Committee. The granting of any such permit shall be at the discretion of the
Township Committee. The parks, operating hours are not applicable to Township's
lighted baseball fields. Use of the Township's tennis courts and/or basketball courts
shall not exceed a two hour limit.
§ 25-57 PARKS, POOL AND RECREATIONAL AREAS § 27-2.1
27:1
§ 27-2.1. Rules of Conduct. [1991 Code § 222-1; Ord. No. 93-33; Ord. No. 93-11
§ 1[A]; Ord. No. 2001-23; Ord. No. 2009-14 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-05; Ord. No.
2012-20]
No person shall:
§ 27-2.2. Exceptions. [1991 Code § 2; Ord. No. 93-33; Ord. No. 98-11 § 1[B]; Ord.
No. 2001-23; Ord. No. 2012-20]
Exceptions will be considered in Subsection 27-2.1 only for Subsections a, b, o and p
a. Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving throwing or otherwise
propelling objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, horseshoes, quoits or
model airplanes before 9:00 a.m.
b. For any leagues or organizations, take part in or abet the playing of any games
involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows,
javelins, horseshoes, quoits or model airplanes without a permit issued by the
Recreation Department.
c. Bring a dog, cat or other pet, whether leashed or running free, onto any public park
or playground or any portion thereof at any time.
d. Play or practice golfing.
e. Engage in fighting or violent behavior.
f. Spit, urinate or defecate except in designated facilities.
g. Litter.
h. Exhibit public nudity or public indecency.
i. Use threatening or obscene language.
j. Alter or adjust any fence, play surface, or piece of gym equipment (including but
not limited to playground equipment or basketball rims) without the prior written
approval of the Township of Springfield.
k. Smoke.
l. Possess a firearm or knife.
m. Build fires.
n. Possess any type of glass container.
o. Use any type of artificial illumination for any Township field or recreation facility
without the prior approval of the Township of Springfield.
p. Operate any type of motorized vehicle except on driveways or parking lots without
the prior approval of the Township of Springfield.
q. For-profit entities are strictly prohibited from using the Township's fields,
basketball courts and tennis courts.
§ 27-2.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 27-2.2
27:2
may be requested in advance, in writing, upon good cause shown, to the Director of
Recreation. A permit to do any act shall authorize the same only insofar as it may be
performed in strict accordance with the terms and conditions thereof. Any violation by
its holder or the holder's agents or employees of any terms or conditions thereof shall
constitute grounds for its revocation by the Director of Recreation or his/her authorized
representative, whose action therein shall be final. The holder of such permit, together
with the holder's agents and employees, who violates such terms and conditions, shall
be jointly and severally liable to the Township for all damages and loss sustained by the
Township. Neither the recovery or collection of such damage shall in any manner relieve
such holder or person from liability to punishment for any violation of any provision of
this section.
§ 27-2.3. Permitting Procedures. [1991 Code § 222-2.1; Ord. No. 93-33; Ord. No.
2001-23; Ord. No. 02-28 § 1(B); Ord. No. 2012-20]
Permits for events as stated in Subsection 27-2.1a and b shall be obtained by application
to the Department of Recreation in accordance with the following procedures:
a. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application with the
Department of Recreation and provide the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or association
sponsoring that activity, if any.
3. The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
4. The park or portion thereof for which the permit is desired.
5. Any other information which the Department of Recreation shall find
reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued.
b. Standards of Review for Permitting Application by the Department of Recreation:
1. That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park.
2. That the proposed activities and use will not unreasonably interfere or detract
from the promotion of public health, wealth or safety in recreation.
3. That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated will not
include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
4. That the proposed activity will not entail an extraordinary burdensome
expense or policing by the Township.
5. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for another use on that date
and hour requested in the application.
c. An application shall be made to the Recreation Department during normal business
hours, three days in advance of the proposed use. Permits shall be issued on a firstcome
basis.
§ 27-2.2 PARKS, POOL AND RECREATIONAL AREAS § 27-2.3
27:3
§ 27-2.4. Issuance or Denial of Permits; Appeals. [1991 Code § 222-2.2; Ord. No.
93-33; Ord. No. 2012-20]
The Department of Recreation shall apprise an applicant, in writing, of its reason for
refusing a permit, and any aggrieved person or organization shall have a right to appeal
to the Township Administrator by service of a written notice thereof on the Director of
Recreation and the Township Clerk within five days of the refusal. The decision of the
Township Administrator shall be final.
§ 27-2.5. (Reserved)
§ 27-2.6. Expulsion from Recreational Facilities. [Ord. No. 2012-20]
If an enforcement officer determines that a person has violated Subsection 27-2.1 above,
he or she may:
§ 27-2.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2012-20]
In addition to the offender being removed from the recreation facility as described in
Subsection 27-2.6, any person violating any of the provisions of Subsection 27-2.1 shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to the monetary penalties provided for in § 1-5 of the
Township Code.
§ 27-3. through § 27-5 (RESERVED)
§ 27-6. MUNICIPAL POOL.
§ 27-6.1. Establishment of Utility. [1991 Code § 253-8]
There is hereby created and established by the Township a municipal public utility to be
known as and constituted as the "swimming pool utility" of the Township, hereinafter
referred to as "utility," pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A and all other applicable Statutes of New
Jersey.
d. Any person, league or organization which has obtained a valid permit shall have
paramount rights to use the park or portion thereof for the activity, day and hour for
which the permit is issued, and all activity which interferes with the operation of
the valid permit shall yield to the permit holder.
a. First Offense: Cause the offender to be removed from all recreation facilities for the
balance of the day on which the violation occurred and for two additional days
immediately following the date of the first offense.
b. Second Offense: Cause the offender to be removed from all recreation facilities for
the balance of the day on which the violation occurred and for five additional days
immediately following the date of the second offense.
c. Third Offense: Cause the offender to be removed from all recreation facilities for
the balance of the day on which the violation occurred and issue to such offender a
Notice of Trespass prohibiting the offender from entering the recreation facility for
the balance of the calendar year in which the third offense occurred.
§ 27-2.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 27-6.2
27:4
§ 27-6.2. Definitions. [1991 Code § 253-9]
As used in this section:
AGE — Shall mean the individual's age on December 1 of the year of each season.
AREA — Shall mean the total area belonging to the swimming pool utility.
POOL APRON AREA — Shall mean the eight-foot area of concrete immediately
surrounding the pool.
POOL AREA — Shall mean the entire fenced area surrounding the pool.
POOL PATIO — Shall mean the concrete area in addition to the open area surrounding
the pool.
§ 27-6.3. Membership Limitation. [1991 Code § 253-10]
Membership shall be limited to a maximum of 5,800 permanent Township residents and
shall not be transferable.
§ 27-6.4. Types of Membership. [1991 Code § 253-10A; Ord. No. 92-24; Ord. No.
2000-08 § I [B]; Ord. No. 2001-05; Ord. No. 2004-05 § I; Ord. No. 2010-05 § I]
The types of membership shall be:
a. Family Membership. Family membership shall include husband, wife and
unmarried children up to and including 22 years old residing within the same
household.
b. Joint Membership. A joint membership shall be available to any two persons
residing in the same household.
c. Associated Individual Membership. An associated individual membership shall be
available to an individual over 21 years of age not a member of the immediate
family yet permanently residing within a household holding a family membership.
d. Individual Membership. An individual membership shall be available to any
permanent resident of the Township not a member of a family group entitled to a
family membership between the ages of 13 and 61.
e. Senior Citizen Membership. A senior citizen (individual) membership shall be
available to all persons 62 years of age or older. A senior citizen (couple)
membership shall be available to any married couple in which one spouse is 62
years of age or older.
f. Nanny/Caregiver Membership. A nanny/caregiver membership shall be available.
This membership shall be available only in conjunction with any regular paid
membership, and shall apply to a single person, 16 years of age or older, employed
full-time as a child, elderly or health-care worker, upon proof of employment, as
well as verification of employment signed by both the employer and employee.
Such caregiver shall only be permitted access to the pool grounds while
accompanying the person receiving such care.
g. Out-of-Town Family Membership. Membership shall be opened to a maximum of
§ 27-6.2 PARKS, POOL AND RECREATIONAL AREAS § 27-6.4
27:5
§ 27-6.5. Revocation or Suspension of Membership. [1991 Code § 253-10B]
All memberships shall be granted subject to the rules and regulations of the pool as
established by the Township Committee by ordinance or resolution. Failure to abide by
these rules and regulations may result in revocation or suspension of membership.
§ 27-6.6. Guest Privileges. [1991 Code § 253-10C; Ord. No. 93-4; Ord. No. 94-4;
Ord. No. 97-5 § 1[A]; Ord. No. 2002-10; Ord. No. 2006-04 § I(A); Ord. No. 2007-05
§ 1(A); Ord. No. 2009-14 § I(A); Ord. No. 2010-05 § I; Ord. No. 2010-27 § I]
250 out-of-town families. Preference shall be given to those out-of-town families
sponsored by current Township residents. Out-of-town family membership shall
include husband, wife and unmarried children up to and including 22 years old
residing within the same household.
h. Any membership indicated in the prior subsections above shall be available for the
period of August 1 through the end of the pool season upon payment of 1/2 of the
membership fee.
a. Guest tickets shall be valid or usable from and including the day of opening of the
swim pool facility to and including the day of closing of the swim pool facility.
b. Members shall be fully responsible for the conduct and behavior of their guests and
shall be subject to all of the sanctions and penalties contained herein for their guests'
violations of this section as though they themselves had committed such violations.
c. A guest ticket shall entitle a person not a resident of Springfield to the issuance of
a daily identification badge, good for one day only and only if accompanied by a
pool member.
d. Failure of a member to return a guest badge at the end of the day of use shall result
in an automatic two week suspension of all membership privileges.
e. Memberships may be granted to families who are unable to pay the fees set forth in
Subsection 27-6.7c, provided that there is no waiting list for membership and upon
investigation and recommendation of the Municipal Welfare Department and
approval of the Township Committee. The applicant for membership shall execute
a properly acknowledged agreement to reimburse the municipality.
f. Membership shall automatically terminate when the member shall no longer be a
permanent Township resident.
g. No person shall obtain membership through fraudulent or false statements or
representations. Any violation hereof shall result in the membership of such person,
as well as the membership of all other members of such person's family, being
revoked for the remainder of the season without refund.
h. The maximum allowable number of guests in any one day shall be 100.
i. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the entry into the pool of any person
pursuant to any program sponsored or approved by the Township, pursuant to rules
and regulations in connection therewith.
§ 27-6.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 27-6.6
27:6
§ 27-6.7. Fees; Use of Receipts. [1991 Code § 253-11; Ord. No. 93-4; Ord. No.
94-4; Ord. No. 96-5; Ord. No. 96-9; Ord. No. 97-5 § 1[A]; Ord. No. 99-7 § 1[C];
Ord. No. 2000-8 § I; Ord. No. 2001-05; Ord. No. 2002-11; Ord. No. 2004-05 § I;
Ord. No. 2005-05 § I; Ord. No. 2006-04 § I(B); Ord. No. 2007-05 § I(B); Ord. No.
2010-05 § I; Ord. No. 2010-27 § II; Ord. No. 2011-03 § 1A; Ord. No. 2013-03
§ I(A); Ord. No. 2015-06 § I(A); Ord. No. 2015-18]
j. Springfield residents may purchase and use guest tickets, without being
accompanied by a pool member, at the weekend and holiday fee set forth herein,
for use only on weekends and holidays prior to the pool opening on a daily basis.
k. Children 12 years of age and under must be accompanied by an adult pool member.
a. Collection. The Township shall charge and collect for the use and operation of the
utility, and all such fees, rents and other charges shall be placed in a separate
account of the Township.
b. Use of Receipts.
1. All fees, rents and other annual charges received from the operation of the
utility shall be applied solely to the annual payment of principal and interest
on any obligations issued for the swimming pool, and then applied towards the
operation, maintenance and improvement of the utility.
2. The provisions of this subsection shall not, however, supersede the specific
dedication of receipts from the utility as provided in any law which authorizes
the establishment or creation of such utility.
3. The anticipated revenues from the operation of the utility and the
appropriations to be made therefor shall be set forth in a separate section of the
annual municipal budget.
c. Fees for Municipal Pool. [Amended 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01; 3-8-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-06; 2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-01; 3-28-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-02; 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02; 9-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-16;
2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01; 11-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-13]
1. Resident membership fees shall be as follows:
Family membership $388
Family membership with nanny/caregiver $450
Individual membership $250
Senior citizen/permanently disabled (individual) $111
Senior citizen/permanently disabled (couple) $191
Joint membership $317
Active military No charge
Add-on for weekly infant/toddler time early entry $55
2. Nonresident membership fees shall be as follows:
§ 27-6.6 PARKS, POOL AND RECREATIONAL AREAS § 27-6.7
27:7
Family membership $579
Family membership with nanny/caregiver $679
Individual membership $423
Senior citizen/permanently disabled (individual) $245
Senior citizen/permanently disabled (couple) $373
Joint membership $505
Add-on for weekly infant/toddler time early entry $85
3. Daily pass fees shall be as follows:
(a) For residential individual(s) age four and older:
1-day pass $12
2-day pass $19
3-day pass $26
(b) For nonresidential individuals four years of age and older, who are
accompanied by a Springfield resident or a pool member:
1-day pass only $18
(c) Daily pass fee for individuals 62 years of age and older:
Residents $8
Nonresidents who are accompanied by a
Springfield resident or a pool member
$15
(d) Twilight fees: individuals four years of age and older entering the pool
after 5:00 p.m.:
Residents $7
Nonresidents who are accompanied by a
Springfield resident or a pool member
$10
(e) Children under the age of four years shall be admitted free of charge.
(f) Children 12 years of age and under must be accompanied by an adult at
all times at the pool.
4. Resident-only weekend/holiday pass (Saturdays, Sundays, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, and Labor Day only):
Family $209
Family with nanny/caregiver $225
Individual $117
Senior citizen/permanently disabled (individual) $69
Senior citizen/permanently disabled (couple) $108
§ 27-6.7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 27-6.7
27:8
Joint $152
Active military No charge
5. Private swim lessons (per child, per two half-hour sessions): $100.
6. Group swim lesson, per child (per two-week sessions): $61.
7. Rental of pool lockers (per season):
Large lockers $30
Medium lockers $20
Small lockers $10
8. Swim team registration: $95.
9. No fees shall be returnable for any reason after the first operating date of each
season.
10. Members shall be required to make deposits on items as specified by the
Township Committee and shall pay a fee for chairs, lockers and umbrellas and
other items as specified by the Committee.
11. Private camp usage of the Springfield Community Pool shall be subject to
Township Committee approval of a contract. Private camps shall pay the
Springfield Community Pool a fee per camper per day in consideration of the
services and facilities being provided, according to the fee schedule below.
Said payments shall be made once per week for the duration of the contracted
date range.
Campers Per Day Fee Per Camper Per Day
1 to 25 $9.50
26 to 75 $9
76 to 99 $8.50
100+ $8
12. Party rental of the Springfield Community Pool multipurpose room (full room)
(up to four hours) on weekends during the pool operational season, for pool
members only: $260, plus $6 per non-pool-member guest for access to the pool
complex for the duration of the party.
Party/meeting rental of the Springfield Community Pool multipurpose room
(full room) (up to four hours) on weekdays/weekends during the non-pool
operational season: $400 for Springfield residents and businesses, $500 for
non-Springfield residents and businesses.
Party/meeting rental of the Springfield Community Pool multipurpose room
(half room) (up to four hours) on weekdays/weekends during the non-pool
operational season: $200 for Springfield residents and businesses, $250 for
non-Springfield residents and businesses.
§ 27-6.7 PARKS, POOL AND RECREATIONAL AREAS § 27-6.7
27:9
§ 27-6.8. Identification Badges. [1991 Code § 253-12; Ord. No. 02-28; Ord. No.
2007-05 § I(C)]
Additional hours (nonrefundable) during the non-pool operational season: $60
per hour.
13. Private party rental of the Springfield Community Pool picnic grove (four
hours) on nights and weekends during the pool operational season, no access
to indoor multipurpose room or kitchen, available to pool members only: $90
reservation fee, plus $6 per non-pool-member guest for access to pool grounds
for the duration of the party.
14. Fee exceptions. The Township Committee may, at its sole discretion, set aside
a certain date or dates each year, which date(s) shall be specified annually by
resolution of the Township Committee and published by the Township, on
which date(s) all pool fees shall be waived for Township of Springfield
residents.
a. All members shall be issued identification badges, which must be shown for
admission and be pinned to their exterior garments at all times within the area.
b. Identification Badges Are Not Transferable. No member shall deliver to or
authorize any other person to wear or use that member's badge for admission to the
pool or pool area. Any member who so transfers, delivers or authorizes another to
wear or use that person's badge as aforesaid, as well as any member who is the
recipient or user of a transferred badge as aforesaid, shall each pay a penalty of $25
to the swimming pool utility of the Township, and if such penalty is not paid, the
member who does not pay same shall have all membership privileges revoked for
the remainder of the season without refund. This revocation shall continue in force
to succeeding seasons until the penalty is paid.
c. No Person Shall Deface Any Badge. Any person who defaces a badge shall lose
swimming privileges for seven days and shall pay a penalty of $1 to the swimming
pool utility of the Township. Second offense shall result in revocation of
membership privileges for the remainder of the season without refund.
d. No person who is not a member shall enter the pool or pool area:
1. Using as identification for such entry a badge which was not issued to such
person; or
2. Without a temporary badge, or in lieu thereof, written permission of the
Director of Recreation of the Township. Violation of this subsection shall
subject such person to arrest and, upon conviction of the offense, to payment
of a fine not exceeding $50.
e. Lost identification badges must be reported to the pool manager immediately.
Temporary replacement identification badges shall be issued, valid for only one
week, upon payment of a fee of $2. At the expiration of the week, a new season
identification badge will be issued.
f. All persons purchasing a Student five-Trip Pass will be issued a special
§ 27-6.7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 27-6.8
27:10
§ 27-6.9. (Reserved)
§ 27-6.10. Hours of Operation. [1991 Code § 253-13; Ord. No. 99-7 § 1[D]; Ord.
No. 2009-14 § I(B); Ord. No. 2011-03 § 1B]
The municipal pool shall be open during the following hours:
§ 27-6.11. Rules and Regulations. [1991 Code § 253-14; Ord. No. 2011-03 § 1A;
Ord. No. 2011-09]
Use of the swimming facilities shall be subject to such rules and regulations as may
be promulgated by the Township Committee by ordinance or resolution, which shall be
posted at all times upon the bulletin board at the swimming facilities. A copy thereof
shall be filed with the Township Clerk for public inspection. The following rules shall
be in effect:
identification badge, which must be shown for admission and punched. The badge
shall be surrendered upon the fifth use thereof.
a. Monday through Friday: 12:00 noon to 8:00 p.m.
b. Saturdays, Sundays and holidays: 11:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., except Memorial Day
weekend and each weekend thereafter until the pool opens on a daily basis: 12:00
noon to 5:00 p.m.
c. Monday through Friday mornings as per schedule, there will be beginner's
swimming lessons for all children who permanently reside in the Township.
d. After 6:00 p.m., use of the pool will be restricted to members 15 years or older and
to members under 15 years only if accompanied by their parents.
e. One dance may be held during the Labor Day weekend for swim pool members
only, on Friday night, Saturday night or the night preceding Labor Day, to proceed
past sundown. Notwithstanding any contrary provision contained in this section,
alcoholic beverages may be served and consumed during the aforesaid dance.
f. Five additional evening activities may be held at the swim pool which may continue
until the hour of 12:30 a.m. upon the recommendation of the Recreation Director or
the Recreation Committee, but subject to the approval of the Township Committee,
during any swim pool season. Attendance at such activities need not be limited to
swim pool members.
g. All pool opening and closing times are subject to adjustment upon recommendation
of the pool management and approval by the Township Committee.
a. Pool Rules.
1. All bathers, including babies, shall wear bathing suits in both the swimming
and wading pools. Babies shall wear rubber pants in wading pools.
2. Women, girls, men and boys with long hair shall wear bathing caps at all times
in the pool.
§ 27-6.8 PARKS, POOL AND RECREATIONAL AREAS § 27-6.11
27:11
3. All persons using the pool must shower prior to entering the pool, using warm
soap and water.
4. Any persons having a communicable disease, open blisters or cuts, sore or
inflamed eyes, ears, nose or mouth infections, excessive sunburn or any type
of skin disease shall be excluded from the pool area.
5. No inflatable water paraphernalia shall be allowed within the pool area.
6. Diving shall be permitted in designated areas only.
7. No one shall be allowed in water unless a lifeguard is present.
8. No swimming shall be permitted in diving areas, except as permitted by the
pool manager.
b. General Rules of Conduct.
1. Dress in and out of the pool shall be consistent with standards of good taste.
Brief-type swimming attire is not considered suitable.
2. Street shoes shall not be permitted within the pool apron area.
3. Street clothing shall be left in designated areas.
4. Women and girls of any age shall not comb their hair or wear pin curlers
within the pool apron area.
5. Dressing and undressing shall be done in locker rooms only. Dressing or
undressing shall not be permitted in parking areas.
6. All food shall be served and consumed within designated areas only. Under no
circumstance shall food or beverages be brought into pool area.
7. Children under 13 years of age shall not be permitted unless accompanied by
a responsible adult member. Children members between the ages of 10 and 13
shall be admitted without an adult only upon successful completion of a
swimming proficiency test.
8. Destruction of property shall result in suspension or revocation of
membership.
9. The pool management shall not be responsible for valuables brought into the
area.
10. All litter, paper or debris shall be placed in designated trash receptacles.
11. All vehicles shall park front-end in only.
12. All vehicles shall park only in lanes and areas designated or as requested by
the pool employees.
13. All vehicles must move in the pool area at a speed not to exceed 10 miles per
hour.
14. All vehicles must move in the direction and the lanes which are established.
§ 27-6.11 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 27-6.11
27:12
§ 27-6.12. Enforcement. [1991 Code § 253-15]
§ 27-6.13. Incorporation of Swimming Pool Code. [1991 Code § 253-16]
The Swimming Pool Code (1955) of New Jersey approved by the State Department of
Health shall be hereby incorporated in this section and shall become a part thereof.
15. All sections of the municipal parking lot regulations of § 7-36 and supplements
thereto must be strictly obeyed.
c. Prohibited Acts.
1. There shall be no glass or glass containers or metal containers within the pool
area.
2. There shall be no alcoholic beverages within the pool area.
3. There shall be no pets or animals within the pool area.
4. Bicycles, baby carriages and strollers shall not be allowed unless parked in
designated areas.
5. There shall be no wrestling, running, ball playing or other similar activity
within the pool apron and parking area.
6. No radios shall be operated in the parking area.
7. There shall be no blowing of horns or loitering in the parking area.
8. There shall be no smoking on pool grounds, except for in a designated area,
which shall be outside the pool fencing.
9. There shall be no food consumption in cars.
10. There shall be no spitting, unnecessary expectoration, spouting of water.
11. There shall be no roughness, rowdiness, profanity or other conduct affecting
the safety and comfort of others.
a. The regulations shall be posted at the pool and strictly enforced.
b. The Township Committee, pool manager or the assistant manager may close or
limit the swimming facilities to all or anyone whenever in their judgment such
action is deemed necessary or desirable for the protection of health or safety of such
persons entitled to use the facilities.
c. Members of the Police Department, pool manager and all other lifeguards when on
duty at the swimming facilities shall have authority to prohibit any action or
conduct which they may consider to be dangerous, improper or immoral or any act
or actions in violation of the rules and regulations hereinbefore provided and shall
have the power of expulsion or suspension of the privileges otherwise granted to
the holder of the membership badge.
§ 27-6.11 PARKS, POOL AND RECREATIONAL AREAS § 27-6.14
27:13
§ 27-6.14. Provisions Not Exclusive. [1991 Code § 253-17]
The provisions of this section shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other
provisions as set forth in any New Jersey Statute or regulation of the Township or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 27-6.15. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 253-18; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 27-7. TENNIS COURTS, MUNICIPAL.
§ 27-7.1. Badge Required. [1991 Code § 262-1]
Every person who uses any municipal tennis court in the Township shall wear in full
view a badge issued by the Township or shall be a guest of a badge owner.
§ 27-7.2. Fees for Tennis Court Badges. [1991 Code § 262-2]
Fees payable for tennis court badges shall be as set forth below and are subject to change
by amendment.
Municipal Tennis Courts:
Residents of the age of 18 and over $10
Residents of the age of 17 and under $10
All guests, regardless of age (per day) $10
Nonresidents, regardless of age (per year) $50
NOTE: However, notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, in the event that any
individual uses the tennis courts for profit wherein that individual receives moneys,
goods or services in return for providing lessons or services which involve the use of
the municipal tennis courts, there shall be an additional charge of $50 for each hour of
such use.
§ 27-7.3. Rules and Regulations. [1991 Code § 262-3]
The Township Committee may from time to time in its discretion, by resolution,
establish rules and regulations governing the use and conduct of all recreational and
athletic facilities in the Township.
§ 27-7.4. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 262-4]
The penalty for failure to comply with this section or any rule or regulation created
hereunder may be suspension, termination or denial of any or all permits and privileges
hereunder and, in addition, any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 27-8. SPRINGFIELD COMMUNITY POOL DAY-CAMP PROGRAM.47
§ 27-6.14 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 27-8.1
27:14
§ 27-8.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2002-11]
There is hereby created and established a municipal day-camp facility to be located
at the Springfield Community Pool. The day-camp shall be a part of and operated
by the Springfield Municipal Swimming Pool Utility. The Township Committee may
promulgate additional rules and regulations concerning same by resolution.
§ 27-8.2. Membership. [Ord. No. 2002-11; Ord. No. 2004-07 § I; Ord. No. 2005-05
§ I]
To be eligible to be enrolled in the day camp, a child shall be at least four years of age
and not older than 13 years of age on December 1 of the year of the program. All children
must be toilet trained to be eligible to attend or to continue attending. Membership in
the preteen summer sports camp program shall be limited to pool members who shall
be entering grade 6, 7 or 8 in September of the year of the program. There shall be a
Counselor in Training (C.I.T.) program available for those children who have or will
become 13 years of age during the twelve-month period ending on December one of the
year of the program.
§ 27-8.3. Camp Sessions. [Ord. No. 2002-11; Ord. No. 03-21 § I; Ord. No. 2004-06
§ I; Ord. No. 2004-07 § I; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I; Ord. No. 2006-04 § I(C); Ord. No.
2012-08 § 1; Ord. No. 2013-03 (B)]
The day camp shall operate the following sessions, on specific days and dates as
established on a year-to-year basis.
Camp A, 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. for eight weeks.
Camp B, 12:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. for eight weeks.
Camp C, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. for eight weeks.
Camp D, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. for two weeks.
Camp E, 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. for two weeks.
Camp F, 12:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. for two weeks.
Camp G, (Reserved)
Camp H, (Reserved)
Camp I, (Reserved)
Camp J, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. for the 9th week.
Camp K, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. for the 10th week.
Before Care, 7:45 a.m. to 8:30 a.m., on all days on which camp is in session.
After Care, 4:30 p.m. to 5:30 p.m., on all days on which camp is in session.
47. Editor's Note: Ordinance history includes 1991 Code § 154 and portions of Ordinance Nos. 93-4, 94-4, 94-9, 96-5, 97-5,
99-7 and 2001-05.
§ 27-8.1 PARKS, POOL AND RECREATIONAL AREAS § 27-8.4
27:15
§ 27-8.4. Fees. [Ord. No. 2002-11; Ord. No. 03-21 § I; Ord. No. 2004-05 § I; Ord.
No. 2004-06 § I; Ord. No. 2004-07 § I; Ord. No. 2005-05 § I; Ord. No. 2006-04
§ I(D); Ord. No. 2009-14 § I(C); Ord. No. 2010-05 § II; Ord. No. 2012-08 § 2; Ord.
No. 2013-03 § 1(C); Ord. No. 2015-06 § I(C); 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01;
2-14-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-01; 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02; amended
2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01; 11-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-13]
The fee for each child enrolled in the day camp shall be as follows, and is payable in
full prior to the first day of the camp season, except for Camp J or K, which are payable
no later than the Thursday, preceding the first day of each session. No fees shall be
returnable for any reason after the first day of the camp season, or for Camp J or K, that
session.
a. Resident L.
Camp A (pool members) $1,064*
Camp A (non-pool-members) $1,360*
Camp B or C (pool members only) $626
Camp D $392*+=
Camp E or F $247+=
Camp J (Camp A-F pool campers only) $207
Camp K (Camp A-F pool campers only) $207
Camp L (Camp A-F pool campers only) $207
Camp Leader in Training (L.I.T.) Program fee $75 per week
* For 2 or more children, a $75 per eight-week session or a $15 per two-week
session discount shall be deducted for each additional child.
+ Discount equivalent of two camp days shall be deducted per child for Week 1
of Camps D, E and F.
= Discount equivalent of one camp day shall be deducted per child for Week 2 of
Camps D, E and F.
b. Nonresident Fees.
Camp A (pool members) $1,369
Camp A (non-pool-members) $1,777
Camp B or C (pool members only) $731
Camp D $498+=
Camp E or F $319+=
Camp J (Camp A-F pool campers only) $274
Camp K (Camp A-F pool campers only) $274
Camp L (Camp A-F pool campers only) $274
§ 27-8.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 27-8.4
27:16
§ 27-9. RENTAL OF CERTAIN RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. [Added
12-28-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-23]
Rental agreement: Individuals and entities seeking to rent the Springfield Community
Pool's multipurpose room, picnic area, or the Chisholm Community Center shall execute
a rental agreement in a form approved by the Township's Director of Recreation.
The rental agreement shall include, and all renters shall be subject to, the following
requirements:
+ Discount equivalent of two camp days shall be deducted per child for Week 1
of Camps D, E and F.
= Discount equivalent of one camp day shall be deducted per child for Week 2 of
Camps D, E and F.
c. Additional sessions.
Before-care (per 2-week session) $70+
After-care (per 2-week session) $75=
+ Discount equivalent of two camp days shall be deducted per child for Week 1
of before-care and after-care.
= Discount equivalent of one camp day shall be deducted per child for Week 2 of
before-care and after-care.
d. Visiting camp fee per day per camper: $5.
a. Alcohol consumption.
1. The consumption of alcohol in conjunction with the rental of the multipurpose
room is permitted subject to the terms of this chapter, New Jersey Law, the
Township Code, and the rental agreement. Consumption of alcohol is
restricted to beer and wine only, and is permitted inside the pool's
multipurpose room and kitchen only. There shall be no alcoholic beverages
outside of the aforementioned multipurpose room and kitchen on the pool
grounds, which prohibition includes, but is not limited to, the parking lot,
sidewalks, picnic area, grass and deck areas, playground, courts, fitness room,
locker rooms, and offices.
2. The consumption of alcohol in conjunction with the rental of the Springfield
Community Pool's picnic area and Chisholm Community Center is prohibited.
b. Insurance. The renter shall provide the Township of Springfield with certificates of
insurance for all coverages required herein to be in place for the event.
1. Renters of multipurpose room, picnic area, or Chisholm Community Center
shall secure and maintain general liability insurance ($1,000,000 per
occurrence) coverage for the date of the event. For rentals which will not
include more than 25 individuals, and will not include the consumption of
alcohol, the Township may permit a waiver or reduction in limits of the
general liability insurance requirements in this Subsection b1.
§ 27-8.4 PARKS, POOL AND RECREATIONAL AREAS § 27-9
27:17
§ 27-10. RECREATION FEES. [1991 Code § 165-3; Ord. No. 95-19A; Ord. No.
2000-22 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-10; Ord. No. 2005-03 § I; Ord. No. 2007-04 § I(E);
Ord. No. 2006-7 § I; Ord. No. 2007-21 § I; Ord. No. 2008-4 § I; Ord. No. 2009-14
§ I(D); Ord. No. 2015-06 § I(D); 2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01; 2-14-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-01; 2-13-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-02; 9-11-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-16;
amended 2-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01; 11-26-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-13]
Sports program registration $20 — $300
Individual adult program $20 — $60
Team adult program (per team) $200 — $400
Camps and clinics $40 — $200
Trips $1 — $125
Special events $1 — $50
Miscellaneous activities $1 — $125
Replacement of lost badge $5
Returned check fee $35
Refund administrative fee $15
Credit card processing fee (pool and recreation) No charge
2. If alcohol will be consumed during rental of the multipurpose room, then the
renter shall secure and maintain liquor liability insurance coverage, in addition
to general liability coverage for the date of the event, as follows:
(a) If the renter is a business which manufactures, distributes, sells, or serves
alcoholic beverages, and intends to serve or sell alcoholic beverages at
the event, the renter shall secure liquor legal liability insurance or a
properly endorsed general liability policy for liquor sale/service with a
minimum limit of liability of $2,000,000 per occurrence.
(b) If the renter hires a vendor to serve or sell alcoholic beverages, rather than
providing the alcohol him/herself, the renter shall secure a liquor legal
liability insurance policy or properly endorsed general liability policy for
liquor sale/service with a minimum limit of liability of $2,000,000 per
occurrence.
(c) If the renter is providing alcohol him/herself, and not as set forth in
Subsection b2(a) or (b) above, then the renter shall secure a host liquor
liability insurance policy with a minimum limit of liability of $2,000,000
per occurrence.
c. Security. Security, in the form of a uniformed police officer(s), shall be on duty
during the full rental period if deemed necessary by the Chief of Police and the
Director of Recreation. The Springfield Township Police Department or an
authorized substitute shall provide this security. Security fees will be the
responsibility of the renter.
d. Indemnification. Renter shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify the Township
in connection with rental.
§ 27-9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 27-10
27:18
Use of Chisholm Community Center Gymnasium and
Party Room (4 hours)
$225
Upstairs use only (4 hours) $100
Additional hours (nonrefundable) $60 per hour
Chisholm Playground Camp
Single week (each child) (resident) $65*+
Single week (each child) (nonresident) $75*+
Second child and additional children (residents only)
will be charged $50 per single session
*40% discount shall be deducted per child for Week 1 of Chisholm Playground
Camp
+20% discount shall be deducted per child for Week 2 of Chisholm Playground
Camp
Annual Youth Wing After-School Program registration
fee
$25
Youth Wing After-School Program replacement ID
card fee
$5
§ 27-10 PARKS, POOL AND RECREATIONAL AREAS § 27-10
27:19

Chapter 28
SHADE TREES
§ 28-1. PREAMBLE.
§ 28-1.1. Findings. [1991 Code § 2681; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
The Township Committee does herein decide and find that the indiscriminate,
uncontrolled and excessive destruction, removal and cutting of trees upon lots and
tracts within the Township has resulted in creating increased municipal costs to control
drainage, has further caused increased soil erosion, increased dust, increased noise
level, which has adversely affected property values and has further rendered lands
unfit and unsuitable for their most appropriate use, with the result that there has been
a deterioration, or will result in a future deterioration, of conditions affecting our
environment and the health, safety and general well-being of the inhabitants of the
Township.
§ 28-1.2. Purpose. [1991 Code § 268-1; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
It is the purpose of this chapter to help maintain the residential character of the
Township, to control soil erosion and sediment damage and related environmental
damage by requiring adequate provisions for surface water retention and drainage and
for the protection of exposed soil surfaces in order to promote the safety, public health,
convenience and general welfare of the community. The standards and procedures
established in this chapter are intended to furnish guidelines for the use of Township
boards, committees and commissions in evaluating tree removal and planting plans prior
to issuing approval for subdivision and other land developments.
§ 28-2. PROHIBITION. [1991 Code § 268-2; amended 9-22-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-18]
No person shall cut or remove any tree upon any lands within the Township unless
such action is done in accordance with the regulations and provisions of this chapter.
Any contractor hired to prune or remove trees in the Township must be registered and
licensed as provided in N.J.A.C. 7:3A-1.1 et seq. Furthermore, until the provisions of
this chapter have been complied with, no building permit shall be issued, no site plan
shall be approved and no application for development shall be approved.
§ 28-3. DEFINITIONS. [1991 Code § 268-3; Ord. No. 98-21 § I[C]]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
OFFICER — Shall mean the Supervisor of the Department of Public Works or a person
designated thereby.
PREFERRED TREE LIST — Shall mean a list of trees recommended by the officer as
best adapted to the climate, soil and topography of the Township of Springfield.
TREE — Shall mean any woody perennial plant or coniferous tree having a diameter
greater than four inches, measured at a point 4 1/2 feet above the ground, except as set
forth in Section 28-6.
§ 27-10 SHADE TREES § 28-4
28:1
§ 28-4. (RESERVED)
§ 28-5. PERMIT FOR REMOVAL.
§ 28-5.1. Application for Permit to Remove. [1991 Code § 268-5; Ord. No. 98-21
§ I[C]; amended 9-22-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-18]
§ 28-5.2. Fee. [1991 Code § 268-6; Ord. No. 98-21 § 1[C]; 9-22-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-18]
§ 28-5.3. Criteria for Reviewing Application. [1991 Code § 268-7; Ord. No. 98-21
§ 1[C]; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
a. Any person desiring to destroy, cut or remove any tree shall apply in writing to the
officer for a permit to remove such tree and shall file a tree removal and planting
plan in the form of a map and exhibits showing:
1. General location of wooded area and trees to be removed and to be retained.
2. Exact location of rare or historic trees as required by the officer.
3. Simple map of property and location of trees.
4. Estimated number of trees on tract.
5. Species involved.
6. Location of streams and wetlands.
7. A list of trees to be planted, preferably of the species shown on the preferred
tree list.
8. Tree removal plan and tree planting plan in relation to principal and accessory
buildings, roads and driveways, parking lots, garden areas, etc.
9. Location of buildings.
10. Location of roads, driveways, parking lots, recreation areas and garden areas.
b. The officer shall have 10 working days to approve or disapprove any application
made pursuant to this section. If no action is taken by the officer within 10 working
days, the application shall be deemed approved.
a. The applicant at the time of filing the application shall pay a fee of $50 for review
and processing of the application.
b. If the application is denied or the project is abandoned, the Township shall return
the fee paid for each tree to be removed. The Township shall retain the $50
processing and review fee.
c. The fee of $100 for each tree to be removed, in excess of four trees removed in 12
months, shall be held in a separate fund by the Township to be used solely for the
replanting of trees to replace each tree removed by the applicant.
§ 28-4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 28-5.3
28:2
a. The officer shall examine the site to determine whether the cutting, removal or
destruction of a tree or trees shall impair drainage conditions, cause soil erosion,
increase dust hazards, decrease the property value or neighboring property values
and shall further determine the overall effects on the physical and aesthetic values
of the land as well as any adverse impact upon the environment.
b. As a basis for determining permitted tree removal, the officer shall give
consideration to, but shall not be limited to, the following: [Amended 9-22-2020
by Ord. No. 2020-18]
1. Clearance of trees for proposed rights-of-way shall be approved by the officer
only for the paved width of such rights-of-way, plus a ten-foot width on each
side only for alignments as approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board,
in writing. Alignment of the rights-of-way shall be planned to save as many
trees as possible.
2. It shall be within the discretion of the officer to permit trees to be removed
where the proposed paved portion of a parking area is planned. In off-street
parking areas other than for single-family residential dwellings, islands of
trees must be left in such a manner that there is a tree every 200 feet or less in
any direction. No paving of any impervious nature shall be placed around the
base of the trunk of the tree within 10 feet, and the grade shall be such that
drainage of rainwater will keep the root area watered without pooling or
exceeding the requirements of the species. Excess water shall be admitted to
dry wells or storm sewers on the parking lot or drained by acceptable means.
3. In the vicinity of such uses or structures, in the absence of existing trees or
forest cover, provision shall be made for screen species.
4. Any grading plan must protect standing trees from machine operation, soil
storage or material by distance or proper barrier. A wooden barrier or storm
fencing must be placed within the area designated by the officer. Any tree
damaged must be repaired or replaced.
5. A buffer zone of trees and shrubs shall encircle industrial or commercial areas
in accordance with the zoning and other laws of the Township of Springfield.
6. Cluster development, commercial development and industrial development
shall consider the use of previously treeless areas for building sites. If it is
necessary to develop wooded areas or remove trees for proposed building sites
in the case of such developments, the Planning Board, Zoning Board,
Construction Official or Zoning Officer may require tree planting in treeless
areas on the site or off the site with the number of trees necessary to provide
equivalent environmental benefits.
7. Trees in the area between the street line and the setback line of the buildings
shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
c. However, no permit shall be issued if:
1. The purpose of tree removal is to expose signs and billboards or expose
previously cleared land.
§ 28-5.3 SHADE TREES § 28-5.3
28:3
§ 28-5.4. Exceptions. [1991 Code § 268-4; Ord. No. 98-21 § 1[D]; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(B); amended 9-22-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-18]
This § 28-5 shall not apply to:
§ 28-6. PLANTING. [1991 Code § 268-8; Ord. No. 98-21 § 1[C]; 9-22-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-18]
Any tree used in a required planting or to replace a damaged tree must be at least 2 1/2
inches in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet from the top of the root level.
§ 28-7. REMOVAL PROCEDURES.
2. The existing trees form part of a planned greenbelt or buffer zone.
3. The trees are formally designated by the officer to be special by virtue of
history, unusual size or the like; written permission of the officer must be
obtained to remove, destroy or kill those trees.
4. Any grading plan must protect standing trees from machine operation, soil
storage or material storage by distance or proper barrier. Any tree damaged
must be replaced.
5. Tree removal from any slope will contribute, in the opinion of the officer, to
extra runoff of surface water onto adjoining property and erosion and silting,
unless other means approved by the Township Engineer are provided to
prevent runoff, erosion and silting.
6. The tree is considered to be unique and irreplaceable by reason of age,
historical association or botanical rarity, as previously determined by the
officer.
d. The officer shall have the discretion to direct any applicant under this chapter to
replace any tree in excess of four trees removed in 12 months, approved for
removal, pursuant to this section, with one (1) or more trees, which tree shall be
planted on public property or on the property of a private landowner who gives
permission to do so. [Amended 9-22-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-18]
a. Any tree on the Township’s rights-of-way;
b. Any tree growing on property actually being used as a nursery, garden center,
Christmas tree plantation or orchard;
c. Any dead, diseased or other tree that is likely to endanger life or property as
determined by the officer as to any tree within the right-of-way. The Township shall
be responsible for removing any such tree that is dead, dangerous or must be
removed due to sidewalk repair required by the Township;
d. Any tree removed pursuant to a valid site plan or subdivision approval by the Board
of Adjustment or Planning Board.
§ 28-5.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 28-7.1
28:4
§ 28-7.1. Marking Trees for Removal. [1991 Code § 268-9]
Each tree which has been approved for destruction, cutting or removal shall be
prominently marked by the officer.
§ 28-7.2. Removal of Stumps. [1991 Code § 268-10]
Each tree which has been approved for removal shall be removed so that no stump
remains visible above the surface of the ground.
§ 28-8. (RESERVED)
§ 28-9. COMPLIANCE. [1991 Code § 268-11; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
The officer shall, on the officer's own initiative or on complaint of any individual, take
action pursuant to this chapter to assure compliance with this chapter, including but not
limited to a stop-work order.
§ 28-10. APPEALS. [1991 Code § 268-12; Ord. No. 98-21 § 1[C]]
Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the decision of the officer to the Township
Committee within 10 days of the receipt of the officer's decision. The appeal to the
Governing Body shall be made by serving the Municipal Clerk in person or by certified
mail with a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds therefor and the name and address
of the appellant and the name and address of his attorney, if represented. The Governing
Body shall proceed to hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Township Committee at least five days subsequent to service of same, unless the
applicant consents in writing to an extension of the period. Failure of the Governing
Body to hold a hearing results in the affirmation of the appeal. The Township Committee
may reverse, modify or affirm the aforesaid decision.
§ 28-11. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
§ 28-11.1. Penalty. [1991 Code § 268-13; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to
$1,000 per tree, or community service not to exceed 30 days for each tree, or both.
§ 28-11.2. Separate Violation. [1991 Code § 268-13; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
Each tree removed in violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation
thereof.
§ 28-11.3. Denial or Revocation of Site Plan. [1991 Code § 268-13; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(B)]
If the court, after trial, determines that any violation of this chapter was willful and
wanton, such finding shall be brought to the attention of the Planning and Zoning Boards
and the Construction Official and such information shall be used to deny or revoke site
plan approval or deny or revoke a construction permit.
§ 28-7.1 SHADE TREES § 28-12
28:5
§ 28-12. COPIES OF CHAPTER. [1991 Code § 268-14]
Copes of this chapter shall be on file in the offices of the Planning and Zoning Boards
and shall be distributed with any application forms which are to be submitted to such
Boards for site plan approval, variant relief or the like.
§ 28-12 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 28-12
28:6
Chapter 29
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 29-1. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
§ 29-1.1. Definitions. [1991 Code § 184-1]
As used in this section:
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Shall mean any items used to extinguish or control any
fire or stop or contain any release involving any hazardous material which becomes
damaged, cannot be reused or cannot be replenished without cost after that particular fire
or release. These items include but are not restricted to tools, equipment, fire-fighting
foam, chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent materials, sand and other containment
materials, recovery drums and specialized protective equipment, to include but not be
restricted to acid suits, acid gloves, goggles and personal protective clothing, including
breathing apparatus and encapsulation suits.
FIRE APPARATUS — Shall mean vehicle or vehicles used at scene during incident.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Shall mean any material, solid, liquid or gas, listed or
regulated as a hazardous material by the United States Department of Transportation, to
include, but not be limited to, any substance or material judged to be a danger to the
health and safety of the general public by the emergency response personnel at the scene
of an incident.
MANPOWER COSTS — Shall mean the cost required to reimburse the Township
for manpower extended as a result of a hazardous materials incident occurring in the
Township, including but not limited to police personnel and Fire Department personnel,
including permanent and volunteer members. Reimbursement shall be at such rate as the
individual who was assigned such duty is being paid, including overtime, if necessary.
RELEASE —Shall mean leak, spill, dumping, pouring or escape, whether accidental or
negligent, of hazardous materials.
VEHICLE — Shall mean any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles, trucks, boats, tractor-trailers,
construction equipment, farm machinery and gardening equipment.
VESSEL — Shall mean any container, drum, box, cylinder or tank used to hold or
contain or carry or store any hazardous material.
§ 29-1.2. Purpose. [1991 Code § 184-2]
a. This section provides for the reimbursement to the Township of manpower costs,
vehicle and apparatus time and for the replacement or reimbursement of the
specialized and sometimes nonreusable equipment required by State and Federal
regulations to be made available in the Township in case of fire, leakage or spillage
involving any hazardous material.
b. This section entitles the Township to reimbursement for manpower costs, vehicle
and apparatus time and for any expendable items used by the Township or any of
its agencies in extinguishing any fire, stopping or containing any leak or controlling
§ 28-12 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 29-1.2
29:1
§ 29-1.3. Responsibility for Reimbursement. [1991 Code § 184-3]
Reimbursement to the Township for any manpower costs and expendable items used
shall be made by the following parties:
§ 29-1.4. Reimbursement for Services. [1991 Code § 184-4]
Any person or company responsible for any fire or release of hazardous material must
provide reimbursement for services rendered by any recovery company, towing
company or other technical assistance called for by the Fire Department and Police
Department to handle such incident, including emergency construction work and heavy
equipment rental.
§ 29-1.5. Time Limit for Payment. [1991 Code § 184-5]
Any person, owner or company responsible for any fire or release of hazardous material
shall reimburse the Township of Springfield Fire Department and Police Department
for the full price of any manpower costs, vehicle/apparatus time or expendable items
used to extinguish or control such a fire, stop or contain such a release or control such a
spill within a period of 30 days after receipt of a bill for such items from the Township
of Springfield Fire Department and/or Police Department. In the event payment is not
received within 30 days, the Police Chief or Fire Chief may sign a complaint for
violation of this chapter in the Municipal Court.
§ 29-1.6. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 184-6]
Any person, owner or company responsible for any fire or release of hazardous materials
who fails to reimburse the Township of Springfield Fire Department or Police
Department within the time set forth in this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $500 per day or to imprisonment for a period of not more than
six months, or both, for each day after 30 days from receipt of a bill that the bill remains
unpaid.
§ 29-1.7. Disposal of Funds. [1991 Code § 184-7]
All reimbursement collected for hazardous material incidents shall be placed into the
general fund. A record of the moneys collected shall be kept by the Treasurer.
any spill of hazardous materials.
a. The owner or operator of any vehicle responsible for any fire or release of
hazardous material.
b. The owner or person responsible for any vessel containing hazardous materials
involved in any fire or release on public or private property, whether stationary or
in transit, whether accidental or through negligence.
c. The owner or person responsible for any property from which any release of
hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or through negligence.
d. Any person responsible for any fire or release of hazardous materials on public or
private property, whether accidental or through negligence.
§ 29-1.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 29-2
29:2
§ 29-2. INSPECTION OF DIESEL-POWERED VEHICLES.
§ 29-2.1. Definitions. [1991 Code § 276-1]
As used in this section:
AUTOBUS — Shall mean and include all motor vehicles used for the transportation of
passengers for hire.
DIESEL-POWERED ENGINE — Shall mean a mechanism for converting energy into
mechanic force and motion by using a compression-ignition type of internal-combustion
engine.
DIESEL-POWERED MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is selfpropelled
by a compression-ignition type of internal-combustion engine and which is
designed primarily for transporting persons or property on a public street or highway.
For purposes of this chapter, passenger automobiles and motorcycles are excluded.
EXHAUST EMISSIONS — Shall mean substances emitted into the atmosphere from
any opening downstream from the exhaust ports of motor vehicle engine.
IDLE — Shall mean the motor vehicle operating mode consisting of an unloaded,
throttled engine speed at the revolutions per minute specified by the manufacturer.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean all vehicles propelled otherwise than by muscular
power, excepting motorized bicycles and such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks.
OPACITY—Shall mean the property of a substance which renders it partially or wholly
obstructive to the transmission of visible light, expressed as the percentage to which the
light is obstructed.
PERSON — Shall mean corporations, companies associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies as well as individuals, and also includes all
political subdivisions of this State or any agencies or instrumentalities thereof.
SMOKE —Shall mean small gasborne and airborne particles, exclusive of water vapor,
arising from a process of combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
§ 29-2.2. Inspection Standard. [1991 Code § 276-2]
a. Any motor vehicle propelled by a diesel-powered engine which is subject to
inspection by the owner or lessee at the premises or place of business of the owner
or lessee as required by the Division of Motor Vehicles as a condition of
compliance with the inspection shall not emit smoke in the exhaust emission in
excess of the 20% smoke opacity standard as determined by the following
procedure:
1. The vehicle driven on chassis dynamometer with simulated load by power
absorption procedure requires that the smoke meter be firmly positioned on the
exhaust outlet and that the vehicle be positioned on the chassis dynamometer
before the inspector proceeds with the following steps:
(a) With vehicle on a chassis dynamometer under no power absorption,
select a gear ratio which will produce a maximum vehicle speed of 45
miles to 60 miles per hour at governed engine revolutions per minute.
§ 29-2 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 29-2.2
29:3
§ 29-2.3. Idle Standard. [1991 Code § 276-3]
(b) With engine running at governed engine revolutions per minute, apply
power absorption load to the dynamometer until such loading reduces the
engine revolutions per minute to 80% of the governed speed; the peak
smoke opacity measured over a period of five to 10 seconds with the
engine under such loading shall be the smoke opacity.
2. The vehicle driven in low gear with simulated load by braking action
procedure requires that the smoke meter be firmly positioned on the exhaust
outlet before proceeding with the following steps:
(a) Select a gear ratio which will produce a maximum speed of 10 miles to
15 miles per hour at governed engine revolutions per minute and drive
vehicle at 10 miles to 15 miles per hour at governed engine revolutions
per minute.
(b) Load the engine by applying brakes until engine revolutions per minute
is lugged down to 80% of the governed engine revolutions per minute;
the peak smoke opacity measured over a period of five to 10 seconds with
the engine under such brake loading shall be the smoke opacity.
b. Any diesel-powered autobus which is subject to the inspection rules and regulations
of the New Jersey Department of Transportation (reference N.J.S.A. 48:4 and
N.J.A.C. 16:53), as a condition of compliance with the inspection, shall not emit
smoke in the exhaust emissions in excess of the 12% smoke opacity standard as
determined by the following standard:
1. Position smoke meter against exhaust outlet using extension pole and magnet
so that the optical axis of the sensor head is perpendicular to the smoke plume.
2. With engine at normal operating temperature, depress accelerator pedal slowly
to obtain a fast idle (1,200 to 1,300 revolutions per minute).
3. Accelerate the engine from fast idle to maximum governed revolutions per
minute by depressing the accelerator pedal as rapidly as possible.
4. As governed revolutions per minute is reached, release the accelerator pedal to
allow engine to coast down to fast idle (1,200 to 1,300 revolutions per minute).
5. Repeat steps in paragraphs 3 and 4. (Note: Steps in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 are
to purge the engine.)
6. After the engine purge, repeat steps in paragraphs 3 and 4 three times in
succession. After each successive measurement, record peak opacity reading
and reset smoke meter. The average of the three peak smoke opacity
measurements obtained with the smoke meter shall be the test result as
measured using the standing acceleration test procedure.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the engine of a diesel-powered motor
vehicle to idle for more than three consecutive minutes if the vehicle is not in
motion, except:
§ 29-2.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 29-2.3
29:4
§ 29-2.4. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 276-4]
A violation of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 29-2.5. Enforcement. [1991 Code § 276-5]
The Township Committee and its agencies and the Springfield Board of Health are
hereby granted and shall have authority to exercise all the powers necessary and
appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this section.
§ 29-3. DISPOSAL OF FLUORESCENT AND MERCURY VAPOR LAMPS.
§ 29-3.1. Definition. [1991 Code § 200-11A]
As used in this chapter:
FLUORESCENT LAMPS — Shall mean and refer to fluorescent and mercury vaportype
tubular lamps.
§ 29-3.2. Findings. [1991 Code § 200-11B]
It is hereby determined that:
1. A motor vehicle at the vehicle operator's place of business where the motor
vehicle is permanently assigned may idle for a maximum of 30 consecutive
minutes, except thereafter that vehicle may not idle again until the vehicle
engine has been stopped for three or more hours; or
2. A motor vehicle may idle for 15 consecutive minutes when the vehicle's
engine has been stopped for three or more hours.
b. The provisions of paragraph a above shall not apply to:
1. Autobuses while discharging or picking up passengers.
2. Motor vehicles stopped in a line of traffic.
3. Motor vehicles whose primary or secondary power source is utilized in whole
or in part for necessary and definitely prescribed mechanical operation other
than propulsion, passenger compartment heating or air conditioning.
4. Motor vehicles being or waiting to be examined by State and Federal motor
vehicle inspectors.
5. Emergency motor vehicles in an emergency situation.
6. Motor vehicles while being repaired.
7. Motor vehicles while engaged in the process of connection, detachment or
exchange of trailers.
8. Motor vehicles manufactured with a sleeper berth while being used, in a
nonresidentially zoned area, by the vehicle's operator for sleeping or resting.
§ 29-2.3 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 29-3.2
29:5
§ 29-3.3. Discarding in Certain Places Prohibited. [1991 Code § 200-11C]
No person shall throw or leave a discarded fluorescent lamp upon any sidewalk, street or
other public place or in any vacant lot, hallway, cellar or other place used by the public.
§ 29-4. FERTILIZER APPLICATION AND USE.
§ 29-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
The purpose of this section is to regulate the outdoor application of fertilizer so as
to reduce the overall amount of excess nutrients entering waterways, thereby helping
to protect and improve surface water quality. This section does not apply to fertilizer
application on commercial farms.
§ 29-4.2. Basis and Background. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
Elevated levels of nutrients, particularly phosphorus, in surface waterbodies can result in
excessive and accelerated growth of algae and aquatic plants (eutrophication). Excessive
plant growth can result in diurnal variations and extremes in dissolved oxygen and pH,
which, in turn, can be detrimental to aquatic life. As algae and plant materials die off,
the decay process creates a further demand on dissolved oxygen levels. The presence of
excessive plant matter can also restrict use of the affected water for recreation and water
supply.
While healthy vegetated areas are protective of water quality by stabilizing soil and
filtering precipitation, when fertilizers are applied to the land surface improperly or
in excess of the needs of target vegetation, nutrients can be transported by means of
stormwater to nearby waterways, contributing to the problematic growth of excessive
aquatic vegetation. Most soils in New Jersey contain sufficient amounts of phosphorus to
support adequate root growth for established turf. Over time, it is necessary to replenish
available phosphorus, but generally not at the levels commonly applied. Other target
vegetation, such as vegetable gardens and agricultural/horticultural plantings, will have
a greater need for phosphorus application, as will the repair or establishment of new
lawns or cover vegetation. A soils test and fertilizer application recommendation geared
to the soil and planting type is the best means to determine the amount of nutrients to
apply. Timing and placement of fertilizer application is also critical to avoid transport of
nutrients to waterways through stormwater runoff. Fertilizer applied immediately prior
to a runoff-producing rainfall, outside the growing season or to impervious surfaces is
most likely to be carried away by means of runoff without accomplishing the desired
objective of supporting target vegetation growth. Thereof, the management of the type,
a. Discarded fluorescent lamps contain chemicals which are dangerous to living
tissue.
b. Broken fluorescent lamps, when discarded so as to be exposed to the public or when
disposed in garbage receptacles in an exposed condition, are hazardous to the
public, particularly to children and to employees of the Township and contractors
engaged in the removal of garbage and other refuse material.
c. Personal contact with broken fluorescent lamps may lead to serious injuries to the
person in contact with same.
§ 29-3.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 29-4.2
29:6
amount and techniques for fertilizer application is necessary as one tool to protect water
resources.
This section does not apply to application of fertilizer on commercial farms, but
improper application of fertilizer on farms would be problematic as well. Stewardship
on the part of commercial farmers is needed to address this potential source of excess
nutrient load to waterbodies. Commercial farmers are expected to implement best
management practices in accordance with conservation management plans or resource
conservation plans developed for the farm by the Natural Resource Conservation Service
and approved by the Soil Conservation District Board.
§ 29-4.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUFFER — Shall mean the land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any waterbody.
However, in situations that warrant additional flexibility, such as where lot sizes are
exceptionally small or where the twenty-five-foot buffer constitutes the majority of the
available property, the required buffer may be reduced to 10 feet in width, with the
additional requirement that a drop spreader be used for fertilizer application.
COMMERCIAL FARM — Shall mean a farm management unit producing agricultural
or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually.
FERTILIZER—Shall mean a fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other substance
containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its plant nutrient
content, which is designed for use or claimed to have value in promoting plant growth,
and which is sold, offered for sale, or intended for sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean a surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This term shall be used
to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or other material that
prevents infiltration of water into the soil.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Shall mean any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P205, with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero; except that it shall not
be considered to include animal (including human) or vegetable manures, agricultural
liming materials, or wood ashes that have not been amended to increase their nutrient
content.
SOILS TEST — Shall mean a technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil-testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by Rutgers
Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATERBODY — Shall mean a surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary.
§ 29-4.2 ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS § 29-4.4
29:7
§ 29-4.4. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
No person may do any of the following:
§ 29-4.5. Phosphorus Fertilizer Application. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
No person may do the following:
§ 29-4.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
This section shall be enforced by the Township Engineer, Police Department and/or
other representatives or employees duly designated by the Township of Springfield.
§ 29-4.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2014-04]
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed $250 per violation, with each day or documented act or occurrence
to be considered a separate violation.
a. Apply fertilizer when a runoff producing rainfall is occurring or predicted and/or
when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer movement off site exists.
b. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently applied to an
impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the target surface or returned
to either its original or another appropriate container for reuse.
c. Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any waterbody.
d. Apply fertilizer more than 15 days prior to the start of or at any time after the end
of the recognized growing season, which growing season runs from March 1 to
November 15 (Springfield being located in USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 6b)
a. Apply phosphorus fertilizer in outdoor areas except as demonstrated to be needed
for the specific soils and target vegetation in accordance with a soils test and the
associated annual fertilizer recommendation issued by Rutgers Cooperative
Research and Extension.
b. Exceptions.
1. Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
(a) Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land disturbance,
provided the application is in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules,
(b) Re-establishing or repairing a turf area.
2. Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular fertilizer
under the soils surface, directly to the feeder roots.
3. Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container plantings,
flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens.
§ 29-4.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 29-4.7
29:8
Chapter 30
SOIL AND SOIL REMOVAL
§ 30-1. REMOVAL PROCEDURES.
§ 30-1.1. Permit Required; Conformity With Chapter. [1991 Code § 244-1]
Unless provided in the land use regulations, no excavation shall be made and no soil
shall be removed unless a permit shall have been first obtained from the Township
Committee as provided in this section. No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be
removed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 30-1.2. Application for Permit. [1991 Code § 244-2]
Any person or owner desiring to make any excavation or to remove soil from premises
in the Township shall first file with the Township Clerk an application for a permit to
make the excavation or to remove soil, together with a map of the premises. The map
shall show the proposed contour lines and proposed grades resulting from any intended
removal of soil in relation to the existing topography of the premises. The proposed
contour lines and the proposed grades shall be subject to approval by the Township
Engineer. No permit for soil removal shall be issued until such map has been filed and
until the contour lines and grades have been approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 30-1.3. Hearing and Determination; Standards. [1991 Code § 244-3]
Upon fulfillment of the requirements of subsection 30-1.2, the applicant shall, on
request, be granted a hearing before the Township Committee on the application. In
determining its action on the application the Township Committee shall take into
consideration soil erosion, drainage, soil fertility, lateral support, slopes and grades of
abutting streets, land values and uses and such other factors as may bear upon or relate to
the coordinated, adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Township. The
permit shall be granted if the Township Committee is of the opinion that the proposed
soil removal will not create conditions inimical to the public health, welfare and safety
and will not result in the creation of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion
or fertility problems, depressed land values, nor create any drainage, sewerage problems
or other conditions of danger.
§ 30-1.4. Topographical Restrictions. [1991 Code § 244-4]
In the removal of soil, the owner, applicant or person in charge of the excavation or the
removal of soil shall so conduct and complete the operations that:
a. There shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions.
b. The area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris and graded to conform to
the contour lines and grades approved by the Township Engineer.
c. There shall be no detriment to adjoining properties or to the Township.
§ 29-4.7 SOIL AND SOIL REMOVAL § 30-1.5
30:1
§ 30-1.5. Retention of Topsoil. [1991 Code § 244-5]
The applicant, owner or person in charge of the removal of soil shall not take away the
top layer or arable soil for a depth of four inches. The top layer of arable soil to a depth
of four inches shall be set aside for retention on the premises and shall be respread over
the premises when the rest of the soil has been removed in accordance with the levels
and contour lines approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 30-1.6. Use of Streets. [1991 Code § 244-6]
In the removal of soil or dirt, the owner, applicant or person in charge shall make use
only of such streets for transportation as are designated for that purpose by the Township
Engineer.
§ 30-1.7. Bond. [1991 Code § 244-7]
Before any permit for soil removal shall be issued, the applicant or owner shall enter into
and file with the Township a bond running in favor of the Township, with such surety
and in such amount as shall be approved by the Township Committee. The amount of
the bond shall be determined by the Township Committee after report by the Township
Engineer as to the necessities and requirements in the undertaking. The bond shall be
conditioned upon the following:
§ 30-1.8. Applicability. [1991 Code § 244-8]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to excavations for improvements
being made by the Township or its contractors.
a. The work of soil removal shall comply with all ordinances and regulations on the
subject.
b. The work shall be done in proper manner, in accordance with the grades and
contour lines approved by the Township Engineer.
c. The top layer of soil to a depth of four inches shall be set aside and retained, to be
thereafter respread over the area when the rest of removal has been completed.
d. Repairs at the expense of the owner or applicant shall be made to any street used in
transportation if the Township shall consider repairs are necessary because of such
use of the streets.
e. The worker shall be properly done without detriment to adjoining properties or
detriment to the Township.
f. The work shall be done without leaving any sharp declivities, pits or depressions.
g. The area shall be leveled off properly and cleared of debris.
h. The owner or applicant shall pay the costs incurred by the Township Engineer in
examination, inspection and supervision during the progress of the soil removal.
§ 30-1.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 30-1.9
30:2
§ 30-1.9. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 244-9]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 30-1.9 SOIL AND SOIL REMOVAL § 30-1.9
30:3

Chapter 31
(RESERVED)
§ 30-1.9 (RESERVED) § 30-1.9
31:1

Chapter 32
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 32-1. PREAMBLE.
§ 32-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [1991 Code § 171-1; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare of their citizenry.
§ 32-1.2. Findings of Fact. [1991 Code § 171-2; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
§ 32-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [1991 Code § 171-3; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B)]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by
provisions designed:
a. The flood hazard areas of the Township are subject to periodic inundation which
results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect
the public health, safety and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of
special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities and, when
inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately
floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to
the flood loss.
a. To protect human life and health.
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges, located in areas of special
flood hazard.
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development
of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood-blight areas.
g. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special
flood hazard.
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 30-1.9 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 32-1.4
32:1
§ 32-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [1991 Code § 171-4; Ord. No. 02-28
§ I(B)]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
§ 32-2. through § 32-4 (RESERVED)
§ 32-5. DEFINITIONS AND USAGE. [1991 Code § 171-5; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(B);
Ord. No. 2006-22 § I(A)]
(Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this
chapter its most reasonable application.) As used in this chapter, the following terms
shall have the meanings indicated:
APPEAL—Shall mean a request for a review of the Township Engineer's interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO or AH Zone on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), with a 1% or greater chance of flooding to an
average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD—Shall mean the land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean flooding having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT—Shall mean area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any man-made change to improved or unimproved
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property
due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or
in flood heights or velocities.
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses,
be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural
protective barriers which help accommodate or channel floodwaters.
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase
flood damage.
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
§ 32-1.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 32-5
32:2
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, located within the area of
special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a nonbasement building built, in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and piers) or shear
walls parallel to the flow of the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — Shall mean the official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — Shall mean the official report in which the Federal
Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood Insurance
Rate Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a flood plain ordinance, grading ordinance or erosion control ordinance) and
other applications of police power. The term describes such State or local regulations,
in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is: listed individually in
the National Register of Historic Places (as maintained by the Department of Interior)
of preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements
for individual listing on the National Register; certified or preliminarily determined by
the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district; individually listed on the New Jersey inventory of historic places
pursuant to the New Jersey historic preservation program approved by the Secretary of
the Interior; or, individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in a community
with historic preservation programs that have been certified by either the approved
New Jersey program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or directly by the
Secretary of the Interior if New Jersey has no such approved program.
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
§ 32-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 32-5
32:3
LOWEST FLOOR—Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure usable solely for the parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement is not considered
a building's "lowest floor," provided that such enclosure is not built as to render the
structure in violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" does not include a "recreation vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of
this chapter.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is: built on a single
chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal projections;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and designed
primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvements and shall mean the date the building permit was issued,
provided that the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond
the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling, nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
§ 32-5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 32-5
32:4
occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before "the start of construction" of the improvement. This
term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
officer and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or, any
alterations of an "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an "historic structure."
VARIANCE—Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
§ 32-6. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 32-6.1. Development Permit Required; Necessary Information. [1991 Code
§ 171-12]
§ 32-6.2. Designation of Administrator of This Chapter. [1991 Code § 171-13;
Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A)]
The Construction Official or, at the official's direction, the Zoning Official, is hereby
appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development
permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 32-6.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Construction Official or, Upon
a. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins
within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection 32-8.2.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the
Township Engineer and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate,
drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area
in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
b. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including
basement, of all structures.
2. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing
criteria in subsection 32-7.2b.
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated
as a result of proposed development.
§ 32-5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 32-6.3
32:5
Designation, the Zoning Official. [1991 Code § 171-14; Ord. No. 02-28 § I(A); Ord.
No. 2006-22 § I(B); Ord. No. 2006-22A § I]
Duties of the Construction Official or, at the official's designation, the Zoning Official,
shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Permit Application Review.
1. Review all development permit applications to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permit applications to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental
agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permit applications to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, and if so assure that the encroachment
provisions of subsection 32-7.3a are met.
4. Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base flood level
in accordance with subsection 32-7.2.
b. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 32-8.2, Basis
for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the Township Engineer shall
obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a Federal, State or other source in order to administer subsection
32-7.2a, Specific Standards, Residential Construction and subsection 32-7.2b,
Specific Standards, Nonresidential Construction.
c. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the
lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved
structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record an actual elevation in relation to mean sea level; and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection 32-6.1b3.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
chapter.
d. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section and the
Land Use Regulation Program, prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
2. Require that maintenance be provided within the altered or relocated portion
§ 32-6.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 32-6.3
32:6
§ 32-6.4. Variance Procedure. [1991 Code § 171-15]
of said watercourse so that the floodcarrying capacity is not diminished.
e. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the
exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example,
where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection 32-6.4.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Appeal Board as established by the Township Committee shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter. The Township Committee or its designee is hereby established as the
Appeal Board under this chapter.
2. The Appeal Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Township
Engineer in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board, or any taxpayer, may
appeal such decision to the Superior Court as provided in State Statutes.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections
of this chapter and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of
others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion drainage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are
not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
floodplain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
§ 32-6.3 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 32-6.4
32:7
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site.
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and
bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of paragraph 4 and the purposes of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
6. The Township Engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal
Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, provided that items set forth in paragraph a, 4, above have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of
structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State
Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in the
remainder of this section.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase
in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public
as identified in paragraph a, 4 or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that
the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below
the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
§ 32-6.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 32-6.4
32:8
§ 32-7. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 32-7.1. General Standards. [1991 Code § 171-16]
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required:
elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the
systems into floodwaters.
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during flooding.
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and
other service facilities shall be designed and located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
§ 32-6.4 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 32-7.1
32:9
§ 32-7.2. Specific Standards. [1991 Code § 171-17; Ord. No. 2006-22 §§ I(C),(D)]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided
as set forth in subsection 32-8.2, Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard,
or in subsection 32-6.3b, Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data, the following
standards are required:
exposure to flood damage.
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other
proposed development.
e. Enclosure Openings. For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for
the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either
be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
a. Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall:
1. Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation;
2. Require within an AO Zone on the Springfield FIRM that all new construction
and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number
is specified); and require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
b. Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or;
1. Require within any AO Zone on the Springfield FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or
other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified); and require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
2. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
§ 32-7.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 32-7.2
32:10
§ 32-7.3. Floodways. [1991 Code § 171-18]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 32-8.2 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential,
the following provisions apply:
§ 32-8. APPLICABILITY; PENALTY; DISCLAIMER.
§ 32-8.1. Lands to Which Provisions Apply. [1991 Code § 171-6]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the
Township of Springfield.
§ 32-8.2. Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard. [1991 Code
§ 171-7; Ord. No. 2006-22 § I(E)]
The areas of special flood hazard within the Township (designated as Community No.
345321), are identified and defined on the following documents prepared by the Federal
3. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
4. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect to the effect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this subsection.
Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in subsection
32-6.3c2.
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with subsection
32-7.1a2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within an area
of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that
the top of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation.
a. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development, shall be prohibited unless a technical evaluation demonstrates
that encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If paragraph a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 32-7,
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data has been
provided and no floodway has been designated, the cumulative effect of any
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more
than 0.2 of a foot at any point.
§ 32-7.2 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION § 32-8.2
32:11
Emergency Management Agency, which documents are hereby adopted and declared to
be a part of this chapter, and are on file at the Office of the Township Clerk:
§ 32-8.3. Violations and Penalties. [1991 Code § 171-8; Ord. No. 2006-22 § I(F);
Ord. No. 2006-22A § II]
No structure of land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or
altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any
of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates
this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both,
for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
§ 32-8.4. Applicability of More Stringent Restrictions. [1991 Code § 171-9]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements,
covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance,
easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 32-8.5. Interpretation. [1991 Code § 171-10]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 32-8.6. Disclaimer of Liability. [1991 Code § 171-11]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger
floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township, any officer
or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Union County, New
Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September 20, 2006.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Union County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions) as
shown on Index and panel numbers 0003, 0009, 0010, 0011, 0020, 0021; whose
effective date is September 20, 2006.
a. Considered as minimum requirements.
b. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body.
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State Statutes.
§ 32-8.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 32-8.6
32:12
Chapter 33
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 93-11.
§ 33-1. FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
The Township Committee hereby finds that the properties comprising the Special
Improvement District (the "District"), as hereinafter designated, are an integral, vital,
economic and social component within the Township and that the creation of the District
will serve to enhance the safety, welfare and economic growth of the District, as well
as the residents of Springfield and the Township as a whole. The creation of a District
Management Corporation (the "Corporation") will provide administrative and other
services to benefit those businesses, property owners, tenants, inhabitants and consumers
in the District and will also assist the Township in promoting economic growth and
employment. It is in the best interest of the Township and the general public to create
the District and the Corporation. All costs related to the maintenance, administration
and operation of the District and Corporation shall be funded by a special assessment
imposed and collected by the Township with the regular property tax payment, payment
in lieu of taxes or otherwise, on properties located within the District. All of these
payments or a portion thereof as designated by Resolution of the Township Committee,
shall be transferred to the Corporation to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and to
exercise the powers given to it by this chapter.
§ 33-2. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Special Improvement District (the "District")
comprised of all designated commercial property within the Township and to establish a
district management corporation (the "Corporation") to assist the Township in promoting
the economic and general welfare of the District and the Township.
§ 33-3. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT. [Ord. No. 2011-06; Ord. No. 2011-06;
Ord. No. 2012-31 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-65, et seq., the Township Committee does hereby establish a
special improvement district within the Township, comprised of all commercial property
within the geographic boundaries of the District, as specifically designated by tax lot and
block, and street address, in Appendix A to this chapter, which may be found at the end
of this chapter48. In the case of mixed use properties encompassing a residential and a
commercial use, the Tax Assessor shall establish the proportion of the property which is
a commercial use. The District shall include designated areas, which shall be delineated
for each property in Appendix A: Tier 1 properties shall be in or near the core business
district along Morris Avenue; Tier 2 properties shall be in or near the core business areas
along Mountain Avenue; Tier 3 shall be in or near the core business areas along U.S.
Route 22; Tier 4 properties shall be private membership recreation facilities.
§ 33-4. DISTRICT MANAGEMENT CORPORATION.
48. Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 32-8.6 SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT § 33-4.1
33:1
§ 33-4.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
There is hereby created the Springfield Community Partnership Management
Corporation (hereinafter "Community Partnership"), a not-for-profit corporation, which
shall serve as the district management corporation for the Springfield Improvement
District.
§ 33-4.2. Membership. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
All owners of property designated in Appendix A hereof shall be members of the
Community Partnership, and each property shall have one vote.
§ 33-4.3. Board of Directors. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
§ 33-4.4. Authority. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
The Community Partnership shall have all powers necessary and requisite to effectuate
the purposes of this chapter, including but not limited to the power to:
a. The Board of Directors shall be composed of 11 directors. Of those, eight members
shall be persons who own property, work or reside in the Township and shall be
elected by the membership at the last regular meeting of each year, to serve a term
of three years, commencing on January 1 of the following year; two members shall
be persons who own property, work or reside in the Township and shall be
appointed in January by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Township
Committee, to serve a term of three years commencing upon their appointment. The
final member shall be the liaison with and appointed by the Township Committee
each January and shall serve a term of one year commencing upon appointment.
b. All Directors shall serve on a volunteer basis without compensation.
c. The Board of Directors shall adopt and amend bylaws as necessary for proper
functioning of the Board and the corporation.
d. At the first regular meeting of each calendar year, the Board shall elect officers
from among the members of the Board, by majority vote, which shall consist of a
President, one or more Vice-Presidents, a Treasurer and a Secretary.
e. A majority of the Directors shall constitute a quorum.
f. Any vacancy on the Board shall be filled in a like manner as the person creating the
vacancy, which appointment shall be for the unexpired term, only.
a. Adopt bylaws for the regulation of the affairs and the conduct of business, and to
prescribe rules, regulations and policies to further the performance of its functions
and duties.
b. Employ such persons as may be required and to fix and pay their compensation
from funds available,
c. Retain legal counsel.
d. Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements respecting an
§ 33-4.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 33-4.4
33:2
§ 33-5. ASSESSMENTS.
§ 33-5.1. Determination of Costs. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
All costs of improvements and maintenance, other than the costs of improvements
and maintenance normally incurred by the Township out of general funds, shall be
determined and approved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-80 or N.J.S.A. 40:56-85, as
appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of property or money.
e. Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or convenient to the
exercise of the powers and functions of the Community Partnership, including
contracts with any person, firm, corporation, government agency or other entity.
f. Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own obligations.
g. Borrow money from private lenders not to exceed 180 days and from government
entities for that or longer periods.
h. Fund the improvement of the exterior appearance of properties in the district
through grants.
i. Fund the rehabilitation of public property in the District or property owned by the
Community Partnership.
j. Accept, purchase, rehabilitate, sell, lease or manage property in the District.
k. Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the Community
Partnership.
l. Provide security, sanitation and other services to the District, supplemental to those
provided normally by the Township.
m. Undertake improvements designed to increase the safety or attractiveness of the
District to businesses which may wish to locate there or to visitors to the District,
including but not limited to litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas
and facilities and those improvements generally permitted for pedestrian malls
under N.J.S.A, 40:56-66, pursuant to pertinent regulations of the Township
Committee.
n. Publicize and promote the District and the businesses included within the District
boundaries.
o. Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in, and to balance the business mix of the
District.
p. Organize special events in the District.
q. Provide special parking arrangements for the District.
r. Provide temporary decorative lighting in the District.
s. Take any other actions that are necessary and proper to achieve the purposes of this
chapter and that are otherwise permitted by law.
§ 33-4.4 SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT § 33-5.1
33:3
determined by the Community Partnership and shall be assessed pursuant thereto.
§ 33-5.2. Initial Assessment. [Ord. No. 2011-06; Ord. No. 2012-31 § 2]
The initial formula for the assessment is as follows, or as mandated by statute: each
property's current assessment, as determined by the Tax Assessor for real estate tax
purposes, will be multiplied by a rate or rates to be determined by the Board of Directors
of the Community Partnership to determine the budget and amount of the special District
assessment. The rates for each of the tiers need not be the same. The foregoing shall
be collected semiannually as a special assessment against properties that are within the
District.
§ 33-5.3. Payment. [Ord. No. 2011-06; Ord. No. 2012-21]
Special assessments shall be made payable at the same time as the Township's property
taxes are collected, namely on the first day of the month in the months of August,
November, February and May of each year and shall be received by the Township Tax
Collector within 10 calendar days following the date upon which such assessment is
payable.
§ 33-5.4. Interest; Lien. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
Any assessments not received within 10 calendar days following the date upon which
such assessment is payable shall be subject to interest from the date the assessment was
payable until the date of actual payment, at the following rates: for the first $1,500,
8% per annum; for amounts in excess of $1,500, 18% per annum. The Township Tax
Collector may affix a penalty not to exceed 6% of the delinquent assessment as billed,
prior to the end of the fiscal year, for the most recent fiscal year only. Unpaid special
assessments shall become a lien against commercial properties and shall be collectible
in the same manner as any other municipal property taxes and assessments.
§ 33-6. ANNUAL REPORT; BUDGET. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
a. The Community Partnership shall submit an annual report to the Township
Committee pursuant to N.J.S.A. 46:56-80, within 30 days after the close of the
fiscal year. This report shall consist of a narrative covering the previous year's
operation, and detailed financial statements.
b. The Community Partnership shall submit a detailed business plan and budget for
the upcoming year, no later than December 1 of each fiscal year, for approval by
resolution of the Township Committee, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:56-84. The budget shall be submitted with a report which explains how the
budget contributes to the goals and objectives for the District.
c. The fiscal year of the Community Partnership will be January 1 to December 31.
d. The Community Partnership shall cause an annual audit of its books, accounts and
financial sections to be made and filed with the Township Committee, The
Community Partnership shall employ a certified public accountant of the State of
New Jersey. This audit shall be completed and filed with the Township Committee
within four months after the close of the fiscal year of the Community Partnership.
§ 33-5.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 33-6
33:4
§ 33-7. MUNICIPAL POWER RETAINED. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
Notwithstanding the creation of the District, the Township expressly retains all its police
powers and other rights and powers related to the area designated as within the District.
§ 33-8. IMPLEMENTATION; TERM OF OFFICE. [Ord. No. 2011-06]
The initial Board of Directors of the Community Partnership shall be appointed by the
Township Committee, and shall serve until December 31, 2011. All Directors appointed
to a term to commence on January 1, 2011, or within January 2011, shall be randomly
chosen to serve a term of one year, two years or three years, to create equally staggered
terms of office.
Appendix A to Chapter 33 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
A certified duplicate copy of the audit shall be filed with the Director of the
Division of Local Government Services, Department of Community Affairs, within
five days of the filing of the audit with the Township Committee.
e. All books, records, accounts and reports of the Community Partnership shall be
available at all reasonable times for public inspection.
§ 33-6 SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT § 33-8
33:5

Chapter 34
(RESERVED)
§ 33-8 (RESERVED) § 33-8
34:1

Chapter 35
LAND USE
Editor's Note: This chapter contains the Township of Springfield Land Use
Regulations as adopted by Ordinance No. 2003-18 repealing the former Land Use
Ordinance. Prior ordinances codified herein and superseded include portions of
Ordinance Nos. 93-5, 95-12, 95-17, 96-2, 97-14, 98-24, 2000-06, 2000-23, 2001-21,
2002-7 and 2003-02.
§ 33-8 LAND USE § 33-8
35:1

ARTICLE I
Title and Short Title
§ 35-1. TITLE. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
A comprehensive Ordinance regulating the uses of land and the uses and location of
structures; the height and bulk of structures; the area, yard and dimension of yards and
other open space; the density and intensity of population and land use; the division
of the Township of Springfield into districts for such purposes; the creation of a map
showing said districts; the establishment of rules, regulations and standards governing
the subdivision and development of land within the Township, and the establishment
of a Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment and appropriate penalties and
procedures for violations of its provisions, all enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.
§ 35-2. SHORT TITLE. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as: The Land Use Ordinance of the
Township of Springfield, 2003.
§ 35-1 LAND USE § 35-2
35:3

ARTICLE II
Purpose and Scope
§ 35-3. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
This Land Use Ordinance is adopted in order to promote and protect the public health,
safety, general welfare, and in furtherance of the following related and more specific
objectives:
a. To encourage municipal action to guide the appropriate use or development of all
lands in the Township, in a manner which will promote the public health, safety,
morals, and general welfare;
b. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made disasters;
c. To provide adequate light, air and open space;
d. To ensure that the development of the Township of Springfield does not conflict
with the development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the
County of Union and the State as a whole;
e. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods,
communities and regions and preservation of the environment;
f. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by the
coordination of public development with land use policies;
g. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of agricultural,
residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open space, both
public and private, according to their respective environmental requirements in
order to meet the needs of all New Jersey citizens;
h. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will promote
the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such facilities and routes
which result in congestion or blight;
i. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
j. To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space, energy
resources and valuable natural resources in the Township and to prevent urban
sprawl and degradation of the environment through improper use of land;
k. To encourage planned unit developments which incorporate the best features of
design and relate the type, design and layout of residential, commercial, industrial
and recreational development of the particular site;
l. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction;
m. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures and
activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the cost of such
development and to the more efficient use of land;
§ 35-3 LAND USE § 35-3
35:5
§ 35-4. SCOPE.
§ 35-4.1. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Except as hereinafter provided, no lot or land or part thereof shall be used and no
building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, structurally altered, enlarged, rebuilt
or used except in conformity with the lot dimension, yard, coverage, height, spacing
and use regulations herein prescribed. Where a lot is formed from part of a lot already
occupied by a building, such subdivision shall be effected in such a manner as not to
impair any of the requirements of this chapter with respect to the existing building and
all yards and other open space in connection therewith and so that all resulting lots have
adequate dimensions consistent with the requirements of the zoning district in which
they are located and so that all lots have frontage on a street.
§ 35-4.2. Interpretation of Standards. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be
minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Township. Any deviation from the provisions of this chapter shall require
a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 c or d or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 a., except that
if an applicant can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to his land, the literal enforcement of one or more of the site plan or subdivision
design or submission regulations, as established by Articles VI and IX of this chapter,
is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the appropriate municipal agency may
permit such exception or waivers from the aforementioned requirements for site plan or
subdivision review only as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent
of the rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter. Where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other provisions of law or
by other rules or regulations or resolutions, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
Where other laws, rules, regulations or resolutions require greater restrictions than are
imposed or required by this chapter, the provisions of such laws, rules, regulations or
restrictions shall control.
§ 35-4.3. Compliance. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
All applicable requirements of this chapter shall be met at the time of application,
construction, expansion, alteration or change in use of the principal or accessory use
and shall apply to the entire structure or structures whether or not the entire structure or
structures were involved in the construction, expansion, alteration, moving or change in
tenancy or use. In all instances the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, shall apply the requirements of the Ordinance in a reasonable manner,
considering both the existing and proposed development of the subject site. In the case
n. To promote utilization of renewable energy sources;
o. To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of recyclable
materials from municipal solid waste through the use of planning practices designed
to incorporate the State Recycling Plan goals and to compliment municipal
recycling programs; and
p. To further the goals and policies of the Township of Springfield.
§ 35-3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-4.3
35:6
of legally permitted nonconforming uses, structures or lots, the requirements of § 35-43
shall apply.
§ 35-4.4. Prohibited Uses. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
a. Any use not expressly permitted in this chapter is prohibited. The following uses
are specifically prohibited in all zones:
1. Narcotics clinics and the sale or display of narcotics paraphernalia.
2. Flea Markets (outdoor or indoor) other than temporary.
3. Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
4. Disinfectant, insecticide or poison manufacture.
5. Fertilizer manufacture.
6. Commercial incineration, reduction, compaction storage, private or
commercial dumps, sanitary landfill depots or depositories for disposal of
solid or liquid wastes material.
7. Acids similar to sulfurous, sulfuric, nitric, picric, carbolic, flouric or
hydrochloric acid manufacture.
8. Vinegar manufacture.
9. Dog kennels and pigeon coops.
10. Stockyards.
11. Slaughtering of animals.
12. Animal black, lamp black or bone black manufacture.
13. Rawhide or skin storage, cleaning curing or tanning.
14. Soap manufacture from animal fat.
15. Glue, size or gelatin manufacture, where the processes include the refining or
recovering of products from fish, animal refuse or offal.
16. Grease, lard, fat or tallow rendering or refining.
17. Wool pulling or scouring.
18. Automobile junkyards, and storage of unlicensed vehicles.
19. Explosives manufacture or storage.
20. Pyroxylin plastic and all flammable plastic manufacture or the manufacture of
articles therefrom.
21. Rubber or gutta percha manufacture or treatment.
22. Smelting of iron, copper, tin, zinc or lead from ore.
§ 35-4.3 LAND USE § 35-4.4
35:7
§ 35-4.5. Principal Buildings Per Lot [Added 4-28-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-08]
Unless otherwise permitted by this Ordinance, no more than one principal building or
structure, other than an accessory building to the principal building, shall be permitted
on any one lot in the Township of Springfield. Multiple principal buildings are permitted
in the M-R, PUD and AH zones pursuant to §§ 35-15.2, 35-15.3 and 35-15.7.
§ 35-5. through § 35-6 (RESERVED)
23. Sand, gravel or clay pits and the washing or processing of sand, gravel or clay.
24. Monument works.
25. Tattoo parlors and establishments of any nature whatsoever which utilize
needles for the purpose of making indelible markings upon the body by the
insertion of pigment under the skin or by production of scars.
26. Any other trade or use that is noxious or offensive or extremely hazardous by
reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke or gas or explosive potential.
27. The storage of merchandise, materials, or supplies in trailers out of doors.
28. The keeping of livestock.
29. Adult book store and/or adult gift store, and adult entertainment, if located
within 1,000 feet of any residence, residential zone, school or house of
worship.
30. Outdoor sales and storage of goods within a parking lot, except by temporary
license.
§ 35-4.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-5
35:8
ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 35-7. DEFINITIONS AND DESCRIPTIONS. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No.
2008-10 § I; Ord. No. 2010-21 § I; Ord. No. 2010-39; Ord. No. 2012-13 § 2]
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms are defined as follows: unless
the context clearly indicates the contrary, words used in the present tense include the
future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular; the word
"shall" is mandatory and not discretionary, and the word "may" is permissive; the word
"lot" includes the words "plot" and "premises"; the word "his" includes "her" and "its";
the word "structure" includes the word "building" and the word "building" includes the
words "dwelling" or "residence"; and the words "use" and "uses" refer to any purpose
for which a lot or land or part thereof or building or structure or part thereof is arranged,
erected, designed, constructed or reconstructed, enlarged, altered, converted, maintained,
occupied, rented, leased or intended to be used. Whenever a term is used in this chapter
which is defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq., such term is intended to have the meaning
as defined in the Statute unless specifically defined to the contrary in this chapter. Any
word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning as defined in Webster's
Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, unabridged, or latest
edition thereof.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A separate and subordinate use or structure
customarily incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the principal use or
structure to which it relates. Where an accessory structure is attached to the principal
structure by any means, it shall be considered part of the principal structure for the
purposes of determining all bulk requirements.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Township Engineer of the Township of
Springfield or other officials of the Township commissioned by the Township
Committee to administer any portion of this chapter.
ADULT BOOK AND/OR GIFT STORE AND ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — An
establishment having any of the following as a substantial or significant portion of
its stock-in-trade activities, books, magazines, gifts, devices, periodicals, films and
tapes which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material,
or activities.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING OR LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING —
Housing for sale or rental that is affordable, according to standards for home ownership
or rental costs adopted by COAH, occupied or reserved for occupancy by households
with a gross household income of 80% or less of the median household income, and
subject to affordability controls.
ALTERATION — Any change, addition or modification in the construction or
arrangement of a building, structure or site.
AMENDED SITE PLAN OR SUBDIVISION APPLICATION — An amended
application for development for a site plan or subdivision that is filed after the Board's
approval of the initial application, but before any construction permits have been issued.
If an amended application is substantially different from the approved application it shall
§ 35-7 LAND USE § 35-7
35:9
be considered a new application. No more than two amended applications may be filed
for a site before the application is classified as a new application.
ANTENNAS — A device used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic
waves between earth and/or outer space-based structures.
APARTMENT—A dwelling unit which is part of, or attached to, a building containing
one or more additional dwelling units or any nonresidential use or uses. The term
"apartment" shall exclude the term "townhouse".
APPLICANT—The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed
to be included in a proposed development including the holder of an option or contract
to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land. The
term "applicant" shall be synonymous with the term "developer."
APPLICATION — The application form and all accompanying documents required
by this chapter for approval of a subdivision, site plan, planned unit development,
conditional use, zoning variance or any other action governed by this chapter.
APPROVING AUTHORITY—The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment of
the Township of Springfield.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION—Any area of land, including structures thereon
that is used for the sale of gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel and other lubricating
substances, including the sale and installation of motor vehicle accessories, and which
may or may not include facilities for automotive repair, vehicle storage while waiting for
service or pick-up, lubricating, or other servicing of motor vehicles, but not including
activities such as painting of vehicles, auto body work, repair of trucks, any repair work
carried on out-of-doors or the operation of an automatic car wash.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building partly underground, and having more than 1/2
of its clear height below the average grade level of the ground immediately adjacent
to the building. Basements used in whole or part for a principal permitted use shall be
considered floor area for the purposes of this chapter.
BILLBOARD — Any sign not located on the business or property which it is intended
to promote.
BOARD—The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Township of
Springfield.
BUILDING—A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to permanent,
temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by buildings of any kind,
as measured in a horizontal plane around the periphery of all building facades and
including all area under any roof overhang.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the finished grade at the corners of the building to the highest elevation of the roof
surface or ridge line on pitched roofs.
CELLULAR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — An antenna that is intended
for commercial transmission or reception of personal wireless telephone services
communications, and including commercial mobile services communications, and
common carrier wireless exchange access services, and also including any other
§ 35-7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-7
35:10
accessory structures and equipment necessary for such transmission or reception. A
"freestanding cellular telecommunications antenna" is such an antenna supported by a
tower, mast, pole or similar structure designed primarily for supporting and raising the
vertical elevation of such antenna.
CHANGE IN USE—The use of a building or land or part thereof which in any manner
differs from the previous use by way of function, operation, or scope including any
changes in occupancy. A change in ownership shall not be considered a change in use
for the purposes of this chapter.
CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY — A discontinuation of an existing use and the
substitution thereof, which in any manner differs from the previous use by way of
function, operation, or scope, including changes in tenancy. A change in ownership shall
not be considered a change of occupancy for the purpose of this section.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing established by N.J.S.A.
52:27D-305 or successor agency of State government responsible for comprehensive
low- and moderate-income housing planning in accordance with sound regional
planning.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — See "vehicle, commercial."
COMMUNITY RESIDENCES AND COMMUNITY SHELTERS — Community
residences for the developmentally disabled and community shelters for victims of
domestic violence as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2.
COMPLETE APPLICATION—A development plan which meets all of the submission
requirements of Article IX of this chapter, and which is accompanied by payment of the
required fees established in Article X of this chapter.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon
a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with the conditions and
standards for the location or operation of such use as contained in Article VII of this
chapter, and upon the issuance of an authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The official of the
Township of Springfield designated by the Township Committee to be responsible
for the administration and enforcement of the Uniform Construction Code pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
CRITICAL AREA — The combined area of any portion of a site having a topographic
slope of 15% or greater and/or any area within the floodplain; and/or any wetlands area
as defined by the New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act.
DATE OF DECISION — The date of adoption of a resolution memorializing an action
by the Board.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land to be
developed.
DEVELOPER — See "applicant."
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement
of any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use
§ 35-7 LAND USE § 35-7
35:11
or change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of
land, for which permission may be required pursuant to this act.
DISTRICT — A designated part of the territory of the Township of Springfield, as
shown on the Zoning Map, to which certain uniform zoning regulations and
requirements of this chapter apply. The term "district" shall be synonymous with the
terms "zone" and "zoning district."
DRIVEWAY —A private roadway leading from a street to a building, house, garage or
parking area.
DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT—Any room or combination of rooms containing
separate sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities intended to provide living
accommodations for one household. The dwelling unit shall be self-contained and shall
not require access through another dwelling unit or other indirect route(s) to get to any
portion of the dwelling unit.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY — A building arranged, intended or designed to
contain two or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY — A dwelling unit, fully detached from all others and
occupied or intended to be occupied by one household.
EASEMENT — A use or burden imposed on real estate by deed or other legal means
to permit the use of land by the public, a corporation, or particular persons for specified
purposes.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The Environmental Commission of the
Township of Springfield created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined by the
Township Tax Assessor through a means designed to ensure that all property in the
Township is assessed at the same assessment ratio or ratios required by law. Estimates
at the time of building permit may be obtained by the Township Tax Assessor utilizing
estimates for construction cost. Final equalized assessed value will be determined at
project completion by the Township Tax Assessor.
FAMILY—A group of individuals not necessarily related by blood, marriage, adoption
or guardianship living together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit under
a common housekeeping management plan based on an intentionally structured
relationship providing organization and stability.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME — A private residence offering family day care services
as described by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the approving authority taken on a
preliminarily approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions, engineering
plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required
improvements have been installed or guarantees properly posted for their completion, or
approval conditioned upon posting of such guarantees.
FLOOD PLAIN—The total area inundated during the flood of record, the greatest flood
in a given area for which accurate records are available, except that where the flood
plain has been delineated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Division of Water Resources, such delineation shall apply.
§ 35-7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-7
35:12
FLOOR AREA — The gross floor area of a building, measured from the outsides of all
exterior walls and including stairs, public halls, lavatories, elevators, partitions, storage
and utility spaces, and any portion of a basement used for a principal permitted use,
excluding storage. Only those areas having five feet or more of clear head room with
completed floors, ceilings and partitions may be considered in computing the top floor
area of any building containing a 1/2 story. However, at least 1/2 of any included top
floor area in such a building shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet six
inches, and the included top floor area shall be connected to the first floor by means of a
permanent stairway. The floor area occupied by child care centers shall also be excluded
from this definition when calculating parking and floor area ratio requirements.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or structures
compared to the total area of the site.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed accessory garage maintained primarily for the
convenience of the occupant of the principal building and in which no business is carried
on and no service is rendered to the general public.
GOVERNING BODY — The Township Committee of the Township of Springfield.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any activity carried out for gain by a resident conducted as
an accessory or conditional use in the resident's dwelling unit as regulated in subsections
35-15.1f and 35-41.2b.
HOUSING REGION — The northwest region of New Jersey composed of Union,
Essex, Morris and Warren Counties, as defined at N.J.A.C. 5:93-2.1, or other group of
two to four counties as my be defined by COAH.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — Development containing low and moderate
income housing units. This term includes, but is not necessarily limited to, new
construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to a residential structure and
the creation of new low and moderate income units through the substantial rehabilitation
of a vacant residential structure.
INTERESTED PARTY—In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the
State of New Jersey; in the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative
proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing within or without
the municipality, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected
by any action taken under this chapter or under any other provision of the Municipal
Land Use Law, or whose right to use, acquire, or enjoy property under this chapter, the
Municipal Land Use Law, or any other law of the State of New Jersey or of the United
States have been denied, violated or infringed by an action or failure to act under this
chapter.
LIVING FENCE — A hedge or line of shrubs or other planted material which is of
sufficient density to physically prevent persons from passing through and which visually
obscures the view from one side to the other.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise
permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, except that contiguous
undersized vacant lots under one ownership or contiguous undersized vacant lots
§ 35-7 LAND USE § 35-7
35:13
adjacent to a developed lot under one ownership, shall be considered one lot, and further,
that no portion of an existing street shall be included in calculating a lot boundary or lot
area. The term "lot" shall be synonymous with the terms "site" and "property."
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within lot lines of a property not
including any portion of a street right-of-way.
LOT COVERAGE — The portion of a site, expressed as a percentage of the lot area,
covered by surfaces that have been compacted or covered with a layer of material so
that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. For purposes of this definition, pools
and decks (provided a pervious material is below the deck) shall be exempt from the lot
coverage calculation.
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest side
or rear lot line measured either perpendicular to the midpoint of the front lot line or from
the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the side or rear lot line, whichever is
greater.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The right-of-way line of the street abutting a lot.
LOT LINE, REAR — A lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line or the
point at which the two side lot lines meet in the case of a triangular lot.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line, including a lot line
or portion thereof which may be the rear lot line of an adjacent lot.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured along the
front lot line. On curved front lot lines the lot width may be measured along the arc of
the setback line provided the required lot width at the front lot line shall not be reduced
by more than 35%.
LOT, CORNER — A lot on the junction of and abutting on two or more intersecting
streets when the interior angle of intersection does not exceed 135°. A corner lot shall
have one rear yard and two front yards but may not have more than one side yard. The
minimum lot width requirement shall be met along each street frontage, and the front
yard shall be maintained along each street frontage. However, the frontage with the
lesser width shall be the front yard.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot, or a through lot.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot fronting on two streets which do not intersect each other at
the boundaries of the lot. A through lot shall have two side yards and two front yards but
shall have no rear yard.
LOW INCOME — A total gross household income no greater than 50% of the median
household income.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by the
Township pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, as amended and supplemented, for the
maintenance of any improvements relating to inferior materials and/or poor
workmanship required pursuant to this chapter.
MASSAGE — Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading,
rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts of the
human body with the hands or any other part of the body, with or without the assistance
§ 35-7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-7
35:14
of any object or mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without
supplementary aids, such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, oils, powders or creams,
including the use of any process offered as supplementary or incidental thereto, such as
heat lamps, hot and cold packs, tubs and showers, and shall include but not be limited
to those practices commonly known as massage, bodywork and somatic therapy.[Added
4-28-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-09]
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment where any person engages in
or is permitted to engage in the practice of massage as defined hereinabove. For the
purposes of this Chapter 35, the term “massage establishment” shall not include:[Added
4-28-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-09]
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals for the
development of the Township of Springfield as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28 which
has been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME — The median income of the housing region
in which the Township of Springfield is located, as defined by COAH, adjusted for
household size, based on the most recent median income figures published by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), the uncapped Section 8 income
limits, or other recognized standard adopted by COAH. These median income figures
may also be available from COAH.
MEDICAL OFFICE — Buildings used or intended for use by medical professionals,
including physicians, dentists, therapists, chiropractors and other licensed health care
professionals. The term "medical office" shall include immediate medical care facilities.
MODERATE INCOME—A total gross household income no greater than 80% and not
less than 50% of the median household income.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings, whether detached or connected, used as
individual sleeping or temporary dwelling units and designed primarily for transient
automobile travelers and provided with accessory off-street parking facilities. The term
motel includes the terms auto court, tourist court, lodge, hotel, motor inn and similar
uses, but shall not be construed to include a mobile home or trailer court or park.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such
adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimensions or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason
of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of this chapter and which does not conform with the use
Any establishments which, incidental to providing manicures and/or pedicures,
offer only chair massage of the neck, hands, and/or feet; and
a.
Any hair salons which, incidental to providing hair styling, perming, texturing,
cutting, coloring, highlighting and/or head and scalp treatments, offer only chair
massage of the neck, hands, and/or feet.
b.
§ 35-7 LAND USE § 35-7
35:15
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption,
revision or amendment.
NUISANCE — An offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice;
a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeated invasion or
disturbance of another's rights, including the actual or potential emanation of any
physical characteristics of an activity or use across a property line which can be
perceived by or affects a human being, including, but not limited to, mechanical noise,
dust, smoke, fumes, odor, glare, flashes, vibration, shock waves, heat, radiation or
objectionable effluent, or the generation of excessive or concentrated noise from the
congregation of people, especially at night or early morning, from passenger traffic or
from transportation of things by truck, rail or other means or the unsafe or illegal use or
storage of toxic or hazardous materials.
OFF-SITE —Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within the property,
of which the lot is a part, which is the subject of a development application or the closest
half of the street or right-of-way abutting the property of which the lot is a part.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a development
application nor on the closest half of the abutting street or right-of-way.
OFFICIAL MAP — The Official Map as adopted by the Township of Springfield in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq., as amended and supplemented. Such a map
shall be deemed conclusive with respect to the location and width of streets, public parks
and playgrounds, and drainage rights-of-way shown thereon.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question and excluding any abutting street or rightof-
way.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by the
Township to guarantee the completion of required improvements pursuant to this
chapter.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS — Establishments primarily engaged in
providing services involving the care of a person or his or her apparel.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT—An area with a minimum contiguous acreage of
50 acres to be developed as a single, self-contained entity according to a plan containing
a mixture of townhouses, retail and personal service stores and shops, offices, and/or
common open space, and various public and quasi-public uses as specified in Subsection
35-15.3 of this chapter.
PLAT — A map of a subdivision approved by the approving authority in accordance
with this chapter and duly filed with the County Recording Officer.
POOL — A tank or basin of water as defined by municipal ordinance.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign not permanently affixed to the ground or a building,
including, but not limited to, signs attached to vehicles, banners, flags, pennants,
inflatable signs, sandwich boards and similar signs.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The official action of a Board taken on a preliminary
major subdivision or site plan taken pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46 and 48.
§ 35-7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-7
35:16
PRINCIPAL USE — The main purpose for which a lot or building is used.
QUASI-PUBLIC USE — A use owned or operated by a nonprofit, religious or
eleemosynary institution and providing educational, cultural, recreational, religious or
similar types of public programs.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of the approving
authority.
RESTAURANT — An eating and/or drinking establishment catering primarily to
customers seated indoors and/or outdoors at tables. The term restaurant excludes standup
indoor eating places, drive-ins, fast food and other such eating places which are
expressly prohibited in all zones. The term "restaurant" includes the terms bar or tavern.
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES — The sale of goods for use or consumption off the
premises, which goods are intended to meet direct consumer food, clothing, furnishing,
recreational or other needs and are not intended for resale, and/or the sale of services
such as personal care, financial, repair, catering and other similar services. The term
"retail sales and service" shall specifically exclude the sale of any type of motor vehicle,
as defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land and space required on the surface, subsurface and
overhead for the construction and installation of materials necessary to provide
passageway for vehicular traffic, pedestrians, utility lines, poles, conduits and mains,
signs, hydrants, trees and shrubbery. Rights-of-way shall be measured from lot line to
lot line.
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person who is 62 years of age or older.
SET-ASIDE — The percentage of housing units devoted to low and moderate income
households within an inclusionary development.
SETBACK—The distance between the property lines and the principal building, or any
projection thereof.
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel to the front, rear or side lot line of a lot in
such a manner that the minimum front, rear or side yard is provided.
SHOPPING CENTER — One or more buildings or parts thereof designed as a unit to
be occupied by two or more separate retail sales and/or service uses, constructed as an
integrated and cohesively planned development.
SIGN — Any demonstration, display, illustration or insignia used or intended to
advertise or promote the interests of any person, corporation, firm, product or service
when the same is placed where it may be in view of the general public, as regulated in §
35-31.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown the existing
and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily limited to topography,
vegetation, drainage, flood plains, marshes and waterways, (2) the location of all existing
and proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress,
drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening
devices, and (3) any other information that may be reasonably required in order to make
an informed determination pursuant to an ordinance requiring review and approval of
site plans by the planning board adopted pursuant to article 6 (C.40:55D-37 et seq.) of
this act.
§ 35-7 LAND USE § 35-7
35:17
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — Any development which is limited to a use specifically
regulated by Subsection 35-65.2a and b of this chapter, which requires a construction
permit for any addition, alteration or modification to an existing conforming
nonresidential or multifamily residential building which will result in less than 200
square feet of additional building coverage and/or require fewer than five additional
parking spaces.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA—(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola, or (2) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — (1) The fondling or other erotic touching of
covered or uncovered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts; or (2)
Any actual or simulated act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate sexual
intercourse.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor
and the upper surface of the floor next above; or, if there be no floor next above, then the
space between the floor and the ceiling next above.
STORY, HALF—Any finished space under a gable, hip, gambrel, or other sloping roof
which meets the definition of "floor area" pursuant to this chapter.
STREET — Any avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or other way which
is an existing State, County or Township roadway; or which is shown upon a plat
heretofore approved pursuant to law; or which is approved by official action as permitted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded
in the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of the Planning
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats, and includes the land
between the right-of-way lines.
STRUCTURE — Any combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy,
use or ornamentation whether installed on, above or below the surface of a parcel of
land. For the purposes of applying the yard requirements of this chapter only, the term
structure shall not apply to fuel oil tanks, septic tanks and leaching systems which are
buried completely below finished grade, to drainage systems, or to utility poles for direct
customer service. For the same purposes, decks, or other similar unroofed construction
or fixtures including pools, shall be considered buildings.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The following shall
not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this act, if no new streets are
created: (1) divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee
thereof appointed by the chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting
parcels are five acres or larger in size, (2) divisions of property by testamentary or
intestate provisions, (3) divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited
to judgments of foreclosure, (4) consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument and (5) the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of
land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and certified by
the administrative officer to conform to the requirements of the municipal development
regulations and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax
§ 35-7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-7
35:18
map or atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision."
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land for the creation of not more than
three lots fronting on an existing street, not involving a planned development, any new
street, or the extension of any off-tract improvement. Any subdivision which involves
a lot which was previously approved as a minor subdivision within a three-year period
prior to the application for another minor subdivision shall be classified as a major
subdivision.
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by COAH, or a court of
competent jurisdiction, approving the housing element and fair share plan of the
Township in accordance with the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq. and
COAH regulations N.J.A.C. 5:93.
TOWNHOUSE — One dwelling unit which has no other dwelling unit located either
above it or below it, that is constructed in a building containing at least three, not more
than 10, separate dwelling units, at least one of which is attached to it by means of a
common side wall, and that has its own separate first floor front and rear access to the
out-of-doors.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Springfield, Union County, New Jersey.
VARIANCE — Permission granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning
Board to depart from the literal requirements of this chapter only upon the making of
certain findings pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c and d.
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL —Regardless of weight, any bus, step van, cargo van, tow
truck, dump truck, box truck, bulldozer, backhoe, taxi, limousine, or motor home; or any
vehicle or trailer used for commercial purposes, regardless of registration; or any vehicle
displaying commercial advertising or external equipment.[Added 9-13-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-17]
VERY-LOW-INCOME — A total gross household income no greater than 30% of
the median household income, by household size.[Added 11-22-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-26]
YARD — An open, unoccupied space on a lot situated between the setback line and the
lot line.
YARD, FRONT — The area lying between the front lot line and the setback line and
extending from side lot line to side lot line.
YARD, REAR — The area lying between the rear lot line and the setback line and
extending from side lot line to side lot line except on a corner lot the rear yard shall
extend from the side lot line to the intersecting front yard.
YARD, SIDE — The area between the side lot line and the setback line and extending
from the rear of the front yard to the front of the rear yard.
§ 35-8. (RESERVED)
§ 35-7 LAND USE § 35-8
35:19

ARTICLE IV
Zoning Districts and Zoning Map
§ 35-9. ZONING DISTRICTS. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of Springfield is hereby divided into 18
classes of districts as follows:
§ 35-10. ZONING MAP. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The boundaries of each of the zone districts created by this chapter and as may be
thereafter amended, are hereby established as shown on the Zoning Map of the Township
of Springfield, signed by the Mayor and Township Clerk. The Zoning Map accompanies
a. Residential Districts.
1. S-120 Single-Family dwellings.
2. S-75 Single-Family dwellings.
3. S-60 Single-Family dwellings.
4. M-R Multifamily dwellings.
5. A-H SC Multifamily Senior Citizen dwellings.
6. A-H 17 Multifamily dwellings.
7. A-H 18 Multifamily dwellings.
8. A-H 24.2 Multifamily dwellings.
9. PD/RCA Planned Development/Regional Contribution District.
10. A-H 7/RCA Affordable Housing/Regional Contribution District.
11. A-H 16 Multifamily dwellings. [Added 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-26]
b. Business Districts.
1. N-C Neighborhood Commercial.
2. G-C General Commercial.
3. H-C Highway Commercial.
4. O Offices.
c. Industrial Districts.
1. I-40 General Industrial.
2. I-20 General Industrial.
d. Planned Unit Development District.
e. Open Space - Government Use.
§ 35-9 LAND USE § 35-10
35:21
this chapter and is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter.49
§ 35-10.1. Amendments to Zoning Map.
The official Zoning Map of the Township of Springfield, as amended, shall be amended
to incorporate the changes set forth in the annexed "Proposed Zoning" map, which
shall change certain areas previously designated as General Commercial and Office to
Neighborhood Commercial and change certain areas previously designated as S-75 to
AH-SC.
The Zoning Map of the Township of Springfield shall be amended to designate an
AH-24.2 Overlay Zone as to the following property, which shall not effect or change the
current zoning thereof: Block 303, Lots 1 and 2.
[Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2006-6 § I(8)]
The Zoning Map shall be amended to remove from the Open Space-Government Use
(OS-GU) Zone the residential lots located on Clinton Avenue and place them in the S-60
Single Family Dwellings Zone.
[Ord. No. 2013-07 § 1(K)]
The Zoning Map shall be amended to delete any reference to the AH-7/RCA Zone which
shall be replaced by the new designation S-75/AH Zone.
[Ord. No. 2015-21 § 1]
To designate Block 204, Lots 1 and 2, as a new zoning district known as AH-16. [Added
11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-26]
To designate Affordable Housing Overlay Zone - 1 (AHO-1) and Affordable Housing
Overlay Zone - 2 (AHO-2) as reflected in the Zoning Map of the Township of
Springfield annexed hereto and incorporated herein. [Added 11-22-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-26]
§ 35-11. INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-12. through § 35-13 (RESERVED)
a. District boundary lines are intended to follow street centerlines and lot or property
lines as they exist at the time of the enactment of this chapter unless otherwise
indicated on the Zoning Map.
b. The exact location of any disputed zone boundary shall be determined by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
c. Where a vacated right-of-way is bounded on either side by more than one district,
the former centerline of such right-of-way shall become the new district line.
49. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map, referred to herein, may be found in Appendix D as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 35-10 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-12
35:22
ARTICLE V
District Regulations
§ 35-14. SCHEDULE OF ZONING LIMITATIONS.50 [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Schedule of Zoning Limitations accompanies and is hereby made part of this
chapter. The regulations contained in the Schedule of Zoning Limitations, in conjunction
with the Supplemental Use and Building Regulations set forth herein, govern the use of
land in the Township of Springfield.
§ 35-15. SUPPLEMENTAL USE AND BUILDING REGULATIONS. [Ord. No.
2003-18]
The use and building regulations contained in this section supplement and are in addition
to the regulations for each district contained in the Schedule of Zoning Limitations.
§ 35-15.1. S-120, S-75, S-60 Single-Family Residential Districts. [Ord. No.
2003-18; Ord. No. 2010-36; Ord. No. 2013-07 § 1(A)]
a. Design of Structures. No structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed or placed,
in any residential zone, which shall be substantially similar to any neighboring
structure, as herein after defined, whether said neighboring structure be then in
existence, or whether a construction permit has been issued or applied for. No
building shall be altered or enlarged to be substantially similar to any neighboring
structure. Said structure shall not be inappropriate to its neighborhood with respect
to the elements of exterior design affecting the character of the neighborhood such
as size, height and materials used in construction, with particular attention given to:
1. The appearance and shape of roof lines.
2. The appearance and arrangement of windows and other apertures in the front
elevation and of floor, chimney, porch and garage in the same elevation.
3. The type, kind and color of materials used in said front elevation.
b. Design Schedule.
1. The following design schedule shall be followed for any development without
regard to sectional subdivision thereof:
Total Number of
Homes in Proposed
Development
Minimum Number of
Different Basic Type
Floor Plans Required
Minimum Number of
Different Front
Elevations Required
For Each Type of Floor
Plans
1 to 10 inclusive 1 3
11 to 25 inclusive 1 5
26 to 50 inclusive 2 3
50. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Zoning Limitations, referred to herein, may be found in Appendix A as an attachment
to this chapter. See also Appendix C, Zone Data.
§ 35-14 LAND USE § 35-15.1
35:23
Total Number of
Homes in Proposed
Development
Minimum Number of
Different Basic Type
Floor Plans Required
Minimum Number of
Different Front
Elevations Required
For Each Type of Floor
Plans
51 and over 3 3
Structures between which the only difference in relative location of elements
is end to end or side to side, increase or decrease in width or depth of structure
or the reversal of elements, shall be deemed to be like each other.
2. In relation to the premises with respect to which a structure is sought to be
erected, constructed, placed, altered or enlarged, said structure shall be deemed
to be a neighboring structure if the subject property is either of the following:
(a) Any lot on the street upon which the structure would front, which is the
first or second lot next along said street in either direction, without regard
to intervening street lines.
(b) Any lot of which part of the street line frontage lies directly across the
street from said premises.
c. Drainage and Driveway Design. For any individual single-family lot a grading plan
shall be submitted to the Department of Engineering, Construction Services and
Code Enforcement for approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. The
grading plans and driveways serving individual single family homes shall meet the
following standards: [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
1. Grading shall be sloped downward from all walls and foundations of buildings
to adequate out-falls or to drainage swales discharging into adequate outfalls.
2. Vertical fall shall be a minimum of six inches and the horizontal length of said
fall shall be a minimum of 10 feet except as restricted by limitation of property
lines wherein the six inch fall must be to the property line.
3. Balance of lot gradient for unpaved areas shall be a minimum of 2%.
4. Maximum slopes for usable rear yards shall be 5/8 inch per foot 5.2% away
from building for a fifteen-foot distance.
5. Maximum slopes for usable front and side yard areas shall be two inches per
foot 16.7% away from building for a minimum four foot distance, except as
limited by side lot lines.
6. All other areas shall be graded no steeper than two feet horizontal to one foot
vertical unless held by satisfactory existing cover or rock outcropping.
7. Top and bottom of banks shall be rounded for convenient maintenance.
8. All areas shall be sloped to lower elevations off the lot or to drainage structures
on the lot.
9. All driveways leading to garages which are detached or attached to or part of
§ 35-15.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.1
35:24
a building, the doors of which face the street, shall slope downward from
the garage to the street as per the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS).
10. All driveways shall be at least nine feet in width, except that driveways
providing access to a two car garage shall provide an eighteen-foot width for a
distance of at least 30 feet from said garage.
11. All driveways providing direct access to a County or State roadway shall
provide an on-site turnaround to prevent vehicles from backing directly onto
said roadway.
12. No driveway shall be located within five feet of a side property line, except
that within the S-60 Zone, driveways may be located within two feet of a side
property line.
13. All driveways shall be at least 20 feet long, as measured from the building
facade to the nearer of the sidewalk line or paved portion of the roadway.
14. Driveways providing access to corner or through lots shall be limited to the
street with the lower traffic volume only, or, in the case of intersecting and/or
parallel streets with substantially the same traffic volume, to only one of the
intersecting and/or parallel streets. The driveway shall be located so as to avoid
interfering with sight distance.
15. In addition, the following items must be included on the plan:
(a) Existing grades.
(b) Proposed grades.
(c) Existing grades of all lots and streets within 20 feet of the property in
question.
(d) Quantity in cubic yards of all soil being disturbed on the property. That
includes soil moved from or to the property.
(e) Soil erosion measures in accordance with the Soil Conservation District
of Union/Somerset Counties.
(f) Present and proposed surface water drainage including drainage
calculations.
(g) North arrow.
(h) Existing and proposed structures, driveways and walkways.
(i) Block, lot, property address and area.
d. Proof of Compliance. In addition to all requirements with respect to the submission
and approval of subdivision plats required by this chapter, regulations adopted by
the Board pursuant thereto, and other municipal requirements with respect to
subdivision approval, application to the Construction Code Enforcement Official
for one or more construction permits in a residential subdivision shall be
§ 35-15.1 LAND USE § 35-15.1
35:25
accompanied by a subdivision plat reflecting compliance with the provisions of
Subsection 35-15.1a through c, including the following:
1. The type of house as to floor plan and exterior elevation to be erected on each
lot.
2. The final grade elevations for each lot giving grade points at the four corners
of the lot and the four corners of the house.
3. Indication of all necessary swales together with the ground elevations along
same.
4. The finished first floor elevation of the house be shown indicating that there
shall be a minimum of a four inch step down between the house and the
garage.
5. Grading design reflecting preservation of natural site features where
practicable.
6. Provisions for diversion of water away from buildings and prevention of
standing water and soil saturation detrimental to structures and to lot use.
7. Provision for disposal of water from the lot.
8. Provision for appropriate finished grades for safe and convenient access to and
use of lot areas with ease of maintenance and for safe access around the
building for its maintenance.
e. Location of Freestanding Air-Conditioning Equipment. Freestanding airconditioning
equipment shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any property
line, except that nonconforming air conditioning structures may be replaced without
a variance from the Zoning Board of Adjustment provided the new unit does not
increase the existing nonconforming characteristics of the structure.
f. Accessory Use Home Occupations. Certain home occupations, shall be considered
accessory use home occupations, if they do not violate any of the criteria of this
section. These home occupations shall be permitted as of right as an accessory use
if they conform to the following criteria, and a zoning permit is issued by the
Zoning Officer:
1. The home occupation shall be clearly subordinate to the residential use.
2. Such home occupation shall be conducted by the owner or tenant residing on
the premises.
3. No employees other than residents are permitted.
4. No more than 25% of the total floor area is allowed to be devoted to the home
occupation.
5. No outdoor storage is allowed.
6. There shall be no more than five client/customer visits to the property per
month.
§ 35-15.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.1
35:26
§ 35-15.2. M-R, Multifamily Residential District. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Within any M-R, Multifamily Residential District, no building or group of buildings
shall be constructed except in conformance with the following:
7. No retail sales or rentals are permitted on the premises.
8. No personal services establishments are permitted.
9. Site plan approval is not required.
10. Home occupations shall not cause any off-site noise, odors, radiation, glare,
radio interference, etc.
11. No toxic or hazardous materials that would constitute a danger to the
environment or neighboring properties shall be stored on the premises.
12. Home occupations shall be allowed no more than two non-passenger car
deliveries per day, excluding U.S. Mail delivery.
13. No signs shall be permitted.
14. No additional parking, other than that required for the residential use, shall be
required.
15. Any alteration to the dwelling for the home occupation shall maintain the
residential character and appearance of the building.
g. Location of Permanently Installed Generators. Permanently installed generators in
residential zones shall not be permitted in the front yard. Such equipment shall be
installed a minimum of 10 feet from the property line, and in conformance with all
flood elevation regulations. All installations shall require the appropriate building
subcode approvals and meet all of the manufacturer's specifications. Testing of the
generator shall occur only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
a. Permitted Density.
1. No more than 16 dwelling units per acre shall be allowed.
2. Living quarters for the owner, superintendent manager or other employee
necessary to the maintenance of the building(s) shall be included in the
computation of the total number of dwelling units permitted.
b. Spacing Between Buildings. In the layout of buildings on a lot or tract of land, the
following minimum distances shall be maintained:
1. Between all principal buildings: 35 feet.
2. Between any principal buildings and detached accessory buildings: 20 feet.
3. Between any principal buildings and any paved surface: 15 feet.
c. Limitations For Units.
1. When a two-story building is designed to provide a series of two-story
§ 35-15.1 LAND USE § 35-15.2
35:27
dwelling units separated and attached by party walls, a maximum of eight
dwelling units shall be contained in any one such building. First floor front and
rear entrances shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
2. No more than 32 dwelling units shall be permitted in any building.
d. Occupancy Restrictions.
1. There shall be no living quarters located above the second story.
2. There shall be no living quarters in either a basement or a cellar.
3. In every unit containing one or more bedrooms, access to every living room
and bedroom and to at least one bathroom shall be had without passing through
any bedroom.
e. Ventilation. Unless originally designed and constructed to provide air conditioning
for all dwelling units, every building shall be so designed that each unit within the
building shall have not less than two exterior exposures for each dwelling unit, the
same being properly pierced by windows in order to provide either through or
corner ventilation. Freestanding air-conditioning equipment shall be located a
minimum of 30 feet from any property line.
f. Maximum Length of Front Facades. The maximum length of any front facade shall
not exceed 160 feet before a break or offset in such facade is introduced. Such offset
shall be a minimum of four feet.
g. Circulation and Parking.
1. Interior streets, roads and driveways shall comply with the requirements of the
New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards.
2. Pedestrian sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all new streets and
in locations wherever normal pedestrian traffic will occur.
3. Parking including off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards.
4. No parking area shall be located in the front yard of any apartment tract, nor
within 10 feet of any property line which is adjacent to a single-family
dwelling or district.
h. Landscaping and Screening.
1. All developments shall be provided with professionally designed landscaping
schemes in accordance with the requirements in § 35-24 and as required by the
approving authority.
2. Open space designed and developed for recreational purposes, including
landscaped areas, parks, ballfields or playgrounds, shall be provided and shall
equal at least 15% of the tract.
i. Utilities and Facilities.
1. Refuse recycling and other utility areas, where provided, shall be located for
§ 35-15.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.2
35:28
§ 35-15.3. PUD, Planned Unit Development District. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
the occupants' convenience and in such a manner as to enhance the aesthetic
character of the development.
2. Coin-operated laundry washing and drying machines may be located in the
basement of the buildings for the sole use of the occupants. Outdoor drying of
laundry is prohibited.
3. In each development, master television antennas and/or cable equipment shall
be built into the building(s). The erection of individual antennas on the roof(s)
of any building is prohibited.
4. The installation and design of other improvements and utilities shall comply
with the improvements and design standards established in this chapter.
j. Storage.
1. Each building shall contain for each dwelling unit a minimum of 200 cubic
feet of storage area in a convenient place in the basement or ground floor
where personal belongings and effects of occupants may be stored without
constituting a fire or health hazard.
2. Each building shall contain for each dwelling unit 50 cubic feet of common
storage area for bicycles, carriages and similar types of frequently used
equipment and utensils.
a. Tract Requirements. A Planned Unit Development (PUD) is permitted on any tract
of land lying wholly within the PUD zone and containing a minimum of 50
contiguous acres. Parcels having fewer than 50 acres may be developed in
accordance with the requirements of the S-75 Zone or, alternatively, the
requirements of Subsections b and h herein provided that the maximum impervious
surface coverage shall be limited to 60%, the maximum floor area ratio shall be
limited to 0.20 and the tract boundary setback requirements at Subsection h6 need
not apply.
b. Permitted Principal Uses in a PUD.
1. Townhouses in accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection g
provided that no more than 65% of the gross tract area shall be devoted to such
uses and further provided that no portion of any residential use shall be located
within 600 feet of Route 22.
2. Nonresidential uses limited to those uses listed below, provided that no more
than 40% and no less than 35% of the gross tract area shall be devoted to such
uses:
(a) Retail and personal service stores and shops designed primarily to serve
the daily needs of residents of the PUD, banks and bank branches, and
small shopping centers containing the above permitted uses, developed in
accordance with the standards for the N-C Zone and Subsection h herein,
provided that such uses shall be located within 500 feet of Route 22,
except that related parking may be located within 700 feet of Route 22.
§ 35-15.2 LAND USE § 35-15.3
35:29
(b) Offices and office buildings, developed in accordance with the standards
for the O Zone and Subsection h herein.
(c) Any public or quasi-public use permitted in the M-R Zone.
3. Common open space, which shall be equivalent in acreage to at least 15% of
the townhouse residential portion of the tract.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses in a PUD.
1. Recreational facilities to serve residents and employees within the
development.
2. A bank branch, restaurant or cafeteria accessory to an office building, but only
within an office building containing more than one office establishment.
3. Off-street parking and loading, in accordance with the provisions of § 35-23
of this chapter, provided that all townhouse units shall provide at least one of
the required parking spaces in a garage attached to the unit, and further
provided that all individual driveways serving an individual unit shall provide
a minimum driveway length of at least 20 feet, as measured from the building
facade to the nearer of the curb or sidewalk line or paved portion of the
roadway. Any visitor parking area for townhouse development shall be located
within 200 feet of the units the area is intended to serve.
4. Fences (See § 35-22).
5. Signs (See § 35-31).
6. Other accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal permitted use.
d. Setbacks from Streets and Tract Boundaries. No building shall be located within 45
feet of any tract boundary nor within 60 feet of any existing street. Moreover, no
building shall be placed within 20 feet of the right-of-way line of any street within
the development nor within five feet of any parking area or driveway to a parking
area.
e. Maximum Building Height.
1. No townhouse building shall exceed 35 feet in height and 2-1/2 stories.
f. Maximum Number of Dwelling Units Permitted. The maximum number of
dwelling units permitted within the PUD shall be nine dwelling units per acre
computed on the land area remaining to the tract after having first subtracted the
acreage of the land area to be devoted to permitted nonresidential uses.
g. Spacing Between Residential Buildings. The residential portion of the PUD shall
provide a minimum of 30 feet separation between buildings.
h. Additional Development Standards, Permitted Non-Residential Uses. The
following restrictions shall specifically apply to all nonresidential uses in the PUD:
1. A maximum lot coverage of 75% and a maximum floor area ratio of 0.30 shall
be permitted on each lot.
§ 35-15.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.3
35:30
2. At least the first 10 feet adjacent to any street or property line shall not be used
for parking and shall be planted and maintained in lawn area or ground cover,
or landscaped with evergreen shrubbery.
3. No merchandise, products, waste, equipment or similar material or objects
shall be displayed or stored outside.
4. All areas not utilized for buildings, parking, loading, access aisles and
driveways or pedestrian walkways shall be suitably landscaped with shrubs,
ground cover, seeding or similar plantings and maintained in good condition.
5. A thirty-foot wide landscaped area shall be maintained along any common
property line with a residential district or use or residential portion of the PUD
development, unless the Board approves a lesser width based on a more
intensive landscape treatment, berming, or other buffering techniques.
6. No wall of any principal or accessory building of a nonresidential use shall be
erected closer than 50 feet from a residential building.
7. The setbacks from streets and tract boundaries shall be as specified in
Subsection d above.
i. Development Standards for Townhouses. No townhouse dwelling unit shall be
constructed in the PUD Zone unless the following minimum standards are met in
addition to other applicable requirements of this chapter:
1. Each building and complex of buildings shall have an architectural theme with
appropriate variations in design and shall be consistent with the design
standards of this chapter.
2. All dwelling units shall be connected to approved and functioning water and
sanitary sewer systems prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
3. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a private rear yard outdoor space
consisting of a deck, patio and/or fenced or walled lawn area. The space shall
have a minimum area of 120 square feet, provided that the average area of all
private outdoor spaces for all units shall be 150 square feet.
4. Sufficient area and equipment shall be made available within each building for
the laundering and drying of laundry of the occupants of each building.
Outdoor drying of laundry is prohibited.
5. Dwelling units shall have access to a master television antenna or cable
system. Individual townhouse units may not erect individual external
television antenna.
6. No townhouse dwelling unit shall be less than 20 feet wide.
7. Fee simple townhouse lots shall meet the following additional requirements:
(a) The boundaries of any individual lot shall not infringe upon or be counted
as common open space areas, nor shall the boundaries of any lot be closer
than five feet from any parking lot or driveway to a parking lot.
§ 35-15.3 LAND USE § 35-15.3
35:31
(b) No construction permit shall be issued for any townhouse dwelling unit,
at any time, unless the proposed construction is in accordance with the
approved site plan, and this condition shall be recited in the deed of the
subdivided townhouse lot.
8. Offsets of at least four feet shall be provided between every two units along
the front facade of townhouse buildings.
9. Public streets and pedestrian sidewalks shall comply with the requirements of
the RSIS.
10. Adequate lighting shall be provided to minimize hazards to pedestrians and
motor vehicles along interior streets, roads and driveways, in parking areas,
near exterior and interior dwelling entrances and along pedestrian walks.
11. Refuse pickup recycling and other utility areas, where provided, shall be
screened by means of an enclosure and be located for the occupant's
convenience and in such a manner as to enhance the aesthetic character of the
development.
12. All developments shall be provided with professionally designed landscaping
schemes in accordance with the requirements of § 35-24 of this chapter.
j. Common Open Space Requirements.
1. Land area equal in acreage to a minimum of 15% of the portion of the tract
devoted to townhouse residential development shall be set aside for common
open space, including buffering, conservation and parks. Said 15% shall not
include and shall be in addition to that open space resulting from the
application of the building spacing and setback requirements of this chapter
and shall not include common parking areas or street rights-of-way. The
designated common open space shall be located wholly within the portion of
the tract to be developed with townhouses.
2. Common open space shall be distributed throughout the residential areas of the
development in an equitable manner, optimally related to the overall plan and
design of the development, and improved to suit the purpose(s) for which it is
intended.
3. Common open space may be offered to the Township for public purposes or it
may be owned and maintained by an association. Any lands intended to be
offered to the Township for public purposes shall be so declared prior to
preliminary approval. All lands not offered to and/or not accepted by the
Township shall be owned and maintained by a homeowner association.
4. Any common open space lands offered to the Township shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) The minimum size of each parcel offered shall be two acres.
(b) Lands offered for recreational purposes shall be improved by the
developer, including, but not limited to equipment, walkways and
landscaping, in order to qualify the lands for acceptance by the Township.
§ 35-15.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.3
35:32
(c) Any lands offered to the Township shall be subject to review by the
Planning Board. The Board, in its review and evaluation of the suitability
of such land, shall be guided by the Master Plan of the Township, by the
ability to assemble and relate such lands to an overall plan, by the ability
of the Township to maintain said lands, and by the accessibility and
potential utility of such lands.
(d) Every parcel of land offered by the developer and accepted by the
Township shall be conveyed to the Township by deed at the time final
site plan approval is granted by the Township. The deed shall contain
such restrictions as may reasonably be required to ensure the intended use
of such areas.
k. General Requirements.
1. Prior to preliminary approval, the developer shall submit a preliminary public
sewer plan together with letters from the appropriate officials indicating the
feasibility of such a sewer plan and the fact that the sewage treatment plant has
sufficient capacity to serve the development.
2. The developer shall be responsible for the collection of trash and recyclables
and the removal of same from the development. This responsibility shall
extend to the developer's successors including any homeowners association or
individual owner. This requirement shall be part of any master deed and
specified to run with the land.
3. Any proposal for a PUD may include provisions for the phasing of
construction over a period of years, provided that the following terms and
conditions, intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development are met:
(a) Where the development is intended to be phased over a number of years,
prior to the granting of preliminary approval for the entire Planned Unit
Development, there shall be an explanation, including appropriate maps,
indicating the location, number, and type of units to be constructed in
each phase and the priority of each phase. Each development phase shall
indicate its relationship to the circulation and utilities systems completed
up to that point in order to assure their adequacy to serve the total
development.
(b) Preliminary approval shall be granted for the complete PUD proposal
before final approval shall be granted for any phase.
(c) For all development phases subsequent to the first phase, no building
permits may be issued for construction of units in any such phase until
construction of preceding phases is substantially completed.
"Substantially completed" shall be taken to mean that, as a minimum, all
exterior finish, paving, fine grading, seeding and landscaping shall have
been completed.
4. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building or part thereof
until all streets, drainage, parking facilities and sewer facilities servicing said
§ 35-15.3 LAND USE § 35-15.3
35:33
§ 35-15.3A. PD/RCA, Planned Development/Regional Contribution District. [Ord.
No. 2003-18; amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-26]
structure are properly completed and functioning.
a. Tract requirements. A Planned Development - Affordable Housing District (PD/
AH) tract of land lying wholly within the PUD zone (Block 4001, Lot 2) and
consisting of approximately 8.5 acres.
b. Principal permitted uses.
1. Multifamily dwellings in accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection
35-15.3Ae.
2. Common open space, in accordance with Subsection 35-15.3j.
c. Housing need compliance. Development of housing within this zone shall require
the following minimum of the total units provided to be affordable to very-low-,
low- and moderate-income households: 20% if the units are offered for sale, 15% if
the units are offered for rent. Should units in other locations within the Township
be converted to affordable housing to fulfill this obligation the requirement shall be
a minimum of 20% of the units provided on this site. A minimum of 50% of the
affordable units in any development shall be low-income units. Thirteen percent of
the affordable units shall be available to very-low-income households, which shall
be counted as part of the low-income housing units.
d. Development in this zone shall comply with the requirements in § 35-15.7 and other
provisions common and applicable to all AH Zones, unless otherwise regulated in
this section.
e. Permitted accessory uses.
1. Recreation facilities to serve the residents of the development.
2. Off-street parking in accordance with the provisions of § 35-23 and the
standards of the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
3. Fences (See § 35-22).
4. Signs (See § 35-31).
5. Other accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
permitted use.
f. Development criteria.
1. Density. The maximum density permitted for the area of the PUD devoted to
this use is 20 units per acre with a maximum of 170 total dwelling units.
2. Maximum height. No principal building shall exceed 40 feet in height and
three stories.
3. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet.
4. Minimum rear yard setback shall be 50 feet.
§ 35-15.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.3A
35:34
§ 35-15.4. O, N-C, G-C, H-C, 1-20 and 1-40 Nonresidential Districts. [Ord. No.
2003-18; Ord. No. 09-011 § I]
5. Minimum side yard setback shall be 30 feet.
6. Minimum distance between buildings shall be 30 feet.
7. Maximum building coverage shall be 30%.
8. Maximum lot coverage shall be 65%.
a. Office Development in the 1-20 and 1-40 Districts. In the event an owner of land
located within the 1-20 or 1-40 General Industrial Districts desires to construct or
establish an office use within the 1-20 or 1-40 District, all of the requirements of
the O-Office Zone District shall apply in place of the 1-20 or 1-40 District
requirements.
b. Drive-in Banking Facilities. Where banks are permitted and a drive-in window or
windows are to be installed, the following requirements shall be satisfied in addition
to all other applicable zoning provisions:
1. There shall be a minimum of two access driveways serving any bank with a
drive-in window or windows.
2. Internal circulation shall be such that queued vehicles for the drive-in windows
do not interfere with parking or site ingress and egress. Additionally, vehicles
exiting from the parking area shall not be required to use a drive-in window
lane.
3. A separate ten-foot wide lane shall be provided for each drive-in window with
a minimum stacking capacity of six vehicles each. In addition, there shall be a
by-pass lane provided with a minimum width of 10 feet.
c. Setback From a Residential District or Use. No wall of any principal building
erected in a nonresidential district shall be closer than 50 feet from a residential
district boundary line or residential lot line.
d. Location of Freestanding Air-Conditioning Equipment. Freestanding airconditioning
equipment shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from any residential
use or district boundary line, and shall be properly screened subject to the approval
of the appropriate agency.
e. Drive Through Windows. Drive through windows for all other permitted uses shall
require a separate ten-foot wide lane for each window with a minimum stacking
capacity of six vehicles each. In addition, there shall be a by-pass lane provided
with a minimum width of 10 feet.
f. Temporary Tents in the H-C District. A temporary tent may be placed for retail
sales in the Highway Commercial District, subject to the following requirements:
1. It shall only be used by a business in a building on the subject property, for the
sale of products normally sold by such business;
2. It shall be permitted for up to two, thirty-day periods within any calendar year,
§ 35-15.3A LAND USE § 35-15.4
35:35
§ 35-15.5. Regulations Pertaining to All Districts. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No.
2008-10 § I; Ord. No. 2010-21 § II; Ord. No. 2013-07 § 1(B)]
which periods may be consecutive.
3. The tent shall not occupy more than 20% of the total parking area available on
the subject property, if there is only one business. If more than one business
occupies the subject property, the parking area available shall be based upon
applicant's pro rata share of the entire parking area.
4. Building, fire and all other necessary permits or licenses must be obtained
prior to placement of the tent.
a. Nuisance Uses. In addition to the provisions of Subsection 35-4.4 of this chapter,
any use or activity constituting or creating a nuisance is prohibited. In addition, no
artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated on a property in such a manner as
to be a nuisance or an annoyance to neighboring properties. No lighting shall shine
directly upon any abutting property. [Amended 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-20]
b. Accessory Buildings and Uses. No accessory building or use shall be constructed
except in conformance with the following:
1. All accessory buildings and uses shall be located on the same lot as the
principal use they are intended to serve unless otherwise permitted by this
chapter.
2. No construction permit shall be issued for any accessory building or structure
prior to the issuance of a construction permit for the principal building to be
located on the same lot.
3. No accessory building or structure shall be located in a front yard, and all such
buildings or structures shall be located at least five feet from a rear or side
property line.
4. No accessory building shall be located within 10 feet of any other building.
5. No more than two accessory buildings shall be permitted on any lot in the
S-60, S-75 or S-120 Zones.
6. The height of any accessory building, shall not exceed 15 feet.
7. No accessory structure shall be permitted in any nonresidential zone, with the
exception of freestanding signs where permitted.
c. Outdoor Storage of Materials, Goods, Supplies and Vehicles.
1. The outdoor storage and/or sale of goods and materials shall not be permitted
in all non-residential zones.
2. In any residential district or property, no commercial vehicle shall be stored,
unless it is stored in a private garage, provided the vehicle is used by the
current resident of the property on which it is stored, as an accessory use. Any
variance from this section shall be deemed a bulk variance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c, and shall not run with the land. [Amended 9-13-2016
§ 35-15.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.5
35:36
by Ord. No. 2016-17]
d. Flood Plain Regulations and Storm Drainage.
1. Flood Plain Regulations. Areas determined to lie within the flood plain shall
be regulated by this chapter and further regulated by Chapter 32 Flood
Damage Prevention, and New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
requirements as supplemented and amended.
2. Storm Drainage. All developments shall comply with the requirements of the
Township of Springfield Storm Water Control and Flood Plain Ordinance, and
the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards where applicable, as
supplemented and amended.
e. Critical Areas.
1. The location of the principal or accessory structure in critical areas shall be
minimized to the greatest extent practical, and shall be pursuant to all State
and Federal regulations. Additionally disturbance of steep slopes shall not
exceed the following:
Steep Slope Category Maximum Disturbance
15 - 19.99% 40%
20 - 24.99% 20%
25% + 5%
Steep slope disturbance necessary for utility easements and utility rights-ofway
are exempt from any disturbance limitations. Disturbance of steep slopes
in amounts greater than indicated above shall require variance approval from
the Board hearing the application.
2. All single family residential lots created after the adoption date of this
chapter51 shall contain at least 6,000 square feet of contiguous, non-critical
land with direct access to an existing or public street.
3. In addition to the lot coverage requirements of this chapter, no development
shall provide more than 80% lot coverage of the non-critical area of the lot.
f. Satellite Dish Antennas. Satellite dish antennas shall be permitted as an accessory
use in all zones of the Township provided the following conditions are met:
1. No more than one such antenna is permitted per lot.
2. All satellite dish antennas located in single family residential zones shall be
situated in rear or side yards and located not closer than 10 feet from any
property line. All such antennas shall be suitably screened from neighboring
properties.
3. Nonresidential uses shall be permitted to erect an antenna on the side or roof
of a principal or accessory building provided said antenna is suitably screened
51. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2003-18 which adopted this Land Use Chapter was adopted July 8, 2003.
§ 35-15.5 LAND USE § 35-15.5
35:37
from public view. No antenna in a nonresidential zone shall be permitted in a
front yard.
4. Ground mounted antennas shall not exceed 15 feet in height, and building
mounted antennas shall not exceed 12 feet in height above the main ridge of
the roof of the building. Pole mounted antennas shall not exceed the maximum
building height permitted in the zone in which it is located.
g. Swimming Pools. The construction of all swimming pools in the Township shall be
in accordance with Chapter 13. A lot grading plan shall be submitted to the
Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code Enforcement for
review and approval, before a permit may be issued. [Amended 12-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-24]
h. Inclusionary development and affordable housing units. All inclusionary
development and affordable housing units, wherever constructed, shall comply
fully with regulations set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq.52 and the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls (UHAC) set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., except as
otherwise set forth herein. [Added 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-26]
i. Pipelines. [Added 5-26-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-11]
1. Applicability. The provisions in this subsection apply to all hazardous material
transmission pipelines proposed for construction and siting within the
Township. To the extent any regulations within this section conflict with state
or federal regulations or laws regulating hazardous material transmission
pipelines, those state or federal regulations and laws shall take precedence
over these regulations. The regulations set forth herein shall be in addition to
any requirements imposed upon pipelines and pipeline owners and operators
under applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, except to the
extent prohibited by such laws, rules and regulations. The Township hereby
adopts by reference the definitions set forth in the Hazardous Liquid Pipeline
Safety Act of 1979, as amended, and recodified in 49 U.S.C. § 601 and 49
CFR 190 to 199, except as otherwise set forth herein.
2. Pipeline uses. Hazardous material transmission pipelines not distributing
services to end users within the Township which are not otherwise regulated
by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities are prohibited in all residential
zones and districts within the Township and shall constitute conditional uses
in all other zones and districts within the Township.
3. As used in this Subsection 35-15.5(i), the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ESSENTIAL PUBLIC FACILITIES — Those public facilities which are
required in order to provide basic health and safety services to residents
and visitors of the Township, including, without limitation, water sanitation
plants, water treatment plants, sewer treatment plants, water storage facilities,
telecommunication towers, police stations, fire stations, jails, courthouses,
public health facilities, and emergency operations centers.
52. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 35-15.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.5
35:38
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — As defined in Chapter 29, § 29-1.1
(Definitions).
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL TRANSMISSION PIPELINE CORRIDOR or
TRANSMISSION PIPELINE CORRIDOR — A pipeline pathway defined
by rights-of-way and easements in which the pipelines and facilities of a
hazardous material transmission pipeline are located, or proposed to be
located, including rights-of-way and easements over and through public or
private property.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL TRANSMISSION PIPELINE or
TRANSMISSION PIPELINE — A pipeline, whether above or below ground,
which transports or is designed to transport a hazardous material. As used
herein, a transmission pipeline includes all parts of those physical facilities
through which a hazardous material moves in transportation, including pipes,
valves, and other appurtenances attached to pipes, compressor units, pumping
stations, metering stations, regulator stations, delivery stations, emergency
response terminals, holders, breakout tanks, fabricated assemblies, and other
surface pipeline appurtenances.
HIGH-CONSEQUENCE LAND USE — A land use that, if located in the
vicinity of a hazardous materials transmission pipeline, represents an
unusually high risk to life in the event of a transmission pipeline failure due to
the characteristics of the inhabitants or functions of the use. High-consequence
land uses include:
TRANSMISSION PIPELINE OPERATOR — The individual or entity
responsible for the operation, maintenance and management of a transmission
(a) Child care;
(b) Houses of worship, including churches and other religious institutions;
(c) Hospitals;
High-rise buildings, including hotels, dormitories, apartment complexes,
and office buildings, which may not lend themselves to a timely
evacuation;
(d)
Open space uses, including Green Acres and Borough-owned lands
designated as open space preservation areas, farmland preservation areas,
historic preservation areas, Blue Acres preservation areas, active
recreation areas, and passive recreation areas;
(e)
(f) National Park Service-designated National Natural Landmarks;
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)-
designated New Jersey Natural Areas and Natural Heritage Priority Sites;
(g)
(h) Residential-care facilities;
Institutional uses, including public and private schools, day-care
facilities, and public or quasi-public buildings; and
(i)
(j) Essential public facilities.
§ 35-15.5 LAND USE § 35-15.5
35:39
pipeline.
4. Development and construction of new hazardous material transmission
pipelines. The following requirements and standards shall apply for the
development and construction of new hazardous material transmission
pipelines:
(a) Approvals required; application. A resolution of approval by the
Township Planning Board shall be required prior to the commencement
of any work to install a transmission pipeline within the Township. An
original application for a transmission pipeline approval and permit shall
be submitted to the Township Planning Board Secretary and a copy
submitted to the Township Engineer. Applications for the development
and/or construction of transmission pipelines shall be submitted in
accordance to the procedures outlined in Article IX of this chapter for site
plan review. In addition to the procedures in Article IX, each application
shall be accompanied by three sets of plans showing dimensions and
locations of the transmission pipelines, related items or facilities within
the subject right-of-way and roadway improvements.
(1) Detailed cross-section drawings for all public street right-of-way
easements, wetland and waterway crossings;
(2) A flow diagram showing daily design capacity of the proposed
transmission pipeline;
(3) Changes in flow in the transmission pipeline; and
(4) The proposed maximum operating pressure, expressed in pounds per
square inch gauge (psig) at all points of change in elevation greater
than 500 feet, or every 500 feet in length as a minimum.
(b) Hazardous material transmission pipeline corridor. Any easements or
rights-of-way obtained by the transmission pipeline operator shall be
recorded in the office of the Union County Clerk for all new hazardous
material transmission pipelines.
(c) Setbacks. In order to mitigate the aesthetic and environmental impacts of
hazardous material transmission pipelines, while minimizing potential
damage or interruption to essential public facilities caused by
transmission pipelines, the following setbacks shall be observed:
(1) Wellhead protection areas.
(i) Except as set forth in this section or unless approved by the
Township Engineer as part of the approval and permit process,
where adequate mitigation measures have been demonstrated
by the applicant to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer,
hazardous material transmission pipeline corridors shall not be
located within the vicinity of a designated wellhead protection
area ("WHPA"), and shall not be located closer than 2,500 feet
in a Tier 1 WHPA, 1,000 feet in a Tier 2 WHPA, and 500 feet
§ 35-15.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.5
35:40
in a Tier 3 WHPA. However, conditions such as slope and
terrain may require additional mitigation as identified in the
permit and approvals process.
(ii) Wellhead protection area is the surface and subsurface area
surrounding a well or well field through which water will move
toward and reach such well or well field, and contaminants and
groundwater pollution, if either or both exist, may pose a
significant threat to the quality of water withdrawn from the
well.
(2) Except as otherwise set forth in this section, hazardous material
transmission pipelines shall not be located closer than 100 feet to:
(i) Any wetland;
(ii) Any year-round naturally occurring creek, stream, river, private
or public well, or pond, unless approved by the Township
Engineer as part of the permit and approvals process where
adequate mitigation measures have been demonstrated by the
applicant; or
(iii) Any property in a business district or where a business is
located.
(3) A hazardous material transmission pipeline, facility or appurtenance
shall not be located closer than:
(i) One thousand feet to any high-consequence land use lot or
essential public facility structure;
(ii) One hundred fifty feet to any residential property, zone or
district on level grade; or
(iii) Two hundred fifty feet to any residential property, zone or
district where the residential property, zone or district is located
downhill from the transmission pipeline, facility or
appurtenance at a grade equal to or greater than 5%, except that
no transmission pipeline shall be located on slopes of a grade
equal to or greater than 15%.
(4) An emergency response terminal shall not be located closer than:
(i) Two thousand five hundred feet to any high-consequence land
use lot or essential public facility structure; or
(ii) Two thousand five hundred feet to any residential property,
zone or district on level grade.
(d) Submittal of Information. Preliminary as-built information, including,
without limitation, as-built drawings or additional information as may be
requested by the Township Engineer about the transmission pipeline will
be filed within 90 days before the transmission pipeline is commissioned
§ 35-15.5 LAND USE § 35-15.5
35:41
with the Township Engineer. Updated as-built information, including,
without limitation, as-built drawings or additional information as may be
requested by the Township Engineer about the transmission pipeline will
be filed within 60 days after the transmission pipeline is commissioned
with the Township Engineer.
(e) Hazardous Material Transmission Pipeline Construction. The
transmission pipeline owner, operator and/or contractor shall give
documented notice 48 hours prior to the commencement of transmission
pipeline construction to the affected residents, businesses (including
agricultural businesses) and to the Township's Police Department and
Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code
Enforcement. Private property owners and business owners shall have
access to their property at all times during construction.
5. Hazardous Material Transmission Pipeline Failure and Remediation. In the
event that a leak or failure has occurred with the transmission pipeline, the
transmission pipeline operator shall notify the Township Engineer, Township
Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code Enforcement,
Police Department, and all property owners within 1,000 feet of the affected
transmission pipeline area within four hours of discovery. Transmission
pipeline operators shall, after being notified of an emergency, cooperate with
Township officials and make every effort to respond as soon as possible to
protect the public's health, safety, and welfare. All leak or spill remediation
plans shall be made in consultation with the Township, and no remediation
may be deemed complete without final approval thereof by the Township. In
the event that a transmission pipeline is shut down due to a leak or failure, the
transmission pipeline operator shall not restart the transmission pipeline
without the written approval of the Township Engineer.
6. In addition to this chapter, the transmission pipeline operator shall comply
with the environmental regulations set forth in Chapter 29 of the Township
Code.
7. Hazardous Material Transmission Pipeline Repair and Maintenance.
Following any repair of a transmission pipeline, any areas disturbed by such
repair shall be revegetated in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Township Code.
8. Hazardous Material Transmission Pipeline Marking. Markers shall be installed
and maintained to identify the location of transmission pipelines in accordance
with all federal and state pipeline marking requirements.
9. Emergency Preparedness Plan. Prior to commissioning a transmission
pipeline, the transmission pipeline operator shall meet with the Township
Police Department and submit a copy of an emergency preparedness plan for
any and all emergencies that may result in an accidental leak or failure incident
regarding the transmission pipeline or any supplemental equipment. The
essential requirements stated in 49 CFR 195.402 and 195.403 shall be covered
by the emergency preparedness plan. No transmission pipeline shall be
commissioned, nor shall any hazardous material be introduced into the
§ 35-15.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.5
35:42
§ 35-15.6. OS-GU, Open Space - Government Use District. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Within any OS-GU Open Space-Government Use District, no development shall occur
except in conformance with the following:
transmission pipeline prior to the transmission pipeline operator receiving
written approval of its emergency preparedness plan by the Chief of Police
or his designee. Transmission pipeline operators shall designate a responsible
local emergency response official and a direct twenty-four-hour emergency
phone number.
10. Insurance Required. No transmission pipeline operator shall commission any
transmission pipeline or introduce any hazardous material into a transmission
pipeline without first securing insurance policies covering general liability,
environmental incidents and contamination, and property damage in an
aggregate amount to be determined by the Township following the submission
of an application and which shall be based upon reasonable estimates of
potential liability and property damage that may result from a leak, spill or
other failure of a transmission pipeline. Prior to commissioning any
transmission pipeline and every year in which the transmission pipeline is in
operation thereafter, the transmission pipeline operator shall submit proof of
its insurance coverage to the Township, and the Township shall be named as
an additional insured on all required policies.
11. Indemnification and Hold Harmless. Prior to commissioning a transmission
pipeline, the transmission pipeline operator shall agree in writing to indemnify
and hold harmless the Township, as well as its officers, officials, supervisors,
employees, agents, contractors, and assigns, from any and all liability relating
to or arising from the transmission pipeline, including, but not limited to, any
failure, leak, spill, contamination, cleanup, remediation, property damage, and
personal injury. The indemnification and hold-harmless agreement shall
include a provision for the payment of the Township's reasonable attorneys'
fees and litigation costs.
a. Permitted Uses.
1. Public parks, playgrounds, open spaces, reservoirs, ice-skating rinks,
ballfields, tennis courts, swimming pools, public schools and Board of
Education facilities, government offices, libraries, firehouses, first-aid and
emergency squad buildings and municipal buildings and other municipal
facilities.
2. Golf courses and country clubs.
3. Customary accessory uses to the above permitted uses.
b. Bulk Requirements. Because of the wide diversity in the nature of the uses
permitted in this zone, no specific bulk requirements are set forth. The Planning
Board, in reviewing development applications for any uses proposed in this district,
shall be guided by generally accepting planning standards and the design standards
of this chapter to minimize the impact on surrounding properties and to ensure
adequate circulation parking and buffering and other planning concerns.
§ 35-15.5 LAND USE § 35-15.7
35:43
§ 35-15.7. Affordable Housing (AH) Zoning Districts. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No.
2006-6 § I(A); Ord. No. 2006-21 § I; Ord. No. 2007-04 § I; Ord. No. 2007-18 § I;
Ord. No. 2015-21 § 2]
a. Purpose. It is the intent and purpose of the AH Zones to:
1. Provide a realistic opportunity for the provision of low and moderate income
housing sufficient to meet Springfield Township's obligation as determined by
the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
2. Conform to the purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-2.
3. Comply with the statutory scheme of the Fair Housing Act, the rules and
regulations of the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing and sound
planning principles.
b. Mandatory Compliance Required. All development applications in the AH Zones
shall comply with the requirements of this section in addition to any other
development requirements of the Township of Springfield.
c. Permitted Principal Uses in the AH Zones. Each zone except the AH-SC Zone, shall
be developed as a single entity. The following are the principal permitted uses in
each of the AH Zones.
1. AH-SC Zone - Apartment building, or group of buildings, or townhouses
devoted exclusively to senior citizens.
2. AH-17 Zone - Apartment buildings, townhouses and single-family dwellings.
3. AH-18 Zone - Apartment buildings or townhouses.
4. AH-24.2 Zone - Apartment buildings.
5. AH-7/RCA Zone - Single-family detached dwellings or townhouses.
6. AH-16 Zone - Apartment buildings or townhouses. [Added 11-22-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-26]
7. AHO-1, Affordable Housing Overlay Zone - Apartment buildings or
townhouses. [Added 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-26]
8. AHO-2, Affordable Housing Overlay Zone - Apartment buildings or
townhouses. [Added 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-26]
d. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Any use or structure customarily incidental to a principal permitted use.
2. Private garages and carports.
3. Signs as regulated in § 35-31.
4. Recreational facilities to serve residents within the development.
e. Development Criteria for AH-SC Zone.
§ 35-15.7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.7
35:44
1. Housing Need Compliance. Development of housing within this zone shall
require a minimum of 20% of the total units provided to be affordable to low
and moderate income households.
2. All housing developed within this zone shall be available exclusively to senior
citizens.
3. Density. The density of housing in this zone shall not exceed 16 units per acre.
4. Development pursuant to this section requires a minimum lot area of two
acres.
5. Maximum Height. No principal building shall exceed 40 feet in height and
three stories.
6. Minimum setback from front, side and rear property lines is 30 feet.
7. Maximum building coverage shall be 25%.
8. Maximum lot coverage shall be 50%.
9. A buffer strip shall be required as described in Subsection 35-23.5, where the
development abuts a residential zone or use.
10. Unless otherwise regulated in this section, the provisions of Subsections
35-15.2 and 35-15.3a shall apply except that the permitted maximum number
of dwelling units in any building shall be 40.
11. Any property within this zone which has a lot area of less than two acres may
be developed as if located within a General Commercial (GC) Zone.
f. Development Criteria for AH-17 Zone.
1. Housing Need Compliance. Development of housing within this zone shall
require the following minimum of the total units provided to be affordable to
low and moderate income households: 17% if the low and moderate units are
for sale; 12% if the low and moderate units are for rent.
2. Density. The density of multifamily housing in any portion of this zone shall
not exceed 17 units per acre. The overall gross density of the entire tract shall
not exceed 15 units per acre.
3. Maximum Height. No principal building shall exceed 40 feet in height and
three stories, provided that no building or part thereof which is located within
100 feet of a single-family residential district shall exceed 35 feet in height and
2 1/2 stories.
4. The minimum setback from front, side and rear property lines is 35 feet.
5. Maximum Building Coverage shall be 30%.
6. Maximum Lot Coverage shall be 60%.
7. A buffer strip of a minimum of 25 feet shall be required as described in
Subsection 35-23.5 where the development abuts a residential zone or use.
§ 35-15.7 LAND USE § 35-15.7
35:45
8. Unless otherwise regulated in this section, the provisions of Subsections
35-15.2 and 35-15.3a shall apply.
9. Vehicular access to and from development in this zone shall be directly with
either/or a combination of Mountain Avenue, Springfield Avenue, or U.S.
Route 22. No vehicular access shall be permitted to minor streets such as
Becker Road from development in this zone. Any such development shall
include direct access to U.S. Route 22 for both ingress and egress, by way of a
continued fee ownership of a minimum fifty-foot right-of-way across the
frontage on such highway of the property designated as Block 3901, Lot 6 on
the tax map of the Township of Springfield, which area shall be rezoned as
AH-16 pursuant hereto. Alternatively, there may be an equivalent easement
across such land, providing for such right-of-way in perpetuity, at which time
the zoning of such area shall revert to the zoning existing at the time of the
effective date of this chapter.
10. No road or multifamily housing units shall be permitted within 100 feet of any
boundary line with any property within any single-family residential zone.
11. Any development within 100 feet of any boundary line with any property
within any single-family residential zone shall be restricted to single-family
use and shall be developed pursuant to the bulk requirements set forth for the
S-60 Zone.
g. Development Criteria for AH-18 Zone.
1. Housing Need Compliance. The developer of housing within this zone shall
have the option of developing multifamily housing per the ordinance
requirements with either:
(a) A minimum of 20% of the total units provided to be affordable to low and
moderate income households. To the extent that the Township's rental
obligation of 34 affordable units remains to be satisfied, each rental unit
provided shall count as two units; or
(b) A contribution to the Township's Housing Trust Fund in the amount of
$20,000 per low and moderate income unit which would have been
provided under a above at 20% of the total units provided.
2. Density. The density of housing in this zone shall not exceed 18 units per acre.
3. Maximum Height. No principal building shall exceed 40 feet in height and
three stories.
4. The minimum setback from the tract boundary shall be 30 feet.
5. Maximum Building Coverage shall be 25%.
6. Maximum Lot Coverage shall be 50%.
7. No more than 42 dwelling units shall be permitted in any building.
8. A buffer strip shall be required as described in Subsection 35-23.5 where the
development abuts a residential zone or use.
§ 35-15.7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.7
35:46
9. The width of streets and driveways shall be no less than 24 feet unless
otherwise provided by the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.)
10. Unless otherwise regulated in this section, the provisions of Subsection
35-15.2 shall apply,
11. All requirements of the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards
(N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.) shall apply as required by State law.
h. Development Criteria for AH-24.2 Zone.
1. Housing Need Compliance. Development of housing within this zone shall
require a minimum of 11.1% of the total units provided to be affordable to low
and moderate income households. If low and moderate income housing units
are rental units, a minimum of 8.3% of the total units shall be affordable to low
and moderate income families, provided the Township rental obligation as
identified in the adopted Housing Plan for Springfield Township has not been
previously met.
2. Density. The density of housing in this zone shall not exceed twenty-four and
two-tenths (24.2) units per acre.
3. Maximum Height. No principal building shall exceed 40 feet in height and
three stories.
4. Minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet.
5. Minimum rear yard setback shall be 50 feet.
6. Minimum side yard setback shall be 30 feet.
7. Maximum building coverage shall be 30%.
8. Maximum lot coverage shall be 65%.
9. A buffer strip shall be required as described in Subsection 35-23.5 where the
development abuts a residential zone or use.
10. Unless otherwise regulated in this section, the provisions of Subsection
35-15.2 shall apply.
11. Residential development of any property as to which this zone is an overlayzone,
shall occur on a minimum of 4.88 acres and no other use of the property
shall be permitted.
i. Development Criteria for S-75/AH Zone.
1. Housing Need Compliance. Development within this zone shall comply with
the use, bulk and setback standards and regulations of the S-75 Zone, and
subject to compliance with either of the following options.
(a) The developer shall construct eight low and moderate income units on
another site within the Township of Springfield, subject to the review and
approval of the Planning Board, or
§ 35-15.7 LAND USE § 35-15.7
35:47
(b) The developer shall fund the conversion of eight existing dwellings
within the Township of Springfield to be available to low and moderate
income families, subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
2. The affordable units shall be subject to the then current affordability
regulations of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) or other agency
charged with regulating affordable housing within the State of New Jersey in
regard to affordability controls and standards.
j. Development criteria for AH-16 Zone. [Added 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-2653]
1. Housing need compliance. Development of housing within this zone shall
require the following minimum of the total units provided to be affordable to
low- and moderate-income households: 20% if the low- and moderate-income
units are for sale and 15% if the low- and moderate-income units are for rent.
2. Density. The gross density of the tract shall not exceed 16 units per acre.
3. Maximum height. No principal building shall exceed 40 feet in height and
three stories.
4. The minimum setback from front, side and rear property lines is 35 feet.
5. Maximum building coverage shall be 30%.
6. Maximum lot coverage shall be 60%.
7. Unless otherwise regulated in this section, the provisions of Subsection
35-15.2 shall apply.
k. Supplementary Regulations Applicable to All AH Zones.
1. Phasing Schedule. Low and moderate income housing units within
inclusionary developments shall be built in accordance with the following
schedule:
Minimum Percentage of Low and
Moderate Income Units Completed
Percentage of Market Housing
Units Completed
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 90
100 100
2. Bedroom Distribution. The low and moderate housing component within
inclusionary developments must meet the following bedroom distribution
requirements.
(a) At least 30% of all low and moderate income units shall be two-bedroom
53. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection j as Subsection k.
§ 35-15.7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-15.7
35:48
§ 35-16. REDEVELOPMENT AREAS. [Added 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-26]
Any residential development that is constructed as part of a redevelopment plan shall
include a set-aside for very-low-, low- and moderate-income housing. If the dwellings
are offered for rent, 15% shall be affordable to low- and moderate-income households. If
units.
(b) At least 20% of all low and moderate income units shall be threebedroom
units.
(c) The combination of efficiency and one-bedroom units is at least 10% and
no greater than 20% of the total low and moderate income units.
3. Development Application Procedure.
(a) An applicant for development in the AH Zones shall submit the required
plans and documents to the Township approving agency for review and
approval as required by Article IX, Site Plan and Subdivision Review.
The Township approving agency shall distribute the plans to those
agencies required by law to review and/or approve development plans
and to Township agencies which normally review development plans.
(b) The Township approving agency shall hold a public hearing on the
application not less than 30 days nor more than 45 days from the date of
submission of a complete application. Approvals shall be governed by the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46 and 40:55D-48.
(c) Notwithstanding any other ordinance requirements of the Township of
Springfield or the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46 and 40:55D-48, the
time period for official action on complete subdivision and site plan
applications for preliminary approval shall be 75 days unless the
applicant consents to an extension of time.
(d) In addition to material submitted for review as required by Article IX,
Site Plan and Subdivision Review, the applicant must also submit an
affirmative marketing plan, an affordability plan and a housing plan. The
housing plan shall detail the type, sale and rental schedule for all housing
units.
The housing plan shall include but not be limited to information
concerning the marketing of units, the sales price and rent schedule
of units, the number of units to be sold and/or rented, the number of
bedrooms in each housing unit, the square footage of each housing unit
and any other reasonable information required under § 35-34 or by any
other Township entity.
4. Income distribution. A minimum of 50% of the affordable units in any
development shall be low-income units. Thirteen percent of the affordable
units shall be available to very-low-income households, which shall be
counted as part of the low-income housing units. [Added 11-22-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-26]
§ 35-15.7 LAND USE § 35-16
35:49
the dwellings are offered for sale, 20% shall be affordable to low- and moderate-income
households. A minimum of 50% of the affordable units in any development shall be
low-income units. Thirteen percent of the affordable units shall be available to very-lowincome
households, which shall be counted as part of the low-income housing units.
§ 35-17. OVERLAY ZONES AND MANDATORY SET-ASIDE. [Added
11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-26]
a. Affordable Housing Overlay Zone - 1. Developers have the option of developing
lands located in the Affordable Housing Overlay Zone - 1 (AHO-1) pursuant to the
following criteria:
1. The site must be a minimum of three acres.
2. The maximum density permitted is 16 units per acre, unless the total size of
the property is five acres or more, in which case the maximum density
permitted shall be 18 units per acre.
3. No property shall be developed unless it shall have access to a public street
other than or in addition to U.S. Highway Route 22.
4. The minimum percentage of low- and moderate-income units to be set aside is
20% for sales units and 15% for rental units.
5. A minimum of 50% of the affordable units in any development shall be lowincome
units. Thirteen percent of the affordable units shall be available to
very-low-income households, which shall be counted as part of the lowincome
housing units.
6. Development standards and regulations for projects developed at a density of
16 units per acre shall be pursuant to § 35-15.7j as in the AH-16 Zone.
Development standards and regulations for projects developed at a density of
18 units per acre shall be pursuant to § 35-15.7g as in the AH-18 Zone, with
the exception that there is no option for a contribution to the Township's
Housing Trust Fund.
b. Affordable Housing Overlay Zone - 2. Developers have the option of developing
lands located in the Affordable Housing Overlay Zone - 2 (AHO-2) pursuant to the
following criteria:
1. The maximum density permitted is 18 units per acre.
2. The minimum percentage of low- and moderate-income units to be set aside is
20% for sales units and 15% for rental units.
3. A minimum of 50% of the affordable units in any development shall be lowincome
units. Thirteen percent of the affordable units shall be available to
very-low-income households, which shall be counted as part of the lowincome
housing units.
4. Development standards and regulations for projects developed pursuant to this
option shall be pursuant to § 35-15.7g as in the AH-18 Zone, with the
exception that there is no option for a contribution to the Township's Housing
§ 35-16 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-17
35:50
§ 35-18. through § 35-20 (RESERVED)
Trust Fund.
c. Mandatory set-aside. Any residential development, in any zone within the
Township, proposed at a density of six units per acre or greater shall include a
mandatory set-aside of 20% of the units to be affordable to low- and moderateincome
households if they are offered for sale and 15% of the units to be affordable
to low- and moderate-income households if they are offered for rent. A minimum
of 50% of the affordable units in any development shall be low-income units.
Thirteen percent of the affordable units shall be available to very-low-income
households, which shall be counted as part of the low-income housing units. These
include any new development proposed through rezoning, use variance, subdivision
or site plan applications. This does not give any developer the right to such
rezoning, variance or other relief, or establish any obligation on the part of
Springfield, its Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment to grant such
rezoning, variance or other relief.
§ 35-17 LAND USE § 35-18
35:51

ARTICLE VI
General Provisions and Design Requirements54
§ 35-21. DRAINAGE. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
For residential developments, the requirements of the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) shall apply.
All streets shall be provided with manholes, catch basins and pipes where the same may
be necessary for proper drainage.
a. The system shall be adequate to carry off the storm water and natural drainage water
which originates within the watershed affected by the development. No storm water
runoff or natural drainage water shall be so diverted as to overload existing drainage
systems to create flooding.
b. No land area shall be developed by any person such that:
1. The rate of storm water runoff occurring at the area is increased over what
occurs there under existing conditions.
2. The drainage of adjacent areas is adversely affected.
3. Soil erosion during and after development occurs.
c. Drainage design shall be in accordance with accepted engineering practices for the
sizing of drainage structures. All calculations shall be submitted to the Township
Engineer for review.
1. Detention systems shall be designed for the two-, ten-, twenty-five- and
100-year storm frequencies.
2. Pipe sizing for the conveyance of storm water shall be designed for the twentyfive-
year storm frequency. In no instance shall the pipe size be less than 15
inches in diameter.
d. Specifications for drainage structures must be in accordance with New Jersey State
Highway Standard Specifications as amended.
e. Drainage inlets shall be located at all intersections, with inlets on both sides of a
street at intervals of not more than 400 feet or such shorter distances as required to
prevent the flow of surface water from exceeding the capacity of the drainage inlet.
Access manholes or inlets shall be placed at pipe junctions, grade changes or other
locations as appropriate.
f. Lots shall be graded away from on-site buildings. In addition, drainage shall be
provided in a manner which will prevent the collection of storm water in puddles or
other unauthorized concentrations of flow and water shall not flow across adjacent
property lines at greater than predevelopment rates.
g. Approval of drainage structures shall be obtained from the appropriate municipal,
54. Editor's Note: Users of this chapter are advised to review the Township of Springfield Design Manual for illustrative
examples of the general provisions and design requirements of Article VI.
§ 35-21 LAND USE § 35-21
35:53
§ 35-22. FENCES AND SIGHT TRIANGLES.
§ 35-22.1. Fences. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2010-38; Ord. No. 2013-07 § 1(C);
Ord. No. 2015-22 § I(A), (B)]
County, State and Federal agencies and offices. Where required, each applicant
shall make application to the State Department of Environmental Protection, the
Union County Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code
Enforcement and the Township Engineer. Final approval shall not be effective until
letters of approval from the proper governmental authorities shall be furnished
to the approving authority with a copy forwarded to the Township Engineer.
[Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
h. When required by the municipality and as indicated on an approved development
plan, a drainage easement shall be provided to the Township where a tract or lot is
traversed by a watercourse, surface or underground drainageway or drainage
system, channel or stream. The drainage easement shall conform substantially with
the lines of such watercourse and provide a ten-foot access strip along at least one
side of the watercourse. In any event, the easement shall be consistent with any
minimum widths and locations as shown on any adopted Official Map or Master
Plan.
a. Permit. No fence shall be erected without the issuance of a construction permit.
b. Materials and Placement.
1. All permitted fences shall be situated on a lot in such a manner that a finished
side of the fence shall face adjacent properties.
2. No fence shall be erected of barbed wire, razor ribbon, metal spikes, electrified
materials or otherwise constructed of any material or in any manner which
may be dangerous to persons or animals.
3. No chain-link fences are permitted in any residential zones.
c. Height and Location.
1. No fence serving a residential use shall be permitted in the front yard of any
residence, and no fence shall be over six feet in height from the front corners
of any residence principal building to the rear of the lot line, and no fence
except a living fence shall be over six feet in height from the rear of the
principal building to the rear lot line. [Amended 4-28-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-10]
2. Fences in any nonresidential district shall not exceed six feet in height and
shall not be located in a front yard.
3. Fencing for tennis courts shall be permitted in all zone districts, provided said
fencing does not exceed 15 feet in height and further provided the fence is
located in a rear yard and meets the rear and side yard setback required of
principal buildings in the district.
4. Public and quasi-public uses may erect security fences in the side and rear
§ 35-21 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-22.1
35:54
§ 35-22.2. Sight Triangles. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
On a corner lot within the triangular area determined as provided in this section, no
wall, fence, structure or other object shall be erected to a height in excess of two
feet; no vehicle, object or other obstruction of a height in excess of two feet shall be
permitted within the corner clearance area; and no hedge, shrub or other growth shall
be maintained at a height in excess of two feet, except that trees whose branches are
trimmed away to a height of at least seven feet above the curb level shall be permitted.
Such triangular area or "sight triangle" is defined as that area bounded by the intersecting
street lines and the straight line connecting "sight points," one each located on the two
intersecting street centerlines. Such points shall be 350 feet from the intersection with
a municipal road, 400 feet from the intersection with a County road along such County
road and 500 feet from the intersection with a State highway along such highway. Where
County roads and State highways intersect, the distance shall be 75 feet along the road
or highway having the lower traffic volume. Sight points for local roads shall be 20
feet from the extension of the curbline or edge of pavement of the adjacent roadway. In
addition, no object or other obstruction shall be so located along any straight or curved
roads as to reduce the line of sight along said road to less than 400 feet. (See Exhibits)55
§ 35-23. PARKING AND OFF-STREET TRUCK LOADING.
§ 35-23.1. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
yards of a lot provided that such fencing does not exceed 15 feet in height.
5. Garden - Deer fences shall be permitted in residential zones, provided they are
intended to protect a garden, are no higher than 12 feet, are located in the rear
yard, are a minimum of five feet off of the property line. Such fence is to be
pervious to light and constructed of large mesh wire or netting.
a. Off-street parking spaces for the storage or parking of passenger vehicles of
occupants, employees and patrons of principal buildings and structures hereafter
erected and enlarged shall be provided and kept available in private garages or on
paved or otherwise approved surface parking areas in amounts not less than
specified herein. The parking and storage of trailers and boats is regulated in § 3-11
of the Township Ordinances.
b. All minimum requirements for off-street parking and truck loading spaces shall be
met at the time of construction, enlargement, or change of use and change of
tenancy of any principal building or structure.
c. No required parking area or off-street truck loading space shall be encroached upon
by buildings, storage or any other use.
d. Nothing in this section shall prevent the repair, reconstruction or rebuilding and
continued use of a nonconforming structure, provided said structure is not enlarged
and the parking requirements are not increased.
e. Where more than one use exists on a lot, the required parking for each use shall be
55. Editor's Note: The exhibit referred to herein may be found in Appendix B as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 35-22.1 LAND USE § 35-23.1
35:55
§ 35-23.2. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
calculated separately and the sum of all of the required parking shall be provided.
f. When the required number of parking spaces calculated as provided herein results
in the requirements of a fractional space, it shall be construed as requiring a full
space.
g. Garages and parking decks in nonresidential zone districts shall meet the principal
building setbacks required in said districts. Detached garages in residential zones
shall meet the accessory building setbacks required in said district. Garages shall be
further subject to the regulations pertaining to accessory buildings prescribed in
Subsection 35-15.5b.
h. In all districts, required parking areas for residential uses shall be on the same lot
with the principal building. Required parking areas for all other uses shall be on the
same lot with the building or use served.
i. The approving authority may waive, in whole or in part, the requirements for
parking areas stipulated in Subsection 35-23.1 in the case of any building, structure
or use hereafter erected or enlarged on any lot, which lot is within 500 feet of a
public parking area owned or operated by the Township, which distance shall be
measured in a straight line between the nearest point of such parking area.
j. All parking areas should provide sufficient levels of handicapped parking spaces in
accordance with all applicable State of New Jersey requirements. Said handicapped
parking spaces may be used to meet the off-street parking requirements of
Subsection 35-23.2.
k. The parking of equipment such as bulldozers, tractors and other construction related
equipment and vehicles in residential zones shall be prohibited.
a. Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter, off-street parking shall be provided on
a lot in accordance with the following schedule:
Principal Permitted Use
Off-Street Parking Requirements
(Number of Spaces)
Apartment buildings Per RSIS
Community residences and
community shelters
Per RSIS
Single family dwellings not in
the S-60 district
Per RSIS, provided that at least 2.0 shall be
provided in a garage
Single family dwellings in the
S-60 district.
Per RSIS, provided that at least 1.0 shall be
provided in a garage
Senior citizen housing Per RSIS
Townhouse dwellings Per RSIS
§ 35-23.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-23.2
35:56
§ 35-23.3. Required Off-Street Truck Loading and Unloading Spaces. [Ord. No.
2003-18]
Principal Permitted Use
Off-Street Parking Requirements
(Number of Spaces)
Auditorium, church or other
place of worship, parish house,
Sunday school and church
school; indoor movie theater.
1.0 per each 3.0 seats of maximum capacity,
with benches and pews deemed to have a
capacity of 1.0 person for each 22 inches in
length
Automobile service station 1.0 per pump island plus 4.0 per bay work area
plus adequate vehicles storage areas to be
determined by the approving authority
Bank 4.0 per indoor teller window for uses with
drive-up windows; 8.0 per teller window for
uses without drive-up windows
Business, professional,
administrative and other
nonmedical office and studio
1.0 per 250 square feet of gross floor area
Child care center The floor area occupied by child care centers
shall be excluded from this requirement when
calculating parking and floor area ratio
requirements
Health club 1.0 per 150 square feet of gross floor area
Home occupation Requirement determined in accordance with
appropriate use as identified in this section, or
as determined by approving authority
Industrial uses excluding
warehousing
1.0 per 500 square feet gross floor area
Medical office 1.0 per each 200 square feet of gross floor area
Motel 1.0 per guest room plus 5.0 per 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area devoted to banquet
rooms, meeting rooms and similar uses
Public and private schools As determined by the approving authority
Other public, quasi-public and
public utility uses.
As determined by the approving authority
Restaurant 1.0 per each 60 square feet of floor area
devoted to patron use, or 1,0 per each 2.5 seats,
inclusive of counter and waiting areas,
whichever is greater
Retail and personal service
stores and shops
1.0 per each 200 square feet of gross floor area
Warehouse 1.0 per 1,000 square feet gross floor area
§ 35-23.2 LAND USE § 35-23.3
35:57
§ 35-23.4. Minimum Design Standards for all Parking and Truck Loading Areas.
[Ord. No. 2003-18]
a. Every nonresidential use which has a floor area of 7,500 square feet or more
devoted to such use shall be provided with off-street truck loading and unloading
spaces at the rear of the building in accordance with the following schedule:
Square Feet of Floor Area Devoted to
Such Use
Minimum Required Number of Off-
Street Truck Loading and Unloading
Spaces
7,500 to 25,000 square feet 1
25,000 to 40,000 square feet 2
40,000 to 100,000 square feet 3
Each additional 60,000 square feet 1 additional
a. Minimum widths of access aisles shall be related to the angle of parking stalls and
use of one-way or two-way traffic as follows:
Parking Angle Aisle Width Traffic Direction
0" 12 feet One-way
0" 18 feet Two-way
30" 12 feet One-way
45" 15 feet One-way
60" 18 feet One-way
90" 24 feet Two-way
Where the angle of parking differs on the two sides of an aisle, the larger aisle
width shall prevail.
b. An off-street parking space shall provide a minimum width of nine feet and a
minimum length of 18 feet measured perpendicular to the width along the angle of
parking, except that parallel off-street parking spaces, shall measure nine feet by 23
feet.
c. All parking areas shall be designed to permit each vehicle to enter and exit all
parking spaces without requiring the moving of any other vehicles. Stacked or
tandem parking is prohibited. No parking area shall be designed so as to require a
vehicle to back directly onto a public street when leaving a stall.
d. An off-street truck loading and unloading space shall have minimum width of 12
feet, a minimum length of 25 feet and a minimum clear height of 14 feet. The access
from the street to the loading space shall also have a minimum clear height of 14
feet.
e. Driveways, parking areas and off-street truck loading and unloading spaces shall be
suitably paved, drained and lighted and appropriately planted and fenced for the
protection of adjacent properties in such accordance with all applicable provisions
§ 35-23.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-23.4
35:58
§ 35-23.5. Required Buffer Areas and Setbacks. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-23.6. Access. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-23.7. Paving Specifications. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
of this chapter. Such areas shall be arranged for the safe, adequate and convenient
ingress and egress of vehicles and pedestrians. All such facilities shall be
maintained in good condition by the owner.
f. Where a portion of the parking area is located on the ground level underneath any
floor of the building, that portion of the parking area, excluding access driveways,
which is underneath the building shall be fully enclosed so that it is no visible from
any street. The walls used to enclose said portion of the parking area shall be of
similar material to match the rest of the principal building.
g. All parking spaces shall be identified by the use of hairpin pavement markings, a
minimum of 18 inches in width.
a. A ten-foot deep buffer area shall be maintained between any parking or loading
areas located in the O, N-C, G-C, 1-20 or 1-40 Districts which abut the S-120, S-75,
S-60, M-R, or AH Zones, or an existing residential use, unless in conflict with
another section of this ordinance. Said buffer strip shall separate the above
mentioned areas by means of a six-foot high fence of closely spaced wood
materials, and the planting of appropriately spaced evergreen plantings to create an
effective screen. Fencing shall be located in the buffer area in such a manner that
planting will be provided facing residential properties, or as determined by the
approving authority. Unless otherwise permitted by the approving authority, the
buffer area shall be located on the nonresidential property.
b. No driveway or parking area in any nonresidential district shall be located closer
than five feet to a side or rear property line.
a. Required parking areas and truck loading spaces shall have access to a public street
by a driveway on the same lot, which driveway(s) shall have a minimum width of
24 feet except that one way driveways may provide a width of 15 feet and
driveways for single family residential uses shall be governed by Subsection
35-15.1c.
b. In any nonresidential district, no driveway shall be designed so that nonresidential
traffic passes a residential district to gain access to the nonresidential use or passes
through a residential district to reach a collector or arterial street.
c. Adequate driveway width and turning radii shall be provided on nonresidential and
multifamily residential properties to insure adequate and safe passage of emergency
vehicles.
a. The minimum compacted thickness of roadway material for nonresidential
development shall be as follows. The standards for residential development shall be
as required in the RSIS.
§ 35-23.4 LAND USE § 35-23.7
35:59
§ 35-23.8. Refuse and Recycling Storage. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-24. LANDSCAPING AND NATURAL FEATURES.
§ 35-24.1. Landscaping. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Minimum Thickness
Type of Street
Mix I-5
Dense Graded
Aggregate Base
Course
(inches)
Bituminous
Stabilized Base
Course Mix I-2
(inches)
Bituminous
Concrete Surface
Course
(inches)
Parking Lots 4 3 2
Minor Roads 4 4 2
Major Roads 4 5 2
Arterial Roads 4 5 2
b. When subgrade conditions are deemed unsuitable, underdrains shall be installed
when and where directed by the Township Engineer.
c. All off-street parking areas shall have adequate pavement markings and/or signage
to indicate traffic flow and parking spaces.
d. All off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided with curbing so that
vehicles cannot be driven onto required perimeter landscaped areas, buffer zones
and street rights-of-way and so that each parking and loading areas has controlled
entrances and exits and drainage control. The requirements for vertical curbing
specified in this section may be waived in favor of flush curbing if deemed
appropriate for drainage purpose by the Township Engineer.
a. Refuse and recycling storage areas shall be required of all multifamily residential
and nonresidential uses. Said areas shall be suitably dimensioned to accommodate
all on-site storage receptacles, and shall be designed to provide separate areas for
refuse and recyclable materials.
b. All refuse and recycling storage areas shall be located atop a reinforced concrete
pad of at least six inch thickness, and shall be surrounded by a six-foot high solid
or slatted fence of appropriate materials.
c. No refuse and recycling storage areas shall be permitted in a front yard, nor shall
any such storage area be permitted to obstruct access to parking stalls, driveways or
building entrances.
a. Landscaping is to be provided as part of all development applications and is to be
integrated into building arrangements, topography, parking, buffering and other site
features. Landscaping may include trees, bushes, shrubs, ground cover, berms,
flowers, sculpture, art and similar materials, and shall be designed to provide
aesthetic, buffering, climatological, environmental, ornamental, and other similar
functions. All landscaping plans shall be prepared by a New Jersey certified
§ 35-23.7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-24.1
35:60
landscape architect, or other individual deemed suitably qualified by the approving
authority.
b. Street trees shall be provided in all developments at intervals of not more than 50
feet. Said trees shall be planted along both sides of streets where appropriate and
shall be of types, sizes and locations conducive to healthy growth. All street trees
shall be planted two feet outside of the street right-of-way.
c. In addition to street trees, other tree plantings may be required on all sites, with said
trees to be selected from the following groups unless substitutions are approved by
the approving authority.
1. Group A.
(a) White Flowering Dogwood.
(b) Red Flowering Dogwood.
(c) Crimson Cloud Hawthorn.
(d) Washington Hawthorn.
2. Group B.
(a) American Beauty Crabapple.
(b) Snow Crabapple.
(c) Shademaster Honeylocust.
(d) Katsura Tree.
(e) Crimson King Maple.
(f) Callery Pear.
3. Group C.
(a) Princeton Sentry Ginkgo.
(b) Emerald Queen Maple.
(c) Sugar Maple.
(d) Red Maple.
(e) Northern Red Oak.
(f) Sweetgum.
4. The approving authority may permit the substitution of evergreen trees for
shade trees, provided that the evergreens replace only Group B and C trees, are
at least eight feet high at planting, and are not located in any required buffer
area.
d. Shade trees shall meet all of the following requirements:
§ 35-24.1 LAND USE § 35-24.1
35:61
1. All trees shall provide a two to 2 1/2 inch caliper as measured four feet above
the ground.
2. All trees must be grown in certified nurseries, have straight trunks, and be
properly staked.
3. All trees shall be balled and burlapped, well-branched and with a good root
system. Backfill shall consist of 50% humus for each tree, and each tree shall
be thoroughly watered and properly pruned at the time of planting.
e. The approving authority may allow a credit for existing trees against the street tree
planting requirement of this chapter.
f. The planting of shrubbery, bushes, flowers and similar plantings shall be designed
to serve decorative and ornamental functions as well as screening and buffering.
Junipers, yews and similar plants shall be used largely for screening and buffering,
while hollies, rhododendron, azaleas, barberries and similar plants shall be used at
highly visible locations such as front yards, building entrances, pedestrian
walkways and adjacent to ground signs. The use of flower beds and planters shall
be strongly encouraged.
g. All parking areas providing at least 10 parking stalls shall provide the following
landscaping features:
1. 5% of the interior portion of said parking areas, excluding all perimeter
landscaping and required buffer areas, shall be landscaped, and no more than
15 parking stalls shall exist in a continuous row without a landscaping break.
2. In addition to the shade tree requirements of Subsection 35-24.1b, parking lots
shall provide one shade tree for each 10 parking stalls.
3. The ends of all parking rows shall be separated from access aisles by a
landscaped island at least four feet in width.
4. The use of tree diamonds shall be prohibited unless deemed necessary by the
approving authority.
5. Evergreen and other appropriate plantings shall be required to separate parking
areas from public rights-of-way.
6. Parking area designs shall be encouraged to sacrifice parking stalls in favor of
saving existing trees and other significant vegetation; in such cases, the
approving authority shall be permitted to waive the parking requirements of
Subsection 35-23.2a.
h. Sidewalks shall be a maximum of six feet in width, and all developed properties
containing sidewalks in excess of said width shall be required to remove the excess
sidewalk and replace same with landscaping designed in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
i. All loading areas and storage areas for refuse and recycling shall be landscaped in
a manner that sufficiently screens the view of the loading area and vehicles from
any public right-of-way and residential property. Landscaping in this instance may
§ 35-24.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-24.1
35:62
§ 35-24.2. Natural Features. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-25. LIGHTING.
§ 35-25.1. Lighting Requirements. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
include berms, fencing, wall or a combination thereof, or any other screening
material required by the approving authority or this chapter.
j. All landscape plans shall provide a two year replacement guarantee for all new
plantings and all existing trees and other vegetation to be retained after
construction. The plans shall also note that all tree removal shall be in conformance
with the requirements of the Township tree removal ordinance. The landscaping
plan is required to be maintained for the life of the project.
k. All landscape plans shall be subject to a post-development inspection by the
Township Engineer.
l. The approving authority shall reserve the right to impose additional landscaping
requirements after due consideration of the size and type of proposed development;
the extent of existing vegetation to be removed during construction; and the nature
of surrounding land uses.
a. Natural features such as trees, views, natural terrain and water bodies shall be
preserved whenever possible in any development. The approving authority may, at
its discretion, reduce the landscaping requirements of this chapter to reflect existing
trees and other vegetation retained as part of any site development.
b. Natural fertility of the soil shall be preserved and on-site soil shall be disturbed as
little as possible. Top soil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed evenly over the tract after construction is completed, with said areas
then stabilized by approved seeding, sodding and plantings.
c. During the design, planning and construction of any development, a conscious
effort shall be made to preserve existing vegetation on the site. The municipal
agency may, at its discretion, require special vegetation protection techniques,
including snow fencing, to minimize site disturbance during construction. The
municipal agency shall reserve the right to require the transplanting of unique or
extraordinary trees that would otherwise be destroyed by site development.
a. Street lighting shall be of a style and number specified by the approving authority
and may be required at all roadway intersections, culs-de-sac and elsewhere as
deemed necessary for safety reasons. The costs of all equipment and installation of
said street lights shall be borne by the developer.
b. All parking areas, driveways, walkways, building entrances, loading areas and
similar locations serving multifamily residential and all nonresidential uses shall be
adequately illuminated for safety and security purposes. The lighting of
intersections, driveways and similar locations shall provide an average illumination
of 0.6 footcandle, while all parking areas shall provide an average illumination of
0.4 footcandle. Illumination levels of other areas to be lighted shall be determined
by the approving authority after due consideration of the subject application.
§ 35-24.1 LAND USE § 35-25.1
35:63
§ 35-26. LOT CONFIGURATION. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-27. through § 35-29 (RESERVED)
§ 35-30. ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS.
§ 35-30.1. General Guidelines. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2013-07 § 1(D)]
c. All outdoor lighting shall be arranged and shielded so as to minimize undesirable
lighting impacts such as glare, driver distraction, unnecessary illumination and
night glow. Automatic shut-off or dimming devices shall be required for all light
fixtures after 10:00 p.m., or 1/2 hour after the closing of any nonresidential use,
whichever is later, with the exception of security lighting. Lighting serving
residential uses shall be permitted throughout the night.
d. Where appropriate, wall-mounted light fixtures shall be preferred over polemounted
fixtures provided the required illumination levels can be met. When polemounted
fixtures are required within parking areas, said poles shall be located
within landscaped islands; no such pole shall be permitted to be located directly
within a parking lot.
e. No light fixture shall provide a mounting height in excess of 18 feet, or the height
of the principal building, whichever is less.
f. The fixture style of any lighting shall be subject to the approval of the approving
authority.
g. All lighting plans shall be subject to a post-development lighting inspection by the
Township Engineer.
h. The approving authority shall reserve the right to modify lighting requirements or
impose additional lighting requirements after due consideration of the size and type
of the proposed development; the location and intensity of nearby street lighting,
and the nature of surrounding land uses.
a. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be either at right angles or radial to street
lines.
b. All lots shall be suitable for their intended use. Where the suitability of a lot for its
intended use is in question due to locational, environmental or other planning
characteristics, the approving authority may withhold approval of said lot or lots.
c. Each lot must front on an approved street.
d. Concrete monuments shall be located and installed in accordance with Township
requirements and the New Jersey Map Filing Act.
e. No development requiring the vacation of a street or the acquisition of public lands
shall be taken before an approving authority until said vacation or acquisition has
been agreed to by the Township.
a. All new buildings should relate harmoniously to the natural features of the site and
to existing buildings and other substantial structures in the vicinity that have a
§ 35-25.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-30.1
35:64
§ 35-30.2. Building, Massing and Scale. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-30.3. Facade Treatment. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2013-07 § 1(E)]
visual relationship to the proposed building or buildings. The achievement of such
relationship may include the enclosure of space in conjunction with other existing
buildings or other proposed buildings and/or the creation of focal points with
respect to avenues of approach, terrain features or other buildings. In particular
areas, building height and orientation may have to be adjusted in order to maintain
such relationships or to preserve visual access to community focal points either
natural or man-made.
b. The selection of building design elements with respect to materials, fenestration,
color, texture, etc., should ensure that such treatment is harmonious with the
colonial heritage of the Township.
c. Building additions and renovations should be designed to reflect the existing
building in terms of scale, materials, arrangement of windows, and color. Additions
and renovations are encouraged that are sympathetic to the original building yet
traditional in spirit.
d. Appearance of the side and rear elevations of building shall receive architectural
treatment comparable to that of any proposed front facade if parking or public
access routes are provided next to the buildings, or if the side or rear facades are in
the view of the general public.
e. New buildings should, where appropriate, strengthen the particular urban design
features of its locale by, for example, framing a view corridor, enclosing an open
space area, or continuing a particular design feature or statement. New construction
should respect the existing street pattern to preserve the adjacent streetscape and
reinforce it where possible and appropriate.
a. Large, horizontal buildings of less than four stories in height should be broken
down into segments having vertical orientation.
b. Buildings with expansive blank walls are prohibited.
c. Buildings should be designed to be "wall dominated" in that the roofs are visually
less dominant in the total design. Roof forms should be similar to those
predominantly found on adjacent buildings. Mansard roofs shall be finished with
the same or comparable materials used on the corresponding facade.
d. A human scale should be achieved at ground level and along street frontages and
entryways through the use of such scale elements as windows, doors, columns,
plazas, awnings and canopies.
e. In new infill construction, the alignments of proposed facades shall be consistent
with the existing setback of nearby buildings and shall be harmonious with the
existing sidewalk pattern. In cases of irregular setbacks, new construction shall
conform to ordinance requirements.
a. Multi-tenant buildings shall provide uniform store fronts, doorways, windows,
§ 35-30.1 LAND USE § 35-30.3
35:65
§ 35-30.4. Building Materials and Texture. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-30.5. Other Requirements. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
awnings and other design features for all ground floor tenants. Upper floors of said
buildings shall at a minimum be coordinated with the ground floor through common
materials and colors.
b. New construction should use windows of similar sizes and shapes or incorporate
other facade elements that establish the same pattern of other buildings in its
context. Window and door sizes and shapes should not be significantly altered by
any building renovation. Mirrored glass shall be prohibited.
c. In new construction, dominant zones and horizontal lines that establish those zones
should be included in the design. Such lines include the tops of display windows,
sign fascias, cornices and belt or soldier courses.
d. Rhythms which carry through a block such as store front patterns, window spacing,
entrances, canopies or awnings, etc., should be incorporated into new or renovated
facades.
e. In all building renovations and expansions, fire escapes shall be prohibited on the
principal facade(s) of a building, or on any facade facing a public street, unless
otherwise required by the fire subcode.
f. Where appropriate, facade renovations should be in accordance with the original
architectural style of the building. Original details should be retained; when it
becomes necessary to introduce new features they should harmonize with existing
features. If windows and doors must be replaced, new materials shall match the
original design.
g. New facades in the O, N-C and G-C zones shall be of a traditional design and
appearance.
h. Historical architectural styles that do not have a design relationship to the rest of
the building are prohibited. Surface detailing should be integrated with the structure
rather than applied for decorative purposes.
i. The use of creative lighting schemes to highlight building facades and related areas
of a site shall be encouraged. The use of traditional style lanterns and similar
fixtures also shall be encouraged. Exterior neon lights and lighting generating glare
and unnecessary night glow impacts shall be prohibited.
a. Repair and restoration of existing building materials deemed to be of architectural
and/or historical value shall be strongly encouraged.
b. Where appropriate, building renovations shall incorporate elements of the original
facade into the renovation design.
c. The use of brick, stone, clapboard, shakes and other facade materials consistent
with traditional architectural styles shall be required of all buildings in the 0, N-C
and G-C Zones in the Township.
§ 35-30.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-30.5
35:66
§ 35-31. SIGNS.56
§ 35-31.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § I, 35-31.1]
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
through a comprehensive system of reasonable, consistent and nondiscriminatory sign
standards and requirements. These sign regulations are intended to:
a. The use of street furniture (benches, tables, trash receptacles, etc.) shall be
encouraged throughout the Township, provided the materials used are consistent
with the overall concept of the building design.
b. Awnings shall be encouraged on all retail buildings in the Township. All awnings
shall be constructed and installed so that the awning complements the overall
building design. No awning shall extend more than four feet from the building
facade. No awning frame shall be less than eight feet above the ground, and no
valance shall be closer than 7 1/2 feet from the ground.
c. Where applicable, buildings shall be painted with colors generally consistent with
traditional architectural design. The painting of buildings with bold patterns,
checks, or stripes is prohibited.
a. Enable the identification of places of residence and business.
b. Allow the communication of information necessary for the conduct of commerce
and the presentation of information.
c. Lessen hazardous situations, confusion and visual clutter caused by proliferation,
improper placement, illumination, animation and excessive height, area and bulk of
signs which compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
d. Enhance the attractiveness, aesthetics and economic well-being of the Township as
a place to live, work and conduct business.
e. Protect the public from the dangers of unsafe signs.
f. Permit signs that are compatible with their surroundings and aid orientation, and
preclude placement of signs in a manner that conceals or obstructs adjacent land
uses or signs.
g. Encourage signs that are appropriate to the zoning district in which they are located
and consistent with the category of use to which they pertain.
h. Establish sign size in relationship to the scale of the lot and building on which the
sign is to be placed or to which it pertains.
i. Preclude signs from conflicting with the principal permitted use of the site or
adjoining sites.
j. Regulate signs in a manner so as to not interfere with, obstruct vision of or distract
motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians.
56. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 2003-18.
§ 35-30.5 LAND USE § 35-31.1
35:67
§ 35-31.2. Construction Permits. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § I, 35-31.2; Ord. No. 2013-07
§ 1(F)]
No outdoor sign or structure, except for residential name plates no larger than one
square foot, as defined herein, shall be erected, hung, placed, or relocated unless written
application has been made to the Zoning Officer and a permit therefor has been duly
issued by him upon payment of the established fee. Temporary signs shall also require a
permit from the Zoning Officer.
§ 35-31.3. Sign Measurements. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § I, 35-31.3]
§ 35-31.4. General Sign Provisions. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § I, 35-31.4; Ord. No.
2013-07 § 1(G), (H)]
k. Require signs to be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and satisfactory
manner.
a. Computation of Sign Area. The area of a sign shall be computed as the total square
foot content of the background upon which the lettering, illustration or display is
presented. If there is no background, the sign area shall be computed, as the product
of the largest horizontal width and the largest vertical height of the lettering,
illustration or total display. This shall not be construed to include any supporting
members which are used solely for such purpose. For signs with two sides, the
maximum sign area shall be permitted on each side. Signs with more than two sides
are prohibited.
b. Computation of Sign Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the largest
vertical height of the background upon which the lettering, illustration, or display is
presented. If there is no background, the height shall be the largest vertical height
of the lettering, illustration, or total display. If the letters, illustrations, or displays
are attached directly to the face of a building, the height of the sign shall be the
height of the largest letter, illustration, or total display, whichever is greatest.
a. No sign shall be placed in such a position that it will cause confusion or danger to
street traffic by obscuring the view of drivers or pedestrians, or by simulating
official directional or warning signals maintained by any governmental body,
railroad, or public utility concerned with the protection of public health or safety.
This shall include, but not be limited to, any sign visible from the public right-ofway
which uses an arrow device, flashing lights, or any depiction of stop signs,
traffic signals, or other traffic safety devices. No sign shall be placed in any sight
triangle required by the Township unless specifically permitted by the approving
authority.
b. No sign or any part of any sign shall be moving or give the illusion of movement.
c. All illuminated signs shall be either indirectly lighted or of the diffused lighting
type. No sign shall be lighted by means of flashing or intermittent illumination. This
shall include Electronic Message Centers (EMCs), which are also referred to as
digital signs or computer-controlled electronic signs that change copy or images
more frequently than once per minute. All lights used for the illumination of any
use or building or the area surrounding them or for the illumination of display of
§ 35-31.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-31.4
35:68
merchandise or products of business establishments shall be completely shielded
from the view of vehicular traffic using the road or roads abutting such business
properties. Floodlights or spot lights used for the illumination of any sign, whether
or not such floodlights or spot lights are attached to or separate from the building,
shall not project above the highest elevation of the front wall of the building
nor more than 18 feet above the street level of the premises, whichever is less.
Illuminated signs shall be so arranged as to reflect the light and glare away from the
adjoining premises or from an adjoining street. All commercial establishments with
the exception of those in the H-C Zone shall turn illuminated signs off no later than
1/2 hour after closing or 10:00 p.m., whichever is later.
d. No sign shall be placed on any roof or above the highest point of any facade and no
sign shall be placed on any mansard roof, so that it projects above the top of the
mansard.
e. Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and
not allowed to become dilapidated. All signs shall be properly affixed to an
approved structure and no signs shall be attached to trees, utility poles, or similar
supports unless permitted by the approving authority.
f. No billboard shall be the principal use on a property. Any billboard that is located
on a property shall conform to the freestanding sign or wall mounted sign
requirements of the zone in which it is located. Billboards may be located on fences
surrounding Township ball fields, provided that said billboards face toward the
field.
g. Portable signs are prohibited.
h. No sign, other than directional and public safety signs, shall be erected within the
street right-of-way without the specific approval of the Township.
i. No approval or permit shall be issued for any sign to be located on any property
containing nonconforming signs until such nonconforming signs have been
removed or replaced.
j. No sign shall emit an audible signal of any kind.
k. No sign shall be erected, or enlarged which is not in conformance with this chapter.
l. Inflatable signs are prohibited.
m. Neon, argon, or similar tubular gaseous illuminated signs shall be permitted only
pursuant to the following regulations:
1. Those signs which are located in the interior of a building, but are intended to
be viewed from the outside, are limited to one sign per window and shall be
no larger than six square feet, or 15% of the total window area, whichever is
less.
2. Those signs located on the exterior of the building, shall be counted in the
overall regulated sign area, and shall be shielded by a translucent diffusing
cover in order to minimize glare.
§ 35-31.4 LAND USE § 35-31.5
35:69
§ 35-31.5. Special Sign Provisions. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § I, 35-31.5; Ord. No.
2010-37; Ord. No. 2013-07 § 1(I)]
a. Home Occupation Signs. Where permitted, home occupation signs shall not exceed
four square feet in area and shall not be illuminated. Such signs shall be placed a
minimum of five feet from the property line. No more than one such sign shall be
permitted per property.
b. Public Announcement Signs.
1. A church, school, or other public or institutional building may have, for its
own use, an announcement sign or bulletin board not over 32 square feet in
area.
2. Such signs as deemed necessary to the public welfare by the Township
Committee are permitted to be placed anywhere in the Township.
c. Real Estate Signs. A real estate sign shall be temporary advertising the sale, rental,
or lease of the premises or portions thereof, and shall be nonilluminated. Such signs
in residential districts shall not exceed four square feet, and in all other districts
shall not exceed nine square feet with the exception of the H-C Zone, where said
signs shall have a maximum size of 32 square feet. No more than one real estate
sign shall be permitted per property. These provisions shall further apply to all signs
announcing that the premises or portion thereof have been sold, rented, or leased.
d. Removal of Signs. Removal of business signs shall be within 14 days of the closing
of such business and shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. Real
estate signs shall be removed within seven days after the signing of a sale
transaction or the execution of a lease.
e. Flags. Flags of government entities shall be permitted in all zone districts except
that no more than three flags shall be permitted per property. No flag pole shall
exceed 35 feet in height. No flag advertising commercial activities or entities shall
be permitted.
f. Public and Semi-Public Signs. In addition to public announcement signs as
permitted in Subsection b, 1 above, public and semi-public uses shall be permitted
one free-standing sign not exceeding 20 square feet in area nor eight feet in height,
and one wall sign not exceeding 20 square feet in area.
g. Direction and Safety Signs. Directional and safety signs shall be provided as
required by the approving authority, and shall not be included in any sign area
computation. No directional or safety sign shall contain advertising material of any
kind.
h. Construction Signs. One construction sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area in
nonresidential zones, and six square feet in residential zones shall be permitted on
all authorized construction sites to advertise the name of the development, the
contractors involved, participating vendors, and/or similar information. No such
sign shall be permitted prior to the acquisition of a construction permit for the site
and all such signs shall be removed upon substantial completion of the construction
project. Such signs shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the front property
§ 35-31.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-31.5
35:70
§ 35-31.6. Signs in Single-Family Residential Districts. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § I,
35-31.6]
§ 35-31.7. Signs in Multifamily Residential Districts. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § I,
35-31.7]
§ 35-31.8. Signs in Commercial Districts. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § I, 35-31.8; Ord. No.
2013-07 § 1(J)]
In the O, N-C, G-C, and H-C Zones, no sign shall be permitted unless in accordance with
the following:
line.
i. Help Wanted Signs. Temporary "Help Wanted" signs shall be permitted at all
nonresidential land uses provided said sign does not exceed two square feet in area.
j. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs, including banners and pennants, shall be
permitted for special public and semi-public events and for private grand openings
and special sales events. One temporary sign used by a business shall not be used
more than twice in any calendar year with each use limited to not more than 30
days. No temporary sign shall exceed the maximum area permitted for permanent
signs in that zone. Temporary signs shall require a permit from the Construction
Official. No banner shall be affixed to a freestanding sign.
a. One nameplate sign may be placed anywhere within a front yard of a single-family
residence.
b. One additional nonilluminated freestanding sign, no larger than two square feet in
area and no higher than four feet, located at least five feet from the front lot line
shall be allowed.
c. No permanent window or door mounted signs are permitted.
a. One nonilluminated or ground lighted sign for each entrance of a complex may be
permitted provided such sign does not exceed 20 square feet in area or four feet in
height and contains only the name of the apartment development or building, the
street address, the location of the manager, and the presence or lack of available
vacant dwelling units. Such signs shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the
front property line.
b. Temporary and permanent signs permitted in Single Family Residential Districts,
as set forth in Subsections 35-31.5 and 35-31.6 shall be permitted in Multifamily
Residential Districts.
a. Wall signs shall meet the following requirements:
1. No business establishment shall be permitted more than one wall sign, except
that uses located on corner or through lots shall be permitted one wall sign for
each facade facing a public street. The total sign area for the sign or signs
permitted on the face of any wall shall not exceed 10% of the area of the face
of the wall upon which such sign or signs are attached, nor shall the length of
§ 35-31.5 LAND USE § 35-31.8
35:71
said sign or signs exceed 60% of the width of the wall on which it is located.
On the secondary street frontage on a corner lot in the O and N-C Zones, the
maximum area of signage shall not exceed 5% of the wall area nor 40% of the
width of the wall to which it is attached.
2. No sign shall extend further than 15 inches from the face of the building upon
which it is attached, provided, however, that where a sign extends more than
three inches from the face of said wall, the bottom of said sign shall not be
closer than 10 feet from the ground level below said sign.
3. The maximum height of any single wall sign shall not exceed five feet.
4. Businesses with additional public entrances facing a rear or side parking lot
shall be permitted an additional wall mounted sign no larger than six square
feet identifying that entrance.
b. Freestanding signs shall meet the following requirements:
1. Unless otherwise provided, one freestanding sign shall be permitted for each
lot.
2. The principal building must provide a fifty-foot front yard setback.
3. The vertical distance from the finished grade at the base of the sign stanchion
to the highest point on the sign, and the vertical clearance at the bottom of the
sign, shall meet the following standards:
(a) Shopping centers with three or more businesses located in the H-C Zone
shall not exceed a distance of 27 feet and shall have a minimum clearance
from the ground of seven feet.
(b) Individual businesses and shopping centers with less than three
businesses located in the H-C Zone shall not exceed a distance of 22 feet
and shall have a minimum clearance from the ground of seven feet.
(c) Freestanding signs for all businesses located in the O, N-C and G-C
Zones shall not exceed a distance of 12 feet.
4. Each sign must be set back both a minimum of 10 feet from the front lot line
and a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of the pavement.
5. The area shall not exceed the following standards:
(a) Shopping centers with three or more businesses located in the H-C Zone
shall be permitted a total sign area of no more than 200 square feet.
(b) Individual businesses and shopping centers with less than three
businesses located in the HC Zone shall be permitted a total sign area of
no more than 75 square feet per business.
(c) The maximum area for freestanding signs located in the 0, N-C and G-C
Zones shall not exceed 24 square feet.
6. All signs must comply with the side yard requirements for principal buildings
§ 35-31.8 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-31.8
35:72
§ 35-31.9. Signs in the Industrial Districts. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § I, 35-31.9]
In the 1-20 and 1-40 Districts, signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following:
in the zone in which the sign is located.
7. Properties located on the Center Island of Route 22 in the H-C zone shall be
permitted two freestanding signs provided one is located on each road
frontage.
8. It is recognized that automobile dealerships located along Route 22 in the H-C
zone have unique circumstances and conditions that require sign regulations
which are different from other commercial enterprises located on that
highway. They generally occupy more land area, have larger road frontages
and are sometimes occupied by multiple franchises. Given these circumstances
and mindful of the municipal goal to control and regulate sign clutter, the
following regulations are proposed specifically for freestanding signs for
automobile and truck dealerships located on Route 22.
(a) Each automobile dealership shall be permitted one freestanding sign for
each 100 feet of road frontage along Route 22, provided that the number
of freestanding signs shall not exceed the number of different franchises
located on the property and that the freestanding signs are separated by at
least 100 feet.
(b) The maximum area of any single freestanding sign shall be 75 square feet.
(c) Any single freestanding sign shall not exceed a vertical distance from the
finished grade at the base of the sign stanchion to the highest point on the
sign of 22 feet and shall have a minimum clearance from the ground of
seven feet.
(d) Freestanding signs must be set back both a minimum of 10 feet from the
front lot line and a minimum of 15 feet from the edge of the pavement.
(e) All signs must comply with the side yard requirements for principal
buildings in the zone.
(f) All signs located on automobile and truck dealerships shall be limited to
advertising only goods and services offered on the premises.
c. Window and door signs shall be permitted at all business establishments provided
said signs cover no more than 20% of the windows or door area.
d. In addition to other permitted signs, banks shall be allowed two signs indicating the
availability of automatic teller machine services, provided neither sign exceeds six
square feet in area and all such signs are facade mounted.
e. In addition to other permitted signs, service stations may be permitted an unlimited
number of all purpose signs indicating product availability, prices, services offered,
and similar information provided that the aggregate area of said signs does not
exceed 48 square feet. The freestanding sign regulations for commercial zones shall
apply to service stations.
§ 35-31.8 LAND USE § 35-31.9
35:73
§ 35-31.10. Design Standards. [Ord. No. 2008-11 § I, 35-31.10]
§ 35-32. STREETS, CURBS AND SIDEWALKS.
All design standards for residential development shall comply with the requirements
of the new jersey residential site improvement standards, which shall supersede these
a. Wall signs may be permitted as regulated in Subsection 35-31.8a herein.
b. One freestanding sign may be permitted provided no sign shall be more than five
feet in height and 25 square feet in area.
c. The sign must be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the front lot line.
a. The use of carved or sandblasted, painted wood signs shall be encouraged on all
appropriate properties in the O, N-C, and G-C Zones and other appropriate
locations in the Township.
b. Sign lighting shall be arranged and shielded to reflect light and glare away from
adjoining properties and area travelers. Freestanding signs shall be lighted from
ground mounted sources only, unless internal illumination is possible, and all such
lighting of signs shall be shielded with appropriate landscape elements.
c. Internally lighted signs shall provide a dark background and light lettering, in no
case shall internally lighted signs use stark white graphics of any kind. Whenever
necessary, the approving authority shall require a sample of the material to be used
for any sign.
d. Freestanding and ground-mounted signs shall be supported by one or more columns
or uprights which are firmly embedded in the ground. Exposed guy wires, chains,
piping, conduit or similar materials shall not be used to support any freestanding or
ground mounted sign.
e. New sign plans for existing development shall recognize the provisions of this
chapter relating to nonconforming signs and shall consolidate and improve existing
signs whenever possible. All changes to existing signs shall conform to all
applicable subsections of this section.
f. The total area of all columns, beams, bases, and design enhancement features used
in connection with a sign shall not exceed the total area of the subject sign. For
example, where a freestanding sign of 24 square feet of message area is proposed,
the framing and support columns of that sign cannot exceed 24 square feet for a
total gross area of sign and support features of 48 square feet.
g. Wall signs for multi-occupancy structures shall use uniform sign sizes, colors,
graphics and shapes whenever possible.
h. In addition to the sign size restrictions established by this chapter, the depth of any
freestanding sign or related support or design enhancement feature shall not exceed
two feet.
i. The applicant shall submit sufficient information to ensure compliance with all of
the standards of this chapter.
§ 35-31.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-32
35:74
requirements.
§ 35-32.1. Streets. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
a. All developments shall be served by paved public streets and all new street shall be
graded and provided with an all weather base and pavement with an adequate crown
and shall meet Township specifications and standards.
b. The arrangements of new streets constructed or to be constructed in subdivisions
shall be such as to provide for the logical extension of any existing or mapped
streets.
c. No development showing reserve strips controlling access to another area, either
developed or undeveloped, shall be approved except where the control and disposal
of land comprising such strips has been given to the Governing Body after
recommendation by the approving authority.
d. Developments that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to the
widths shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or to the street width requirements
of this chapter shall include the dedication of the additional width along one or both
sides of said road. If the subdivision is along one side of the street only, 1/2 of the
required extra width shall be dedicated.
e. The right-of-way and pavement widths shall not be less than the following:
Street Type Right-of-Way Pavement Width
Arterial Streets 80 feet (Determined individually)
Collector Streets 60 feet 36 feet
Minor Streets 50 feet 30 feet
f. The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily, commercial
and industrial developments shall be determined on an individual basis and shall in
all cases be, of sufficient width and design to safely accommodate the maximum
traffic, parking and loading needs and provide maximum access for firefighting
equipment.
g. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and in no case
shall be less than 60°. No more than two streets shall meet or intersect at any one
point and the centerlines of both intersecting streets shall pass through a common
point. Measuring from this common point, any two intersections shall be spaced a
minimum of 125 feet apart. The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at
the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less than 20 feet. All intersections
shall observe the sight triangle requirements of this chapter.
h. Where streets have a reverse curve, a tangent of at least 100 feet in length shall be
required.
i. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 12%. No street shall have a
minimum grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.
j. All changes in grade where the algebraic difference in grade is 1% or greater shall
§ 35-32 LAND USE § 35-32.1
35:75
§ 35-32.2. Street Name Signs. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
be connected by vertical curves of sufficient length to provide a smooth transition
and proper sight distance, but not so great as to create drainage problems.
k. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any point by more than 10°
and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not less
than 100 feet.
l. Cul-de-sac streets may be used to discourage through traffic. Where cul-de-sac
streets are used, they shall be located so that they drain towards their entrances and
shall be no longer than 1,000 feet to the point of tangency. They shall provide a
turn-around at the end and the minimum right-of-way at the turn-around shall be a
radius of at least 50 feet and tangent whenever practicable to the right side of the
street.
m. All driveways or other off-street parking areas shall have driveway aprons
extending from the curb line to the street side of the sidewalk and shall meet the
same construction specifications as the street. Continuous open driveways in excess
of 25 feet resulting in the elimination of curbing along Township streets shall be
prohibited.
n. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate the name of
an existing street that confusion results. The continuation of an existing street shall
have the same name.
o. The length, width or acreage of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the
limitations and opportunities of topography and shall be sufficient to allow all of
the area, yard and parking requirements for the uses permitted and regulated in this
chapter to be met as well as providing for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic.
p. Where extra width has been dedicated for the widening of existing streets, lots shall
begin at such new line and all setbacks shall be measured from such new line.
q. Where the property to be subdivided is next to or includes a railroad right-of-way,
suitable provisions shall be made for considerations such as road crossings,
screening, buffers, freight access, warning signals and signs in recognition of the
relationship between the railroad and the subdivision.
a. Street name signs meeting Township specifications as to size, material and location
shall be installed at the intersection of all streets and at appropriate curves on
curvilinear and similar streets.
b. Where traffic control signs are deemed necessary by the municipal agency and
Township Engineer for Township or County roads or for State highways, the proper
Township, County or State official shall be so informed in order that the proper
agency may evaluate the necessity of the installation at its own expense.
c. All street name and traffic control signs shall be installed and maintained free of
visual obstruction.
§ 35-32.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-32.3
35:76
§ 35-32.3. Curbs. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-32.4. Sidewalks. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-33. UTILITIES. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
All public services shall be connected to an approved public utilities system. The
developer shall arrange with the servicing utility for the underground installation of
the utilities' distribution supply lines and service connections in accordance with the
provisions of the applicable Standard Terms and Conditions incorporated as a part of
its tariff as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey Board of Regulatory
Commissioners (BRC), provided, however, that lots which abut existing streets where
overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service connections have
heretofore been installed may be supplied with electric and telephone service from
those overhead lines, but any new service connections for the utilities overhead lines
shall be installed underground. In the case of existing overhead utilities, should a
road widening or an extension of service or other such condition occur as a result of
the development and necessitate the replacement or relocation of such utilities, such
replacement or relocation shall be underground. Any installation to be performed by
a serving utility shall not be exempt from any provisions of this chapter requiring
performance guarantees and inspection and certification by the Township Engineer.
§ 35-34. AFFORDABLE HOUSING. [Ord. No. 2003-18; amended 5-23-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-08; 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16;4-18-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-06;
5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
Purpose; reporting. The following are provisions addressing the Township's
constitutional obligation to provide for its fair share of low- and moderate-income
housing, as directed by the Superior Court of New Jersey and consistent with N.J.A.C.
5:93-1 et seq.,57 as amended and supplemented, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as amended
a. Curbing and gutters shall be required along all streets adjacent to or within a
development.
b. The minimum standards regarding the width of gutters, height of curbing, base
material, surface material, slope, depth of gutters crossing intersections, and the
installation of catch basins, shall be according to the requirements of the Township,
the Township Engineer and, in the case of County roads or State highways, the
proper County or State official.
c. Curbs and gutters shall be adequate to handle the maximum water run-off from
tributary lands.
a. Minimum four-foot wide sidewalks shall be provided along all streets in the
Township.
b. Continuous paving shall also be available from the sidewalk to the main entrance
or entrances of all buildings.
c. All sidewalks shall have a slope of 1/4 inch per foot toward the gutter.
57. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 35-32.3 LAND USE § 35-34
35:77
and supplemented, and the New Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985. This section is
intended to provide assurances that very-low-, low- and moderate-income units
("affordable units") are created with controls on affordability over time and that qualified
very-low-, low- and moderate-income households shall occupy those units. This section
shall apply to all affordable housing units constructed in the Township of Springfield,
except where inconsistent with applicable New Jersey law, and to the extent necessary
to ensure compliance with that obligation, shall take precedence over all other sections
of the Township's Revised General Ordinances.
a. The Springfield Planning Board has adopted a Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan has been endorsed by the Township
Committee. This section implements and incorporates the adopted and endorsed
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:93-1 et seq.,58 as amended and supplemented, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq. as
amended and supplemented, and the New Jersey Fair Housing Act of 1985, as well
as the terms of the Township's settlement of its Declaratory Judgment action with
respect to its third round fair share obligation.
b. The Township shall file annual monitoring reports regarding the status of the
implementation of its Court-approved Housing Element and Fair Share Plan. The
report shall be posted on the municipal web site and shall be available to the public
at the Springfield Township Hall, Township Clerk's Office, 100 Mountain Avenue,
New Jersey, 07081. A copy of the report shall also be provided to the Fair Share
Housing Center. In addition, in accordance with the Fair Housing Act, the
Township shall undertake the actions in the following two provisions:
1. For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1, 2020, as required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Township will post on its municipal
website, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center, a status report as
to its implementation of its Plan and an analysis of whether any unbuilt sites
or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to present a realistic opportunity and
whether the mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit
comments to the municipality, with a copy to Fair Share Housing Center,
regarding whether any sites no longer present a realistic opportunity and
should be replaced and whether the mechanisms to meet unmet need should be
revised or supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a
hearing before the court regarding these issues.
2. For the review of very-low-income housing requirements required by N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of the third anniversary of the agreement, and
every three years thereafter, the Township shall post on its municipal website,
with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center, a status report as to its
satisfaction of its very-low-income requirements, including the family verylow-
income requirements referenced herein. Such posting shall invite any
interested party to submit comments to the municipality and Fair Share
Housing Center on the issue of whether the municipality has complied with its
very-low-income housing obligation under the terms of this settlement.
58. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 35-34 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-34.1
35:78
§ 35-34.1. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this section shall have the meanings given in this
subsection:
ACT—The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design standards of the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.59
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Township to administer
affordable units in accordance with this section, N.J.A.C. 5:93,60 and UHAC (N.J.A.C.
5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed to attract
buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income at which
new restricted units in an affordable housing development are affordable to low- and
moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a low- or
moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4,61 and, in the case of
an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to the standards set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and supplemented, and, in the case of a rental
unit, that the rent for the unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12,
as may be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in or
approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or otherwise intended
to address the Township's fair share obligation, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100% affordable
housing development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal Fair
Share Plan prepared or implemented to address the Township's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to the Act and
approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through an affordable housing trust
fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs of, and
exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the population such that:
1) all the residents of the development wherein the unit is situated are 62 years of age
or older; or 2) at least 80% of the units are occupied by one person who is 55 years
of age or older; or 3) the development has been designated by the Secretary of the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for older persons" as
defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency established by
P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
59. Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
60. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
61. Editor's Note: The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. expired 10-16-2016.
§ 35-34.1 LAND USE § 35-34.1
35:79
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households live
in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central heat and common
areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are not limited to: transitional
facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and E boarding homes as regulated by
the State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential health care
facilities as regulated by the New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the
developmentally disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New
Jersey Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style housing and
congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services are available when needed
for four or more adult persons unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing,
at a minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable
door on the unit entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD—A household that has been certified by an administrative
agent as a low-income household or moderate-income household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New Jersey Fair
Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT—A housing unit with health and safety code violations
that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A major system includes
weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary
plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint abatement and/or load-bearing structural
systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or corporation that is
the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any land included in a proposed
development including the holder of an option to contract to purchase, or other person
having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement
of any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or of any mining,
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure,
or land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both affordable
units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not limited to: new construction,
the conversion of a nonresidential structure to residential use and the creation of new
affordable units through the gut rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential
structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual household
income equal to 50% or less of the regional median income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT—A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing, electrical, fire
protection, or occupant service components of a building which include but are not
§ 35-34.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-34.1
35:80
limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells), heating, electricity,
sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing
structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderate-income
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME—The median income by household size for the applicable housing
region, as adopted annually by COAH or other entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the regional median income by
household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a moderateincome
household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the transfer of
ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership between former spouses
ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including
sales to third parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result of
inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary
and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently income-eligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units such that no
preference is given to one applicant over another except for purposes of matching
household income and size with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit (e.g.,
by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing region
affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of the regional median
as defined by duly adopted Regional Income Limits published annually by COAH or a
successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of any
building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the rent
paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities computed in
accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section 8 program. In assisted
living residences, rent does not include charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an ownership unit,
that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as amended and
supplemented, but does not include a market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et
seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a very-lowincome
household.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median income by household
size.
§ 35-34.1 LAND USE § 35-34.1
35:81
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl space),
siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows, replacement storm
doors, replacement windows and replacement doors, and is considered a major system
for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 35-34.2. Applicability.
§ 35-34.3. Range of Affordability of Low- and Moderate-Income Housing.
[Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
a. The provisions of this section shall apply to all affordable housing developments
and affordable housing units that currently exist and that are proposed to be created
within the Township of Springfield pursuant to the Township's most recently
adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan. Additionally, the provisions of this
section regarding the very-low-income housing requirement (and definition
thereof), income distribution (and definitions thereof) and bedroom distribution
shall apply to all 100% affordable housing developments created using federal lowincome
housing tax credit financing.
b. In addition, any property in the Township that is currently zoned for nonresidential
uses and that is subsequently rezoned for residential purposes or receives a zoning
change or a use variance to permit residential development, or receives a zoning
change or a density variance to permit higher density residential development, and
provided such residential development provides a sufficient compensatory benefit
in terms of the density of development permitted, shall provide an affordable
housing set-aside of 15% if the affordable units will be for rent and 20% if the
affordable units will be for sale. The determination of a "sufficient compensatory
benefit" shall be made by the reviewing authority based upon prevailing legislation
and/or case law.
c. The following sections shall apply to all developments that contain low- and
moderate-income housing units, including any currently unanticipated future
developments that will provide low- and moderate-income housing units.
a. The average price or rent of purchased low- and moderate-income units within an
inclusionary development shall be, as best as practicable, affordable to households
at 57.5% of median income as contained in Subsection 35-34.2.
b. In devising a range of affordability for purchased housing, as required in Subsection
a above, the development shall provide moderate-income sales units to be available
for at least three different prices and low-income sale units to be available for at
least two different prices.
c. In averaging 57.5% under Subsection a above, developers and/or municipal sponsor
of rental units may establish one rent for a low-income unit and one rent for a
moderate-income unit for each bedroom distribution.
d. At least 1/2 of the low- and moderate-income units constructed in a development
shall be affordable to low-income households.
§ 35-34.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-34.4
35:82
§ 35-34.4. Phasing Schedule for Inclusionary Zoning.
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-Rate
Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Low- and
Moderate-Income Units Completed
25 0
25 + 1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 35-34.5. New Construction.
a. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing units:
1. The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and moderateincome
units, except that where there is an odd number of affordable housing
units, the extra unit shall be a low-income unit. At least 13% of all restricted
rental units shall be very-low-income units (affordable to a household earning
30% or less of median income). The very-low-income units shall be counted
as part of the required number of low-income units within the development.
2. In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units within each
bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
3. Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be structured in
conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units shall be no
greater than 20% of the total low- and moderate-income units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be two-bedroom
units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be threebedroom
units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and three-bedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
4. Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured such that
the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of age-restricted low- and
moderate-income units within the inclusionary development. This standard
may be met by having all one-bedroom units or by having a two-bedroom unit
for each efficiency unit.
b. Accessibility requirements:
1. The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units
in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to the technical design
§ 35-34.4 LAND USE § 35-34.5
35:83
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7,62 and the following:
2. All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in other
multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is attached to at least
one other dwelling unit shall have the following features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door or the
casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor; and
(e) If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection b2(a) through (d)
can be satisfied, then an interior accessible route of travel must be
provided between stories within an individual unit, but if all of the terms
of Subsection b2(a) through (d) above have been satisfied, then an
interior accessible route of travel shall not be required between stories
within an individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7,63 or
evidence that the Township has collected funds from the developer
sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in the development
accessible:
(1) Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable entrance, upon
the request of a disabled person who is purchasing or will reside in
the dwelling unit, an accessible entrance shall be installed.
(2) To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit funds within
the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund sufficient to install
accessible entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have been
constructed with adaptable entrances.
(3) The funds deposited under Subsection b2(f)(2) above shall be used
by the Township for the sole purpose of making the adaptable
entrance of an affordable unit accessible when requested to do so by
a person with a disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit
and requires an accessible entrance.
(4) The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design plan and
cost estimate to the Construction Official of the Township for the
conversion of adaptable to accessible entrances.
(5) Once the Construction Official has determined that the design plan
to convert the unit entrances from adaptable to accessible meet the
requirements of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7,64 and
62. Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
63. Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
§ 35-34.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-34.5
35:84
that the cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable, payment
shall be made to the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in
care of the Township Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds are
deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and appropriately
earmarked.
(6) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be required
where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site impracticable" to
meet the requirements. Determinations of site impracticability shall
be in compliance with the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.65
c. Design:
1. In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and moderateincome
units shall be integrated with the market units.
2. In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units shall have
access to all of the same common elements and facilities as the market units.
d. Maximum rents and sales prices. [Amended 11-5-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-17]
1. In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units, the
administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in the UHAC,
utilizing the most recently published regional weighted average of the
uncapped Section 8 income limits published by the Department of Housing
and Urban Development ("HUD") and using the following calculation
procedures approved by the Court.
2. Income limits for all units that are part of the Township's Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan and for which income limits are not already established
through a federal program exempted from the UHAC pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 shall be updated by the Township annually within 30 days of the
publication of determinations of median income by HUD as follows:
(a) Regional income limits shall be established for the region in which the
Township is located based on the median income by household size,
which shall be established by a regional weighted average of the
uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD. To compute this
regional income limit, the HUD determination of median county income
for a family of four is multiplied by the estimated number of households
within the county according to the most recent decennial Census. The
resulting product for each county within the housing region is summed.
The sum is divided by the estimated total households from the most
recent decennial Census in the Township's housing region. This quotient
represents the regional weighted average of median income for a
household of four. The income limit for a moderate-income unit for a
household of four shall be 80% of the regional weighted average median
income for a family of four. The income limit for a low-income unit for a
household of four shall be 50% of the HUD determination of the regional
64. Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
65. Editor's Note: See now N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.14(b).
§ 35-34.5 LAND USE § 35-34.5
35:85
weighted average median income for a family of four. The income limit
for a very-low-income unit for a household of four shall be 30% of the
regional weighted average median income for a family of four. These
income limits shall be adjusted by household size based on multipliers
used by HUD to adjust median income by household size. In no event
shall the income limits be less than those for the previous year.
(b) The income limits are the result of applying the percentages set forth in
Subsection d2(a) above to HUD's determination of median income for the
fiscal year 2018, and shall be utilized until the Township updates the
income limits after HUD has published revised determinations of median
income for the next fiscal year.
(c) The regional asset limit used in determining an applicant's eligibility for
affordable housing pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16(b)(3) shall be
calculated by the Township annually by taking the percentage increase of
the income limits calculated pursuant to Subsection d2(a) above over the
previous year's income limits, and applying the same percentage increase
to the Regional Asset Limit from the prior year. In no event shall the
Regional Asset Limit be less than that for the previous year.
3. In establishing sale prices and rents of affordable housing units, the
Township's administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the regional income limits established pursuant to the process
defined above.
4. The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each affordable
development shall be affordable to households earning no more than 60% of
median income, and the average rent for restricted rental units shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 52% of median income.
5. The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units shall
establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both low-income and
moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of all low- and moderateincome
rental units shall be affordable to very-low-income households, which
very-low-income units shall be part of the low-income requirement.
6. The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each affordable
development shall be affordable to households earning no more than 70% of
median income, and each affordable development must achieve an
affordability average of 55% for restricted ownership units; in achieving this
affordability average, moderate-income ownership units must be available for
at least three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales prices for
each bedroom type.
7. In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units other than assisted
living facilities and age-restricted developments, the following standards shall
be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
§ 35-34.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-34.5
35:86
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half-person
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-half-person
household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person household.
8. In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in assisted living
facilities and age-restricted developments, the following standards shall be
used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-half-person
household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person household or to
two one-person households.
9. The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be calculated
so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including principal and interest
(based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal
Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed
28% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the affordability average
requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
10. The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as not to exceed
30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household,
including an allowance for tenant paid utilities, as determined under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the
rent shall be subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
11. The resale prices of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional median
income limit for each housing region determined pursuant to the above
methodology. In no event shall the maximum resale price established by the
administrative agent be lower than the last recorded purchase price.
12. The rent levels of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the percentage increase in the Housing Consumer
Price Index for the Northeast Urban Area, upon its publication for the prior
calendar year. This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for
units constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit regulations shall
be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low-income housing tax
credits.
§ 35-34.5 LAND USE § 35-34.6
35:87
§ 35-34.6. Utilities.
§ 35-34.7. Occupancy Standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the administrative agent
shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an undue delay in the occupancy of a
unit, strive to:
§ 35-34.8. Control Periods for Restricted Ownership Units and Enforcement
Mechanisms.
a. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market units within
an inclusionary development.
b. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth in the lease
and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved by DCA for its Section
8 program.
a. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
b. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
c. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
d. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
a. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and each restricted ownership
unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this section for a period of at least
30 years, until the Township takes action to release the unit from such requirements;
prior to such action, a restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
b. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall commence on
the date the initial certified household takes title to the unit.
c. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a restricted ownership
unit and upon each successive sale during the period of restricted ownership, the
administrative agent shall determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also
determine the nonrestricted, fair-market value of the unit based on either an
appraisal or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
d. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall execute and
deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note obligating the purchaser (as well
as the purchaser's heirs, successors and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt
sale after the unit's release from the restrictions set forth in this section, an amount
equal to the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its
restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture lien
evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
e. The affordability controls set forth in this section shall remain in effect despite the
entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with respect to restricted
ownership units.
§ 35-34.6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-34.8
35:88
§ 35-34.9. Price Restrictions for Restricted Ownership Units, Homeowner
Association Fees and Resale Prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 35-34.10. Buyer Income Eligibility.
f. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing certificate of
occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction Official stating that the
unit meets all Code standards upon the first transfer of title following the removal
of the restrictions provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and
supplemented.
a. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be approved by the
administrative agent.
b. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and in advance
of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing standards.
c. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no distinction
between the condominium or homeowner association fees and special assessments
paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers and those paid by market purchasers.
d. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the administrative agent to
increase the maximum sales price for the unit on the basis of anticipated capital
improvements. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or the addition of a bathroom. See § 35-34.13.
a. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, such that low-income
ownership units shall be reserved for households with a gross household income
less than or equal to 50 of median income and moderate-income ownership units
shall be reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80% of
median income.
b. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the administrative agent may, upon
approval by the Township Committee, and subject to the Court's approval, permit
moderate-income purchasers to buy low-income units in housing markets if the
administrative agent determines that there is an insufficient number of eligible lowincome
purchasers to permit prompt occupancy of the units. All such low-income
units to be sold to moderate-income households shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for low-income units.
c. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must occupy it as
the certified household's principal residence and shall not lease the unit; provided,
however, that the administrative agent may permit the owner of a restricted
ownership unit, upon application and a showing of hardship, to lease the restricted
unit to another certified household for a period not to exceed one year.
d. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a restricted
ownership unit when the household is a low-income household or a moderate-
§ 35-34.8 LAND USE § 35-34.10
35:89
§ 35-34.11. Limitations on Indebtedness Secured by Ownership Unit;
Subordination.
§ 35-34.12. Capital Improvements to Ownership Units.
§ 35-34.13. Control Periods for Restricted Rental Units.
income household, as applicable to the unit, and the estimated monthly housing
cost for the particular unit (including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and
private mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly income.
a. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted ownership unit, the
owner shall apply to the administrative agent for a determination in writing that the
proposed indebtedness complies with the provisions of this section, and the
administrative agent shall issue such determination prior to the owner incurring
such indebtedness.
b. With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an owner nor a
lender shall at any time cause or permit the total indebtedness secured by a
restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale price of
the unit, as such price is determined by the administrative agent in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
a. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the administrative agent to
increase the maximum sales price for the unit on the basis of capital improvements
made since the purchase of the unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those
that render the unit suitable for a larger household or that add an additional
bathroom. In no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
b. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that are
permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was initially
restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer, dishwasher, wall-to-wall
carpeting) shall be included in the maximum allowable resale price. Other items
may be sold to the purchaser at a reasonable price that has been approved by the
administrative agent at the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The
purchase of central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the unit resale
provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year, straight-line depreciation, has
been approved by the administrative agent. Unless otherwise approved by the
administrative agent, the purchase of any property other than central air
conditioning shall not be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the
purchaser must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved transfer
of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has taken place at the time
of or as a condition of resale.
a. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each restricted rental unit
shall remain subject to the requirements of this section for a period of at least 30
years, until the Township takes action to release the unit from such requirements.
§ 35-34.10 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-34.13
35:90
§ 35-34.14. Rent Restrictions for Rental Units; Leases.
§ 35-34.15. Tenant Income Eligibility.
Prior to such action, a restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements
of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
b. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall contain deed
restriction language. The deed restriction shall have priority over all mortgages on
the property, and the deed restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with
the Union County Clerk. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of occupancy.
c. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls of this
section despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
1. Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
2. Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
3. The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the property
containing the unit.
a. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as stated on the
lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted rental unit shall be provided to
the administrative agent.
b. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent (except, in the
case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the customary charges for food
and services) without the express written approval of the administrative agent.
c. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not exceed 5% of
the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall be payable to the
administrative agent to be applied to the costs of administering the controls
applicable to the unit as set forth in this section.
d. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be applicable to either
the market units or the affordable units in any development in which at least 15%
of the total number of dwelling units are restricted rental units in compliance with
this section.
a. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.13, as may
be amended and supplemented, and shall be determined as follows:
1. Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 30% of median income.
2. Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 50% of median income.
3. Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than 80% of median income.
§ 35-34.13 LAND USE § 35-34.15
35:91
§ 35-34.16. Municipal Housing Liaison.
b. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a restricted rental
unit when the household is a very-low-income household, low-income household
or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed
for the unit does not exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's
eligible monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if
one or more of the following circumstances exists:
1. The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households eligible for
age-restricted units) of its gross household income for rent, and the proposed
rent will reduce its housing costs;
2. The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly income for rent in the past
and has proven its ability to pay;
3. The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living conditions;
4. The household documents the existence of assets with which the household
proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
5. The household documents reliable anticipated third-party assistance from an
outside source such as a family member in a form acceptable to the
administrative agent and the owner of the unit.
c. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the existence of the
circumstances in Subsections a and b above with the administrative agent, who shall
counsel the household on budgeting.
a. The Township shall appoint a specific municipal employee to serve as a Municipal
Housing Liaison responsible for administering the affordable housing program,
including affordability controls, the affirmative marketing plan, monitoring and
reporting, and, where applicable, supervising any contracted administrative agent.
The Township shall adopt an Ordinance creating the position of Municipal Housing
Liaison. The Township shall adopt a Resolution appointing a Municipal Housing
Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing body
and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee. The Municipal Housing
Liaison shall be approved by the Court and shall be duly qualified through a training
program sponsored by Affordable Housing Professionals of New Jersey before
assuming the duties of Municipal Housing Liaison.
b. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Township, including the
following responsibilities which may not be contracted out to the administrative
agent:
1. Serving as the Township's primary point of contact for all inquiries from the
State, affordable housing providers, administrative agents and interested
households;
§ 35-34.15 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-34.16
35:92
§ 35-34.17. Administrative Agent.
The administrative agent shall be an independent entity serving under contract to and
reporting to the municipality. The fees of the administrative agent shall be paid by
the owners of the affordable units for which the services of the administrative agent
are required. The administrative agent shall perform the duties and responsibilities of
an administrative agent as set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in Sections
5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which includes:
2. Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township's Fair Share Plan;
3. Compiling, verifying and submitting annual monitoring reports as may be
required by the Court;
4. Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and administrative
agents, as needed; and
5. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability controls,
compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least annually and more
often as needed.
c. Subject to the approval of the Court, the Township shall designate one or more
administrative agent(s) to administer newly constructed affordable units in
accordance with UHAC. An operating manual for each affordable housing program
shall be provided by the administrative agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the
governing body and subject to approval of the Court. The operating manual(s) shall
be available for public inspection in the office of the Township Clerk, in the office
of the Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s) of the administrative
agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
administrative agent(s).
a. Affirmative marketing:
1. Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable housing
units in accordance with the affirmative marketing plan of the Township and
the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
2. Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services to low- and
moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
b. Household certification:
1. Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews with
interested households;
2. Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of gross
income and assets upon which to base a determination of income eligibility for
a low- or moderate-income unit;
3. Providing written notification to each applicant as to the determination of
eligibility or noneligibility;
§ 35-34.16 LAND USE § 35-34.17
35:93
4. Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a certificate
substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the ownership or rental
certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
5. Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant households living
in the housing region and eligible applicant households with members working
in the housing region where the units are located; and
6. Employing a random selection process as provided in the affirmative
marketing plan of the Township when referring households for certification to
affordable units.
c. Affordability controls:
1. Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents, forms of deed restrictions and
mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of each restricted
unit;
2. Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its control period,
including the recorded deed with restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as
appropriate;
3. Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation of the
mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the Union County
Clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls for each
restricted unit;
4. Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
5. Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or certifications
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
d. Resales and rerentals:
1. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information
between owners and the administrative agent regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or rerental; and
2. Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information
to low- and moderate-income households regarding the availability of
restricted units for resale or rerental.
e. Processing requests from unit owners:
1. Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance during the term of
their ownership that the amount of indebtedness to be incurred will not violate
the terms of this section;
2. Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from owners of
restricted units who wish to make capital improvements to the units that would
affect the selling price, such authorizations to be limited to those
improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the
depreciated cost of central air-conditioning systems;
§ 35-34.17 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-34.17
35:94
§ 35-34.18. (Reserved)
§ 35-34.19. Affirmative Marketing Requirements.
3. Notifying the Township of an owner's intent to sell a restricted unit; and
4. Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units for hardship
waivers.
f. Enforcement:
1. Securing annually from the Township a list of all affordable housing units for
which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners, and notifying all such owners
that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
2. Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at the earliest
point of contact in the processing of the project or development, written
acknowledgement of the requirement that no restricted unit can be offered, or
in any other way committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
3. The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family homes, of a
notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with the telephone number
of the administrative agent where complaints of excess rent or other charges
can be made;
4. Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units, reminding
them of the notices and requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
5. Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the Township's
Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
6. Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each affordable
housing program administered by the administrative agent, to be approved by
the Township Committee and the Court, setting forth procedures for
administering the affordability controls.
g. Additional responsibilities:
1. The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions necessary
and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities hereunder.
2. The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for submission to
the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet any monitoring requirements
and deadlines imposed by the Court.
3. The administrative agent shall attend continuing education sessions on
affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing at
least annually and more often as needed.
a. The Township shall adopt by resolution an affirmative marketing plan, subject to
approval of the Court, that is compliant with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be
amended and supplemented.
§ 35-34.17 LAND USE § 35-34.19
35:95
§ 35-34.20. Enforcement of Affordable Housing Regulations.
b. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy designed to attract
buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority groups, regardless of race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or
sexual orientation, disability, age or number of children to housing units which are
being marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
affirmative marketing plan is intended to target those potentially eligible persons
who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that region. It is a continuing
program that directs marketing activities toward Housing Region 2 and is required
to be followed throughout the period of restriction.
c. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for all
households that live and/or work in Housing Region 2, comprised of Morris, Essex,
Union and Warren Counties.
d. The Township has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the affirmative
marketing plan and for the proper administration of the affirmative marketing
program, including initial sales and rentals and resales and rerentals. The
administrative agent designated by the Township shall implement the affirmative
marketing plan to assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
e. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative agent shall
provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderate-income applicants on
subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
f. The affirmative marketing plan shall describe the media to be used in advertising
and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing the affirmative
marketing plan, the administrative agent shall consider the use of language
translations where appropriate.
g. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall begin at least
four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of occupancy.
h. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several locations,
including, at a minimum, the county administration building and/or the county
library for each county within the housing region; Township Hall and the
Springfield Free Public Library; and the developer's rental office. Applications shall
be mailed to prospective applicants upon request. In addition, specific notice of the
availability of affordable housing units shall be provided by the administrative
agent to the following community and regional organizations: Fair Share Housing
Center, 510 Park Boulevard, Cherry Hill, New Jersey 08002; the Latino Action
Network, P.O. Box 943, Freehold, New Jersey 07728; East Orange NAACP, P.O.
Box 1127, East Orange, New Jersey 07019; Newark NAACP, P.O. Box 1262,
Newark, New Jersey 07101; Morris County NAACP, P.O. Box 2256, Morristown,
New Jersey 07962; and Elizabeth NAACP, P.O. Box 6732, Elizabeth, New Jersey
07206. [Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-16]
i. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable units shall be
the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
§ 35-34.19 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-34.20
35:96
a. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the affordable
unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the Township shall have all remedies
provided at law or equity, including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction,
a requirement for household recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a
mortgage, recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on the
premises, and specific performance.
b. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or tenant of a
low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner, developer or tenant of the
penalties for such violations, the Township may take the following action(s) against
the owner, developer or tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a period
of 60 days after service of the written notice:
1. The Township may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11 alleging
a violation or violations of the regulations governing the affordable housing
unit. If the owner, developer or tenant is adjudged by the Court to have
violated any provision of the regulations governing affordable housing units
the owner, developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate and specific
violation of these provisions and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderate-income unit
in violation of the regulations governing affordable housing units,
payment into the Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the gross
amount of rent illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderate-income unit
in violation of the regulations governing affordable housing units,
payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as
determined by the Court.
2. The Township may file a court action in the Superior Court seeking a
judgment that would result in the termination of the owner's equity of other
interest in the unit, in the nature of a mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment
shall be enforceable as if the same were a judgment of default of the first
purchase money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or
moderate-income unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the Township, by
means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which time the low- and
moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall be sold at a sale price
which is not less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off
any first purchase money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality, including
attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his right to possession
terminated as well as his title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
§ 35-34.20 LAND USE § 35-34.20
35:97
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the first
purchase money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the low- and
moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse
the Township for any and all costs and expenses incurred in connection
with either the court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are
insufficient to reimburse the Township in full as aforesaid, the violating
owner shall be personally responsible for the full extent of such
deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred by the municipality in
connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a surplus
remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be
placed in escrow by the Township for the owner and shall be held in such
escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such earlier time as
the owner shall make a claim with the Township for such. Failure of the
owner to claim such balance within the two-year period shall
automatically result in a forfeiture of such balance to the Township. Any
interest accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the Township, whether such balance
shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the Township.
(c) Foreclosure by the Township due to violation of the regulations
governing affordable housing units shall not extinguish the restrictions of
the regulations governing affordable housing units as the same apply to
the low- and moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions of
the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The owner
determined to be in violation of the provisions of this plan and from
whom title and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall
not be entitled to any right of redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient amounts are
bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens, the
Township may acquire title to the low- and moderate-income unit by
satisfying the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and
crediting the violating owner with an amount equal to the difference
between the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs
of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum
resale price for which the low- and moderate-income unit could have
been sold under the terms of the regulations governing affordable housing
units. This excess shall be treated in the same manner as the excess which
would have been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold at the
Sheriff's sale or acquired by the Township shall obligate the owner to
accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser which may be
referred to the owner by the Township, with such offer to purchase being
equal to the maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit
as permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
§ 35-34.20 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-34.20
35:98
§ 35-34.21. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant to this section
shall be filed in writing with the Court.
§ 35-35. through § 35-40 (RESERVED)
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
§ 35-34.20 LAND USE § 35-35
35:99

ARTICLE VII
Exceptions and Modifications
§ 35-41. CONDITIONAL USES.
§ 35-41.1. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-41.2. Specific Requirements. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The following conditional uses shall be permitted as provided in § 35-14 provided that
the following specific requirements are met for each use:
a. Before a construction permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for a use
permitted as a conditional use by this chapter, application shall be made to the
Planning Board. In making application to the Board, the applicant shall follow the
procedures outlined in Article IX of this chapter for site plan review.
b. The Planning Board shall approve or deny a conditional use simultaneously with
site plan review, following the procedures outlined in § 900 Article IX of this
chapter. Unless otherwise stated in this section, all applications for conditional use
approval shall be required to obtain major site plan approval.
c. In all requests for approval of a conditional use, the Board shall give due
consideration to all reasonable elements which could affect the public health,
welfare, safety, comfort and convenience such as, but not limited to, the following
principles and standards:
1. Such use shall be specifically authorized as a conditional use in the district
within which the site is located.
2. For every conditional use, the Board shall make a specific finding, supported
by evidence produced at a public hearing in the manner provided by law, that
such use will not be detrimental to the character of the neighborhood.
3. For every conditional use, the Board shall determine that there is adequate and
appropriate access for the estimated traffic from public streets and sidewalks
so as to ensure public safety and to avoid traffic congestion.
4. For every conditional use, the Board shall determine that adequate parking and
off-street truck loading spaces will be provided, in conformity with this
chapter for the anticipated number of occupants, employees and patrons, and
that the layout of the parking spaces, truck loading spaces and interior
driveways is convenient and conducive to safe operation.
5. For every conditional use, the Board shall require suitable plantings and/or
fencing along side and rear lot lines adjacent to residential uses or districts.
6. A conditional use shall be further subject to the applicable specific
requirements set forth in Subsection 35-41.2.
a. Automobile Service Stations and/or Truck Repair Facilities.
1. No outdoor repair of motor vehicles and trucks shall be made in connection
§ 35-41 LAND USE § 35-41.2
35:101
with any automobile service station or truck repair facility nor shall supplies,
materials, or parts be stored outdoors, whether for sale, storage or waste.
2. Gasoline dispensing units and canopies shall be set back at least the average
depth of all existing front yards within the same block, but in no case shall the
setback of the dispensing units be less than 20 feet from the curbline(s) of the
street(s) which abut the site. The dispensing units shall be so located that no
vehicles can be serviced from any portion of the street or sidewalk. No mobile
gasoline pump shall be used or operated on premises.
3. No automobile service station or public garage shall be erected or remodeled
unless such structure shall provide for at least two separate washrooms, each
having a wash basin and flush toilet.
4. All structures, including fuel pumps, car lifts and other service appliances or
equipment, shall be located not less than 20 feet from any side or rear property
line.
5. All motor vehicles awaiting repair or pickup shall be parked or stored on the
site.
6. All unpaved areas shall be attractively landscaped with grass lawns, trees,
shrubs or other appropriate vegetation.
b. Home Occupations. Certain home occupations which meet the following
requirements shall be permitted as conditional uses.
1. The applicant shall submit a site plan in accordance with the requirements of
Article IX.
2. The home occupation shall be clearly subordinate to the residential use.
3. The occupant conducting such home occupation shall reside on the premises.
4. No more than three people, including the occupant, at any one time shall be
engaged in the home occupation.
5. No more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling is allowed to be
devoted to the home occupation.
6. No outdoor storage is allowed.
7. No home occupation is permitted in multifamily buildings.
8. Any classes, lessons, tutoring or the like shall be limited to one student/client
at a time.
9. No retail sales or rentals are permitted on the premises.
10. No personal services establishments are permitted.
11. Home occupations shall not create any off-site noise, odors, radiation, glare,
radio interference, etc.
12. No toxic or hazardous materials that would constitute a danger to the
§ 35-41.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-41.2
35:102
environment or neighboring property shall be stored on the premises.
13. Home occupations shall be allowed no more than two nonpassenger vehicle
deliveries per day, excluding U.S. Mail delivery.
14. Only one sign is permitted at no more than four square foot in size, and located
at least 10 feet from the street line per § 35-31.
15. Adequate parking shall be provided and shall be screened from adjacent
residential uses. Commercial vehicle parking shall be pursuant to Subsection
35-15.5c2.
16. The hours of operation of the home occupation shall be limited from 8:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m.
17. Any alteration to the dwelling for the home occupation shall maintain the
residential character and appearance of the building.
18. Only one home occupation is permitted per lot.
c. Public Utilities Excluding Cell Phone Towers and Antennas.
1. The utility shall furnish proof to the Board that the proposed installation in the
specific location proposed is necessary for the convenient and efficient
operation of the public utility.
2. The design of any building in connection with such facility conforms to the
general character of the area in which it is proposed and will not adversely
affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights in the zone in
which it is located.
3. Adequate and attractive buffering and safety devices shall be provided in
conjunction with such use and sufficient landscaping, including trees, shrubs,
lawns and other screening, shall be provided.
d. Motels.
1. Motels shall be on a lot with a minimum of 200 feet of street frontage and must
contain a minimum of 20 units of accommodation exclusive of a permanent
on-site superintendent's living quarters. A minimum of eight units of
accommodation may be constructed in any single building.
2. Each unit of accommodation shall contain a minimum floor area of 250 square
feet.
3. Each unit of accommodation shall include a minimum of two rooms, a
bedroom and a separate bathroom which affords privacy to a person within
said room and which is equipped with a toilet, a wash basin and a bathtub or
shower, all properly connected to a water and sewer system.
4. Restaurants and conference facilities are only permitted as accessory uses to
the principal motel use.
e. Restaurants and Food Preparation Establishments.
§ 35-41.2 LAND USE § 35-41.2
35:103
1. Exhausts, for all food preparation establishments regardless of whether they
are classified as a restaurant under the terms of this chapter must be provided
with a hood exhaust filtration system to eliminate nuisance odors, pursuant to
the Uniform Construction Code and Township Ordinances under the direction
and supervision of the Fire Subcode Official.
2. Off-street parking for the entire site shall be provided in accordance with
Subsection 35-23.2 of this chapter except in those cases where appropriate
documentation of existing parking levels indicate a lower parking need.
3. The Planning Board at its sole discretion may require additional on-site
parking and buffering requirements on any restaurant offering live
entertainment of any kind.
4. All restaurants and food preparation establishments shall be equipped with a
grease trap.
5. Restaurants in the N-C Zone shall also meet the following requirements:
(a) The definition of "restaurant" not withstanding, no liquor sales of any
kind shall take place on the premises.
(b) A maximum capacity of 40 seats shall be permitted.
f. Private and Parochial Schools.
1. The school shall be limited to the preschool through high school grades.
2. The school shall provide adequate outdoor recreational space and activities, as
determined by the approving authority, but no less than 30% of the lot area.
3. The use shall be limited to day schools only. No boarding schools shall be
permitted.
4. The school shall have a minimum lot size of three acres.
g. Cellular telecommunications antennas are permitted as conditional uses, subject to
compliance with all other requirements in this chapter and provided that all of the
following requirements are met.
1. Permitted Location: Type of Structure. Freestanding telecommunications
antennas are permitted in the 1-20 and 1-40 zones and municipal property in
all zones subject to FAA requirements.
2. Proof of Need and Minimum Impact. The applicant shall be required to
demonstrate that the development is the minimum necessary to provide
adequate communications as may be authorized by the Federal
Communications Commission. Included as part of this requirement, the
applicant shall demonstrate at least, but not necessarily limited to the
following:
(a) That the technology proposed is the least visually intrusive of various
suitable technologies;
§ 35-41.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-41.2
35:104
(b) That the height of the antennas is the minimum necessary;
(c) That co-location of the antenna on other existing antenna structures, or
that location at a less visible location, or that the use of microcells,
providing more numerous antennas at lower heights, either within or
outside the Township of Springfield, is either not practical in order to
provide adequate communication or that the visual impact to the
community on the proposed site is less than would exist at such
alternative locations; and
(d) That the use of digital technology for other existing and pending antennas
in the area would not eliminate the need for the proposed antenna.
3. Maximum Height. The height of antennas and related structures and
equipment other than buildings, where permitted, shall be subject to the
following height restrictions:
(a) Freestanding antennas and related structures and equipment, other than
on buildings in the 1-20 and 1-40 zones and municipal property in all
zones shall not exceed 150 feet in height.
(b) Freestanding antennas and related structures and equipment, when
mounted on the roof of an existing building, as permitted herein, shall not
exceed the height of such roof by more than 20 feet.
4. Required Yard Location and Minimum Setbacks. The following required
locations and minimum setbacks shall apply:
(a) Freestanding antennas shall not be located in the front yard.
(b) Antennas and related structures and equipment, when mounted on an
existing building roof as permitted herein, shall be located so as to
minimize any detrimental visual impact, as determined to be appropriate
by the Board in the particular situation.
(c) An antenna located in a side or rear yard shall be located at least 40 feet
from a property line, but not less than the height of the antenna.
5. Mitigation of Visual and Secured Impact. The base of the antenna support
structure and any related structures and equipment shall be secured and
screened from the street and adjacent properties in a manner acceptable to the
Board. If deemed necessary by the Board to mitigate the visual impact of the
antenna and related structures and equipment, the color, materials, and design
of the entire antenna and related structures and equipment shall be required to
be modified in appearance so as to blend in with the surrounding environment,
as determined by the Board to be appropriate in the particular situation. The
foregoing may include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, such
modifications as special paint treatment, concealment through architectural
means such as a bell tower, steeple, etc., or the use of camouflage through
simulated foliage so as to appear as a tree.
6. May be Additional Principal Use on the Lot. Notwithstanding any provisions
of this chapter to the contrary, a cellular telecommunications antenna or
§ 35-41.2 LAND USE § 35-41.2
35:105
antennas are permitted on the same lot as any other permitted principal use or
structure in the permitted zones.
7. Design for Future Co-Location. Any proposed cellular telecommunications
antenna and related structures shall be designed structurally, electrically and in
all respects, to accommodate both, the applicant's antennas and comparable
antennas for at least two additional users if the antenna is over 100 feet high.
The antennas and related structures shall be designed for future rearrangement
of antennas and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights. If the
foregoing design for co-location requires additional antenna installation or
beyond that permitted above, the Board, in determining the acceptable design,
shall balance the benefits and probability of co-location against any detriments
resulting from such additional antenna height.
The foregoing requirements shall also include a letter of commitment by the
applicant, submitted prior to any approval by the Board, to lease excess space
on the facility to potential users. The letter shall commit the owner of the
antenna and related structure and equipment, as well as any successor in
interest.
8. Abandonment: Removal. Wireless telecommunications towers and equipment
which are not operated for wireless telecommunications purposes for a
continuous period of six months shall be considered abandoned and shall be
removed by the owner, at the owner's expense. This removal shall occur within
90 days at the end of such six-month period of inactivity. If such wireless
telecommunications tower is not removed within the ninety-day period, the
municipality may remove the tower and its structures at the owner's expense.
If the facility is to be retained, its owner shall provide proof that the facility
will be reused within one year of such discontinuation. If the facility is not
used within one year, a demolition permit shall be obtained and the facility
removed. Upon removal, the site shall be cleaned, cleared, restored and
revegetated to preconstruction conditions. To insure the removal of abandoned
towers and related telecommunications facilities, the facility owner shall be
responsible to post a bond at the time a construction permit is issued to cover
the costs of tower removal and site restoration.
h. Automobile Sales, Leases and Service.
1. The site must be a minimum of five acres in area.
2. Used vehicles can only be sold or leased as an accessory to new vehicle sales
and leasing.
3. Vehicle servicing shall be permitted as part of the vehicle sales and leasing
facility, and shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
4. All areas devoted to parking and vehicle storage shall be suitably paved to the
satisfaction of the approving authority.
5. Display lighting shall be shielded and located and maintained so as not to
reflect glare onto surrounding or neighboring properties or public roads.
Strings of exposed lights and lights of intermittent intensity are prohibited.
§ 35-41.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-41.2
35:106
§ 35-42. HEIGHT AND YARD EXCEPTIONS.
§ 35-42.1. Height Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-42.2. Yard Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2003-18; amended 10-13-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-24; 12-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-28]
Open or lattice-enclosed stairways projecting not more than five feet into a yard, and
the ordinary projections of decorative stone, siding, chimneys, pilasters, roof overhangs,
gutters, downspouts, and the like projecting not more than 18 inches, and bay windows
may be constructed without a variance.
i. Automobile and Truck Rental Agencies.
1. No servicing of vehicles is permitted on the premises of automobile rental only
agencies.
2. All vehicles must be parked in marked parking spaces as approved on a plan
submitted to the appropriate approving Board.
3. No tandem parking shall be permitted.
j. Massage establishments. [Added 4-28-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-09]
1. All massage establishments shall comply with the permit requirements of §
4-30. Noncompliance and/or violation of the permit requirements of § 4-30
and the requirements in this chapter shall result in denial or revocation of a
zoning permit authorized under this Article VII.
2. Massage establishments shall be permitted as a conditional use in the H-C, GC,
and PUD (Commercial) Zoning Districts. Massage establishments shall
also be permitted in the N-C Business District Zone, as long as the massage
establishments do not share any property boundary with a residential property
or school property.
3. Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of one parking space per 200
square feet of gross floor area.
4. All massage establishments shall submit a site plan in accordance with the
requirements of Article IX of this Chapter 35.
a. There shall be no restrictions on the height of a church spire or church belfry; on a
dome, cupola or tower, including clock tower, of a public or quasi-public building,
except that no structure erected to a height in excess of the height limit for the
district in which it is situated shall:
1. Be used for residence or tenancy.
2. Have any sign, nameplate, display or advertising device of any kind
whatsoever inscribed upon or attached to such structure.
b. A parapet wall or railing may be permitted to exceed by not more than four feet the
height limits specified in § 35-14.
§ 35-41.2 LAND USE § 35-42.3
35:107
§ 35-42.3. Enclosure Exceptions. [Added 9-13-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-19]
Existing porticos or porches with an existing roof that are within the required setback
may be enclosed provided that there is no increase or expansion in the setback violation.
§ 35-43. NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS.
§ 35-43.1. Nonconforming Structure, Uses and Lots. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Any unlawful structure, use or lot not meeting any particular requirement of this chapter
as of the effective date of this chapter shall be deemed to be nonconforming.
§ 35-43.2. Continuance. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-43.3. Abandonment. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
A nonconforming use shall be deemed to have been abandoned:
§ 35-43.4. Restoration. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2015-22 § I(C)]
Any nonconforming structure or any nonconforming use of a structure which has been
destroyed by any means including by fire, explosion, flood, wind, storm, or other act of
God shall be considered partially destroyed if the cost of restoration equals 1/2 or less
than 1/2 of the estimated true valuation of the structure as determined by the Township
Tax Assessor and such partially destroyed structure or use may be rebuilt, restored or
repaired. If the damage is greater than above outlined, the use or structure shall be
considered completely destroyed and shall not be rebuilt, restored or repaired unless in
a. Any lawful use occupying any structure, lot or land at the time of the adoption or
subsequent amendment of this chapter which does not comply with the use
regulations of the district in which it is situated by virtue of such adoption or
amendment may be continued in the structure or upon the lot or land so occupied.
Any lawful structure or lot existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this
chapter which does not comply with the bulk regulations of the district in which it
is situated by virtue of such adoption or amendment may be continued and
occupied.
b. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person interested
in any land upon which a nonconforming structure or use existed may apply in
writing to the Township for the issuance of a certificate certifying that the structure
or use existed before the adoption of the Ordinance which rendered the structure or
use nonconforming pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68.
a. When it is changed to a conforming use; or
b. Where the nonconforming use has occupied a structure designed for such use, when
the use has been voluntarily discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months; or
c. Where the nonconforming use has occupied a structure not designed for such use or
has occupied a lot or land whereon there is no principal structure devoted to such
use, when the use has been voluntarily discontinued for a period of six consecutive
months.
§ 35-42.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-43.4
35:108
conformity to the use and bulk requirements of this chapter.
§ 35-43.5. Repairs and Alterations. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2010-17]
Such repairs and maintenance work as permitted to keep a structure in sound condition
may be made to a nonconforming structure provided no structural alterations shall be
made except those required by law.
§ 35-43.6. Nonconforming Lots. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Notwithstanding the lot area and lot dimensions requirements of this chapter, a singlefamily
dwelling may be erected on any nonconforming lot existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter which is separately owned and not adjacent to any other lot in
the same ownership, providing all other requirements of this chapter are complied with.
§ 35-44. through § 35-50 (RESERVED)
§ 35-43.4 LAND USE § 35-44
35:109

ARTICLE VIII
Organization and Powers
§ 35-51. PLANNING BOARD.
§ 35-51.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-51.2. Terms. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
a. There is hereby established pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law a Planning
Board consisting of nine members of the following four classes and alternate
members as hereinafter provided:
b. Class I. The Mayor, or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
c. Class II. One of the officials of the municipality other than a member of the
Governing Body to be appointed by the Mayor. The member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board shall be the Class II
Planning Board member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education among the Class IV or
alternate members of the Planning Board.
d. Class III. A member of the Governing Body to be appointed by it.
e. Class IV. Six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the Mayor. The
members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, position or employment
except that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and
one may be a member of the Board of Education. The member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board shall be a Class IV
Planning Board member unless there be among the Class IV or alternate members
of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a
member of the Board of Education, in which case the member of the Environmental
Commission shall be the Class II member of the Planning Board.
f. Alternate Members. Not more than two alternate members of the Planning Board to
be appointed by the Mayor. Such alternate members shall be designated by the
Township Committee as "Alternate #1" and "Alternate #2." Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence
or disqualification of a regular member of any class. In the event that a choice must
be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate #1 shall vote. A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. Alternate members shall meet the qualifications pertaining to Class IV
members of the Planning Board.
g. Quorum. The Planning Board shall, in order of seniority, appoint members of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment as temporary members to act on a particular matter
whenever it is unable to achieve a quorum because of conflicts of interest by regular
Planning Board members.
a. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to the Mayor's official
tenure, or, if the member is the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor, the
designee shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor during the Mayor's official term.
§ 35-51 LAND USE § 35-51.2
35:111
§ 35-51.3. Vacancies. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the Planning Board
term, it shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term. Any
member other than a Class I member after a public hearing if the member requests one,
may be removed by the Governing Body for cause.
§ 35-51.4. Organization of Board. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Planning Board shall annually elect a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman from the
regular Class IV members and select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee.
§ 35-51.5. Planning Board Attorney. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Planning Board may employ, or contract for, and fix the compensation of legal
counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, not exceeding the amount appropriated by
the Township Committee for such use, as reflected in the Township budget and pursuant
to salary ordinance.
§ 35-51.6. Experts, Staff and Reports. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
b. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for one year or
terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs
first, unless the Class II member is also a member of the Environmental
Commission. The term of a Class II or Class IV member who is also a member of
the Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
completion of the term of office as a member of the Environmental Commission,
whichever comes first. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Board of Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever the
member is no longer a member of such other body or at the completion of the
member's Class IV term, whichever occurs first.
c. All Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four years except as otherwise
herein provided. All terms shall run from January of the year the appointment is
made.
d. Alternate members shall be appointed for terms of two years running from January
1 of the year each appointment is made, and the term of not more than one alternate
member shall expire in any given year.
a. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts and
such other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not,
however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Governing Body for its use.
b. Any application before the Planning Board may be referred to any person or agency
for a report, provided that such referral shall not extend the period of time within
which the Board shall act.
§ 35-51.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-51.7
35:112
§ 35-51.7. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Planning Board may adopt bylaws governing its procedural operations. It shall also
have the following powers and duties:
a. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan or components
thereof, to guide the use of lands within the municipality in a manner which protects
public health and safety and promotes the general welfare.
b. To administer the site plan and subdivision review provisions of this chapter.
c. Recommend to the Governing Body an official map pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32.
d. Hear and decide applications for conditional uses in accordance with the applicable
provisions of this chapter.
e. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required by State
or Federal law or regulations.
f. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning process.
g. To consider and make report to the Governing Body within 35 days after referral as
to any proposed development regulation, revision or amendment submitted to the
Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(a), with said report
including identification of any provisions in the proposed development regulation,
revision or amendment which are inconsistent with the Master Plan and
recommendations concerning these inconsistencies and any other matters the Board
deems appropriate, and also to review any matters which may be specifically
referred to the Planning Board by the Township Committee pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(b), including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Acquisition by purchase, lease or otherwise of buildings and land.
2. Sale of Township-owned buildings and land.
3. Vacation of Township and public rights in streets, alleys and thoroughfares
pursuant to law.
4. Creation of Township parks and other recreational areas and facilities.
h. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement projects projected
over a term of six years, and amendments thereto, and recommend same to the
Governing Body.
i. Whenever the proposed development requires approval of a site plan, subdivision,
or conditional use, but not a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the
Planning Board shall grant to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions
as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
1. Variances pursuant to Subsection 35-52.5c of this chapter.
2. Direction of the issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a
mapped street or public drainageway, flood control basin or public area
§ 35-51.7 LAND USE § 35-51.7
35:113
§ 35-51.8. Time Limits for Decision. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
reserved on the official map.
3. Direction of the issuance of a permit for a building or structure not related to a
street. Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of the
hearing on the application for development shall include reference to the
request for variance or direction of the issuance of a permit, as the case may
be.
4. The developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting approval
of the variance or direction of the issuance of a permit and a subsequent
application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use. The separate approval of the variance or direction of the issuance of a
permit shall be conditioned upon grant of all required subsequent approvals by
the Planning Board. No such subsequent approval shall be granted unless such
approval can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan and
zoning requirements of this chapter.
j. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned by Ordinance or by
resolution of the Governing Body for the aid and assistance of the Governing Body
or other Township agencies or officers.
a. Minor Subdivisions. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within
45 days of the date of the certification of the completeness of an application by the
Administrative Officer or within such further time as may be consented to in
writing by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the application and a certificate as to the
failure of the Board to act shall be issued by the Administrative Officer upon the
request of the applicant.
Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of Planning
Board approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with such approval
and the provisions of the "Map Filing Law", or a deed clearly describing the
approved minor subdivision, is filed by the developer with the County Recording
Officer, the Township Engineer, and the Township Tax Assessor. Any such plat or
deed must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board before it
will be accepted for filing by the County Recording Officer.
b. Preliminary Approval - Site Plans and/or Subdivisions.
1. Upon certification by the Administrative Officer of the completeness of an
application for development involving a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary site plan or subdivision
approval within 45 days of the date of such certification or within such further
time as may be consented to in writing by the developer.
2. Upon certification by the Administrative Officer of the completeness of an
application for development involving a subdivision of more than 10 lots or
any development involving a conditional use, the Planning Board shall grant
or deny preliminary site plan or subdivision approval within 95 days of the
§ 35-51.7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-51.8
35:114
§ 35-51.9. (Reserved)
§ 35-51.10. Environmental Commission Referral. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to the Planning
Board an index of natural resources of the Township of Springfield, the Planning Board
shall make available to the Environmental Commission an informational copy of every
application for development submitted to the Board. Failure of the Planning Board to
make such informational copy available to the Environmental Commission shall not
invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 35-51.11. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Planning Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
effectuate the provisions and purposes of this chapter. Said rules and regulations may
include the definition of a complete application and shall provide that the Board review,
on the record, the reports and recommendations of each municipal officer or agency with
respect to each application referred to them by the terms of this chapter.
§ 35-52. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 35-52.1. Establishment of The Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
date of such certification or within such further time as may be consented to
in writing by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to
have granted preliminary approval.
c. Ancillary Powers. Whenever an application for site plan or subdivision approval
includes a request for variance relief or direction of the issuance of a permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval
within 120 days after certification by the Administrative Officer of the
completeness of the application or within such further time as may be consented to
in writing by the applicant. In the event that the developer elects to submit separate
consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the application for
approval of the variance or direction of the issuance of a permit. The period for
granting or denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this
chapter. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the application and a certificate as to the failure of the
Planning Board to act shall be issued by the Administrative Officer upon the request
of the applicant.
d. Final Approval. Final site plan or subdivision approval shall be granted or denied
within 45 days of certification by the Administrative Officer of the completeness of
an application or within such further time as may be consented to in writing by the
applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the application and a certificate as to the failure of the
Planning Board to act shall be issued by the Administrative Officer upon the request
of the applicant.
a. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq. consisting of seven residents of the Township of Springfield
§ 35-51.8 LAND USE § 35-52.1
35:115
§ 35-52.2. Organization of Board. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall annually elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman
from among its regular members and select a Secretary who may or may not be either a
Board member or a municipal employee.
§ 35-52.3. Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may employ, or contract for, and fix the compensation
of legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, not exceeding the amount
appropriated by the Township Committee for such use, as reflected in the Township
budget and pursuant to salary ordinance.
§ 35-52.4. Experts, Staff and Reports. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-52.5. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
appointed by the Township Committee to serve for terms of four years each running
from January 1 of the year of their respective appointments. No member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective office or position under the
municipality.
b. In addition to the regular members, there may be not more than two alternate
members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, to be appointed by the Township
Committee for terms of two years running from January 1 of the year each
appointment is made. The term of not more than one alternate member shall expire
in any given year. Such alternate members shall be designated by the Township
Committee as "Alternate #1" and "Alternate #2". Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence
or disqualification of a regular member. In the event that a choice must be made as
to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate #1 shall vote. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member.
The qualifications and restrictions relating to regular members are also applicable
to the alternate members.
c. Any vacancy of the Zoning Board of Adjustment occurring other than by expiration
of an appointed term shall be filled by an appointment of the Township Committee
to serve the unexpired term of the departing member. A member may, after public
hearing if the member requests it, be removed by the Governing Body for cause.
a. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of such experts and staff and services as it may deem necessary. The
Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants,
the amount appropriated by the Governing Body for its use.
b. Any action of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be referred to any person or
agency for a report, provided that such referral shall not extend the period of time
within which the Board shall act.
a. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in
§ 35-52.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-52.5
35:116
any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an administrative official or
agency based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning regulations of this
chapter.
b. Hear and decide requests for interpretations of the Zoning Map or zoning
regulations of this chapter or decisions upon other special questions upon which
such Board is authorized to pass by any Zoning or Official Map ordinance in
accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law.
c. Where (a) by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific
piece of property, or (b) by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or physical
features uniquely affecting a specific piece of property, or (c) by reason of an
extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
zoning regulation in this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon, the developer of such
property, grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such property, a
variance from such strict application of such regulation so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship; where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece
of property the purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law would be advanced by a
deviation from the zoning regulations of this chapter and the benefits of the
deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a variance to allow
departure from such zoning regulations; provided, however, that no variance from
those departures enumerated in Subsection d shall be granted under this subsection;
and provided further that the proposed development does not require approval by
the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with
which the Planning Board has power to review the request for a variance.
d. In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to allow departure from
the zoning regulations of this chapter to permit:
1. A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use or principal
structure.
2. An expansion of a nonconforming use.
3. Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a conditional
use.
4. An increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined by this chapter.
5. An increase in the permitted density as defined in this chapter except as
applied to the required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one or two
dwelling unit buildings which lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot
or lots resulting from a minor subdivision.
6. An increase in the permitted height of a principal building whenever the
proposed height of said structure exceeds by 10 feet or 10%, the maximum
height permitted in the zone.
A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by affirmative vote of
at least five members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 35-52.5 LAND USE § 35-52.5
35:117
§ 35-52.6. Additional Powers. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers specified in Subsection
35-52.5, have the power given by law to:
§ 35-52.7. Application and Appeals. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
e. No variance or other relief specified herein may be granted unless such variance or
other relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Land Use
Ordinance.
a. Direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved on the Official
Map.
b. Direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
c. Grant, to the same extent and subject to the same procedures and restrictions as
required of the Planning Board, unless otherwise specified, site plan, subdivision
and/or conditional use approval whenever the Board is reviewing an application for
approval of a variance pursuant to Subsection 35-52.5d of this chapter, provided,
however, that the exercise of this power shall be limited to that lot (or lots) for
which a variance is requested, or upon which a proposed variant use, structure or
condition is to be situated.
d. Whenever the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall exercise this power, it shall follow
the same procedures required of the Planning Board by the terms of this chapter
unless otherwise specified.
e. Whenever the Zoning Board of Adjustment has jurisdiction over an application for
a variance pursuant to Subsection 35-52.5d of this chapter, the developer may elect
to submit a separate application requesting approval of the variance and a
subsequent application for any required approval of a site plan, subdivision and/or
conditional use. The separate approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon the
granting of all required subsequent approvals by the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
and no such subsequent approval shall be granted unless such approvals can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial
impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning requirements of
this chapter. The number of votes required to grant any such subsequent approvals
shall be as provided in this chapter for approvals by the Planning Board.
f. Grant certification of a nonconforming use or structure pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-68.
a. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment without prior application to the Construction Official shall be filed with
the Administrative Officer. Twenty-one copies of the application shall be filed at
least 21 days before the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the Board. At the
time of filing the application, the applicant shall also file all plans, maps or other
papers required by virtue of any provisions of this chapter. The applicant shall
obtain all necessary forms from the Administrative Officer, who shall inform the
§ 35-52.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-52.7
35:118
§ 35-52.8. Time Limits for Decision. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-52.9. Expiration of Variance. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the regular meeting
dates of the Board.
b. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested party
affected by the decision of any officer, department, board, or bureau of the
municipality made in the enforcement of this chapter or the Official Map. Each
appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal with the officer
from whom the appeal was taken, together with 21 copies of said notice given to
the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Said notice of appeal shall
specify the grounds for appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
immediately transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken.
c. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from was made, unless the
officer from whose action the appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason
of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril
to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by order
of the Superior Court of New Jersey upon notice to the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
d. In exercising the appeal power, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the action order, requirement, decision
interpretation or determination appealed from, and to that end, have all the powers
of the officer from whose decision the appeal was taken.
a. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120 days
after the date (1) an appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative official
or agency, or (2) the submission of a complete application is submitted requesting
approval by the Board of a variance pursuant to Subsection 35-52.5c or d, or of a
site plan, subdivision and/or conditional use in which simultaneous approval of a
variance pursuant to Subsection 35-52d is requested. In the event that the developer
elects to submit separate consecutive applications for the variance and for
subsequent site plan, subdivision and/or conditional use approval, the 120-day
period shall apply only to the application for approval of the variance, and the time
period for granting or denying any subsequent approvals shall be as provided in this
chapter for approvals by the Planning Board as specified in Subsection 35-51.8.
b. Failure of the Board to render a decision within the requisite time period or within
such further time as may be consented to in writing by the applicant shall constitute
a decision favorable to the applicant, and a certificate as to the failure of the Board
to act shall be issued by the Administrative Officer upon the request of the
applicant.
a. Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or structures, or
§ 35-52.7 LAND USE § 35-52.9
35:119
§ 35-52.10. Environmental Commission Referral. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment an index of natural resources to the Township of Springfield, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make available to the Environmental Commission an
informational copy of every application for development submitted to the Board. Failure
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to make such informational copy available to the
Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 35-52.11. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to accomplish the
provisions and purposes of this chapter. Said rules and regulations shall provide that the
Board review, on the record, the reports and recommendations of each municipal officer
or agency with respect to each application referred to them by the terms of this chapter.
§ 35-52.12. Annual Report on Variances Heard. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year, review its decisions on
applications and appeals for variances and prepare and adopt by resolution a report of
its findings on zoning ordinance provisions which were the subject of variance requests
and its recommendations for zoning ordinance amendment or revision, if any. The Board
shall send copies of the report and resolution to the Governing Body and Planning Board.
§ 35-53. through § 35-55 (RESERVED)
§ 35-56. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BOTH THE PLANNING BOARD
AND ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
permitting a specified use of any premises, shall expire by limitation unless such
construction or alteration shall have actually been commenced on each and every
structure permitted by said variance, or unless such use permitted by said variance
has actually been authorized by a construction permit within one year from the
date of decision by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. If, however, a variance is
granted in conjunction with simultaneous site plan or subdivision approval, it shall
expire at the same time as the site plan or subdivision approval. In the event that an
appeal is filed from the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the running
of the period of limitation herein provided shall be suspended from the date the
appeal is filed with the Governing Body or court of competent jurisdiction until the
termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
b. In the case where an application for variance relief has been approved subject to the
subsequent approval of a separate site plan, subdivision and/or conditional use
application, the approval of the variance shall stipulate a reasonable time period
within which an application for preliminary or final approval of the site plan,
subdivision and/or conditional use shall be submitted before the approval of the
variance shall expire. At the request of the applicant, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may grant an extension of the previously stipulated period for
submission for up to 12 additional months but not more than one such extension
shall be granted.
§ 35-52.9 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-56.1
35:120
§ 35-56.1. Conflicts of Interest. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
No member or alternate member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall act on any matter in which the member has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest. Whenever there shall be a recusal by any such member
from acting on a particular matter, such member shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion relating thereto.
§ 35-56.2. Meetings. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-56.3. Minutes. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include the names
of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the persons appearing by
attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons
therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during
normal business hours at the office of the Secretary of the Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment. Any interested party shall have the right to compel production of
the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding concerning the subject matter of
such minutes. Such interested party may be charged a reasonable fee for reproduction of
the minutes for his use as provided by Township Ordinance.
§ 35-56.4. Hearings. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
a. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
scheduled no less often than once a month and any meeting so scheduled shall be
held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of development applications to process
or for lack of a quorum.
b. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on the request
of any two Board members; any such special meeting shall be held on notice to the
Board members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal requirements.
c. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being present, said
quorum to be the majority of the full authorized membership of the Board.
d. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members present except as
otherwise required by any provision of the Municipal Land Use Law. The failure of
any motion to receive the requisite number of votes for approval shall be deemed
an action denying the application.
e. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the public except as
provided in the Open Public Meetings Law. All such meetings shall be conducted,
and notice of all such meetings shall be given, in accordance with the requirements
of the Open Public Meetings Law.
a. Rules. A hearing shall be held on each application for development. The Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall make the rules
governing the conduct of such hearings, which rules shall not be inconsistent with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or of this chapter. In the issuance of
subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of the
County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.)
§ 35-56.1 LAND USE § 35-56.4
35:121
§ 35-56.5. Public Notice. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2010-35]
shall apply.
b. Maps and Documents. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a
hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days before
the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the office of the
Administrative Officer. The applicant may produce other documents, records or
testimony at the hearing to substantiate, clarify or supplement the previously filed
maps and documents.
c. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as the presiding officer
may designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence, including
witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the County
and Municipal Investigations Law shall apply.
d. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding officer and
the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all interested parties through
their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the
discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as to time and
number of witnesses.
e. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but the
Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
f. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings by
either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means. The Board shall furnish a
transcript or duplicate recording in the municipal offices in lieu thereof on request
to any interested party at the party's expense, unless otherwise provided by
Ordinance for the municipality to assume the expense, provided that the charge
shall not be more than the maximum permitted in N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15. Said
transcript shall be certified in writing by the transcriber to be accurate. If the
applicant provides a stenographer and a transcript is produced, a copy of said
transcript shall be provided to the Board, by the applicant, at no cost to the
Township.
a. Public notice of a hearing shall be given in an official newspaper of the Township
for the following applications for approval:
1. Any request for a variance.
2. Any request for conditional use approval.
3. Any request for the issuance of a permit to build within the bed of a mapped
street, public drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
official map, or on a lot not abutting a street.
4. Any request for preliminary approval of a site plan or subdivision plat.
5. Any request for final approval of a site plan or subdivision plat for which
public notice of the hearing on the final site plan or subdivision plat has been
§ 35-56.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-56.5
35:122
made a condition of the preliminary approval.
6. Public notice shall not be required for a request for minor subdivision approval
or for a request for minor site plan approval (as defined in this Chapter 25),
unless accompanied by a request for variance relief.
b. The Administrative Officer shall notify the applicant at least two weeks prior to the
meeting at which the public hearing will be conducted so that proper notice can be
given by the applicant.
c. Whenever public notice is required for a hearing on an application for development,
the applicant shall give notice thereof as follows:
1. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the
municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
2. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the current
tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all directions of the
property which is the subject of such hearing, whether located within or
outside of the municipality in which the applicant's land is located, provided
that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the condominium
association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has a unit above or below
it, or to the horizontal property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose
apartment has an apartment above or below it. Such notice shall be given either
by serving a copy thereof on the owner as shown on the said current tax
duplicate or his agent in charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by
certified mail to the property owner at his address shown on the said current
tax duplicate. A return receipt is not required.
Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner.
Notice to a corporation owner may be made by service upon its president,
vice president, secretary, or other person authorized by appointment or by
law to accept service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium
association, horizontal property regime, community trust or homeowner's
association, because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing, may be
made in the same manner as to a corporation without further notice to the unit
owners, co-owners or homeowners on account of such common elements or
areas.
3. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving property
located within 200 feet in an adjoining municipality shall be given by personal
service or certified mail to the clerk of such municipality, which shall be in
addition to the notice required to be given pursuant to Subsection c2 above to
the owners of lands in such adjoining municipality which are located within
200 feet of the subject premises.
4. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of property
adjacent to an existing County road or proposed road shown on the County
official map or on the County master plan, adjoining other County land or
situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
§ 35-56.5 LAND USE § 35-56.5
35:123
§ 35-56.6. List of Property Owners. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Administrative Officer shall cause to be made, within seven days after receipt of
a request therefore and upon receipt of payment of a fee of $10 or $0.25 per name,
whichever is greater, make and certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names
and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to
Subsection 35-56.5c2.
§ 35-56.7. Decisions. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
5. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the Commissioner
of Transportation of a hearing on an application for development of property
adjacent to a State highway.
6. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the State Planning
Commission of a hearing on a development application involving more than
150 acres or 500 dwelling units; such notice shall include a copy of any maps
or documents required to be on file with the Township Clerk.
7. Notice pursuant to Subsections c3 through c6 shall not be required unless
public notice pursuant to Subsection c, and notice pursuant to Subsection c2
are required.
8. Notice of hearings on applications for approval of a major subdivision or a site
plan not defined as a minor site plan under this ordinance requiring public
notice shall be given, in the case of a public utility, cable television company
or local utility which possesses a right-of-way or easement within the
municipality and which has registered with the municipality in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.1, by (1) serving a copy of the notice on the person
whose name appears on the registration form on behalf of the public utility,
cable television company or local utility or (2) mailing a copy thereof by
certified mail to the person whose name appears on the registration form at the
address shown on that form.
d. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least 10 days prior
to the date fixed for hearing and the applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of
service with the Board holding the hearing on the application for development.
e. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be deemed to be
complete upon mailing.
f. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall state: the
date, time and place of the hearing; the nature of the matters to be considered; the
identification of the property proposed for development by street address, if any,
and by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in
the Township Tax Assessor's office; and the location and times at which any maps
and documents for which approval is sought are available as required by law.
Where a variance is requested, the notice shall specifically stipulate the requirement
and/or regulation from which relief is sought and, in the case of a variance, the
extent of relief requested.
a. Any member of a board who was absent for one or more of the meetings at which a
§ 35-56.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-56.7
35:124
hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing
was conducted, notwithstanding the absence from one or more of the meetings,
provided, however, that such member has available the transcript or recording of
all of the hearing from which the member was absent and certifies in writing to
the municipal agency that such member has read such transcript or listened to such
recording.
b. Failure of a motion to approve an application for development to receive the
number of votes required for approval shall be deemed an action denying the
application.
c. Any decision of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment when acting
upon any application for development and any decision of the Governing Body
when acting upon an appeal shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon and shall be reduced to writing through resolution adopted at a meeting held
within the time period provided for action on the application for development or
through a memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later than 45 days
after the date of the meeting at which the action was taken.
d. Only the members who voted for the action taken may vote on the memorializing
resolution, and the vote of a majority of such members present at the meeting at
which the resolution is presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt such
resolution. An action resulting from the failure of a motion to approve an
application shall be memorialized by resolution as provided above, with those
members voting against the motion for approval being the members eligible to vote
on the memorializing resolution.
e. The vote on any such resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of the
action taken and not to be an action of the approving authority; however, the date
of the adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date of the decision for
purposes of the mailings, filings and publications required by this section and
Subsection 35-56.8.
f. If the Board fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution as hereinabove
specified, any interested party may make application pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10g.2.
g. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the date of
decision to the applicant, or, if represented, then to his attorney, without separate
charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to all persons who have
requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed by the municipal agency for such
service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the Administrative
Officer, who shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested
party upon payment of a fee calculated in the same manner as those established for
copies of other public documents in the municipality.
h. In the case of a default approval resulting from the failure of the Board to act or
adopt a resolution within the required time period, the applicant shall provide notice
of the default approval to all those entitled to notice by personal service or certified
mail of the hearing on the application for development, whether or not the hearing
on the application for development required public notice. Notice by certified mail
shall be deemed complete upon mailing. All notices shall be filed pursuant to the
§ 35-56.7 LAND USE § 35-56.7
35:125
§ 35-56.8. Publication of Decision. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2009-27 § I]
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the
municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the Administrative Officer the actual
cost of which will be payable by the applicant. Said notice shall be sent to the official
newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
§ 35-56.9. Payment of Taxes. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Every application for development submitted to the Planning Board or to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for
local improvements are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such
application, or, if it is shown that taxes or assessments are delinquent on said property,
any approvals or other relief granted by the Board shall be conditioned upon either the
prompt payment of such taxes or assessments, or the making of adequate provision for
the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be adequately protected.
§ 35-56.10. Conditional Approvals. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
requirements in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.4.
a. In the event that a developer submits an application for development proposing a
development that is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, by a legal action
instituted by any State agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the
public health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any State agency,
political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health
and welfare, the approving authority shall process such application for development
in accordance with this act and municipal development regulations, and, if such
application for development complies with municipal development regulations, the
municipal agency shall approve such application conditioned on removal of such
legal barrier to development.
b. In the event that development proposed by an application for development requires
an approval by a governmental agency other than the approving authority the
approving authority shall, in appropriate instances, condition its approval upon the
subsequent approval of such governmental agency; provided that the municipality
shall make a decision on any application for development within the time period
provided in this act or within an extension of such period as has been agreed to by
the applicant unless the approving authority is prevented or relieved from so acting
by the operation of law.
c. If approval is granted conditioned upon the subsequent approval of another
government agency and such government agency requires revisions in the
application for development which alter the layout and/or design standards
approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment to an extent that
the Administrative Officer determines that the basis upon which the municipal
approval was granted has been changed, the applicant shall be required to apply for
and obtain revised approval from the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment and pay the fees for such approval as set forth in this chapter.
d. Only upon fulfillment of all conditions precedent shall any subdivision plat or site
§ 35-56.7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-56.10
35:126
§ 35-57. through § 35-63 (RESERVED)
plan be signed or any required zoning permit, construction permit, occupancy
permit, or other approval be issued.
e. The fulfillment of all conditions, precedent or subsequent, shall be reported by the
applicant in writing to the Board, which may cause such reports to be independently
verified.
§ 35-56.10 LAND USE § 35-57
35:127

ARTICLE IX
Site Plan and Subdivision Review
§ 35-64. JURISDICTION OF RESPONSIBILITY DURING SITE PLAN AND
SUBDIVISION REVIEW. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment have the powers specified in
Article VIII of this chapter. Certain of the respective powers of the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment overlap in order to expedite the review of site plan and
subdivision applications.
§ 35-65. REQUIREMENTS.
§ 35-65.1. Subdivision Review. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The subdivision review procedures specified herein shall apply to all subdivisions as
defined by this chapter.
§ 35-65.2. Site Plan Review. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
No construction permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any new structure;
or for the addition to an existing structure; or for creation of new parking spaces; or for
the addition of driveways or any paving on any property; or for any change in use or
occupancy on any property until a major site plan has been reviewed and approved by
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, except that:
§ 35-65.3. Simultaneous Applications For Preliminary and Final Approval. [Ord.
No. 2003-18]
An applicant may elect to file for preliminary and final approval simultaneously to
expedite the review process, in which case the submission requirements for final
a. A construction permit for a detached single or two-family dwelling used solely for
residential purposes and its customary accessory structures on one lot shall not
require site plan review, except that, home occupation uses and commercial vehicle
parking, all subject to the requirements of Article VII, shall require minor site plan
approval prior to the issuance of a construction permit.
b. A construction permit for any addition, alteration or modification to an existing
conforming nonresidential or multifamily residential building which will result in
less than 200 square feet of additional building coverage and/or require fewer than
five additional parking spaces shall require only minor site plan approval pursuant
to § 35-67.
c. Resurfacing of existing parking areas or other paved areas shall be exempt from any
site plan approval, provided that the resurfacing results in no change to grading,
drainage, lighting, the number and orientation of parking spaces and other design
details of the area to be resurfaced.
d. Changes in occupancy at existing nonresidential properties shall be permitted a
waiver of normal site plan requirements subject to the favorable recommendation
of the Development Review Committee and concurrence of the Planning Board.
§ 35-64 LAND USE § 35-65.3
35:129
approval shall apply. Applicants seeking simultaneous approvals do so at the peril of
added expenses if changes in design are required.
§ 35-65.4. Variance Relief. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Applications for variances not involving any related site plan, subdivision or conditional
use approval shall be made to the Zoning Board of Adjustment and shall be filed at least
three weeks prior to the meeting date. The filing shall include 20 copies of any maps
and related material; 20 copies of a completed application form and payment of the fees
required by this chapter.
§ 35-65.5. Informal Review. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
At the request of any applicant seeking any approval pursuant to this chapter, the
Planning Board shall grant one informal review of the application which the applicant
intends to submit, provided the following conditions are met:
§ 35-65.6. Findings of the Board. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Board shall review the proposal, determine whether or not the applicable standards
provided in this chapter have been observed, note objections to such parts of the plans as
do not meet the standards, make corrections and recommendations for desired changes
to effect compliance with the Ordinance, and be satisfied that the site plan or subdivision
represents the most desirable alternative for development of the site in compliance with
the Ordinance. When the Board is satisfied that the proposed development complies with
the requirements of this chapter, it shall approve the application.
§ 35-65.7. Simultaneous Review of Site Plans and Subdivisions. [Ord. No.
2003-18]
The approving authority shall have the power to review and approve or deny site
plans simultaneously with its review of a subdivision involving the same site without
the developer being required to make further application to the Board to hold further
hearings.
§ 35-65.8. Waivers. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2012-13]
a. The applicant shall submit all materials subject to the informal review at least three
weeks prior to the meeting date of the Board.
b. The applicant shall pay the informal review fee established by this chapter.
c. The applicant shall establish an escrow account to pay for professional reviews of
the application, if said reviews are requested by the Board.
d. The applicant and the Board shall not be bound by any comments or findings of the
informal review.
a. The Board, when acting upon an application for any approval permitted in this
chapter shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the submissions
requirements of any application as may be reasonable and within the general
purpose and intent of the provisions for the application review if the literal
§ 35-65.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-65.8
35:130
§ 35-66. TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE.
§ 35-66.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 1]
§ 35-66.2. Meetings. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 1]
§ 35-66.3. Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 1]
enforcement of one or more provisions of this section is impracticable or will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
b. The Board may waive the requirement for site plan approval for change of use at
any existing nonresidential structure, providing said waiver is requested by the
applicant; the existing improvements of the site are satisfactory in the opinion of
the Board, further provided the use is permitted and will not increase the required
number of parking spaces. In evaluating a request for a site plan waiver under this
subsection, the Board shall consider the existing conditions of the subject property
and the need to improve said property to bring it into conformance with Ordinance
requirements.
c. The Board shall consider the opinion of the Technical Review Committee in
evaluating any waiver request by an applicant.
a. There shall be a Technical Review Committee which shall be advisory to the
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment and shall consist of the approving
authority planner, the approving authority engineer, Assistant Engineer and the
Zoning Officer. If the planner and/or engineer for either approving authority shall
not be the same person, the planner and/or engineer from the approving authority
having jurisdiction over the subject application shall participate at such Technical
Review Committee meeting. In addition, for those applications under the
jurisdiction of the Technical Review Committee which include properties within
the Springfield Business Improvement District (the "BID"), a member of the BID
(as designated by the BID Board of Directors) shall serve on the Technical Review
Committee.
b. The Technical Review Committee shall analyze on an advisory basis all
applications submitted to it by any interested party prior to a formal application
before an approving authority.
a. Meetings of the Technical Review Committee shall be held at least 14 days prior to
the date of the hearing of any application. All completed applications shall be
submitted at least 14 days prior to the meeting.
b. All Technical Review Committee meetings shall not be subject to the Open Public
Meetings Act. (N.J.S.A. 10:4-1 et seq.)
a. Any interested party may meet with the Technical Review Committee to discuss
and analyze a potential development application with respect to Township
procedures relating to land development; the design preferences of the community,
and the direction established by the Township Master Plan and Land Use
Ordinance.
§ 35-65.8 LAND USE § 35-66.3
35:131
§ 35-67. SUBMISSION OF MINOR SITE PLANS AND MINOR
SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 35-67.1. Application Procedure for Minor Site Plans and Minor Subdivisions.
[Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-67.2. Action by the Township. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
b. The advice of the Committee shall in no way be construed to relieve the applicant
of the responsibility for complying with zoning requirements, development
regulations and design standards and shall not be binding on either the approving
authority or the applicant.
c. All applications for all signs, canopies and facade changes shall be reviewed and
recommended for approval or denial by the Technical Review Committee, which
shall send a copy of its recommendations to the approving authority for formal
action. A copy of said recommendations shall also be sent to the applicant.
d. Any applicant at his/her discretion may apply directly to the appropriate Board
without applying to the Technical Review Committee.
a. The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer at least four weeks prior to
the next meeting of the approving authority: 21 copies of each of the following:
minor plan or plat; the appropriate application(s), which includes the application(s)
for any requested variance(s) and the applicable checklist(s) with the items of
information required therein; any protective covenants, easements and/or deed
restrictions applicable to the subject site, whether recorded or unrecorded; evidence
of payment of the fee in accordance with Article X of this chapter; and an
acknowledgment signed by the applicant stating that the applicant is familiar with
the procedure set forth herein for submitting and acting upon minor subdivision
plats and minor site plans, and agrees to be bound by it. The Administrative Officer
shall process the application and shall issue an application number; said number
shall appear on all papers, maps, plats or plans and other documents for processing
in conjunction with the application.
b. Promptly after the completeness review, the application documents shall be
distributed by the Administrative Officer to each member of the approving
authority, Board Attorney, Township Planner, Township Environmental
Committee, Township Clerk, Zoning Officer, Township Fire Department,
Township Police Department, Board of Education; Township Tax Assessor and
other Township officials and consultants as may be designated by the Board.
c. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide appropriate County, State or
Federal agencies with copies of the subject application.
d. All application and escrow fees shall be paid by certified or bank check at the time
of application.
a. The completeness review authority shall review the application and shall certify its
completeness to the approving authority.
b. The Board shall review the minor site plan or subdivision application and shall
§ 35-66.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-67.2
35:132
either approve or deny the application within 45 days of the date the application is
certified as complete or within such further time as may be consented to in writing
by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within the prescribed time period
shall constitute approval of the application, provided that any such application that
involves variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 or 40:55D-70d shall be
acted upon within 120 days or within such further time as may be consented to in
writing by the applicant. An applicant shall comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10.4 whenever the applicant wishes to claim approval of his application
for development by reason of the failure of the municipal agency to grant or
deny approval within the time period provided in the Municipal Land Use Law. If
approved, approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the application.
c. Prior to any action by the Board, all reports and comments submitted by the
Development Review Committee, Township Planner, Township Engineer, Zoning
Official other Township agencies and consultants, and other governmental agencies
shall be entered into the record of the proceedings on the subject application.
d. The approving authority shall review the application for minor site plan or minor
subdivision in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Municipal Land Use
Law.
e. All hearings held on applications for minor site plan and minor subdivision
approval shall require public notice of the hearing. The approving authority shall
set the date, time and place for the public hearing and shall inform the applicant of
this at least 14 days prior to said hearing date. Notice of the hearing shall be given
by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
f. When a minor subdivision or minor site plan is approved by the approving
authority, a notation to that effect, including the date of approval, shall be made on
at least eight prints of the plan or plat which plan or plat has been revised to include
all conditions embodied in the resolution of approval. Any related deed descriptions
to be filed with the County Recording Officer shall be signed by the Township
Engineer and the Chairman and Secretary of the Board, and submitted to the
Township. No further approval of the application shall be required and the
Secretary of the Board, within 10 days of the date of approval, shall notify the
applicant of the Board's action, and shall forward to both the applicant and the
Construction Code Official a copy of the resolution of approval.
g. Approval of any application by a Board may be conditioned on the satisfaction of
any item(s) deemed appropriate by the Board, including approvals required of other
governmental agencies.
h. When a minor site plan or minor subdivision is disapproved by the Board, the
Secretary of the Board, within 10 days of such action, shall notify the applicant of
such disapproval. Additionally, the Secretary of the Board shall forward the
applicant a copy of the resolution of denial, within 10 days of its adoption by the
Board, setting forth the reasons for the disapproval.
i. Within 190 days from the date of approval by the Board of a minor subdivision, a
plat map drawn in compliance with the Map Filing Act, P. L. 190 c. 141
(C.46:29-9.9 et seq.) or deed description, properly drafted and signed by the
Chairman, Secretary of the Board and Township Engineer shall be filed by the
§ 35-67.2 LAND USE § 35-67.2
35:133
§ 35-67.3. Effect of Approval of Minor Site Plans and Minor Subdivisions. [Ord.
No. 2003-18]
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or
otherwise, upon which minor site plan or minor subdivision approval was granted, shall
not be changed for a period of two years after the date of said approval. The approving
authority may grant an extension of said approval, providing said extension does not
exceed one year in duration.
§ 35-67.4. Submission Requirements for Minor Site Plans and Minor Subdivisions
(Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3). [Ord. No. 2003-18]
applicant with the County Recording Officer. Unless filed within 190 days, the
approval shall expire and will require Board approval as in the first instance.
j. Before the Secretary of the Board returns any approved minor site plan or
subdivision site plan to the applicant, the applicant shall provide additional copies
of the plat or plan as may be necessary in order to furnish copies to the Township
Clerk, Township Engineer, Tax Assessor, Zoning Officer, Board of Health, Fire
Department, Police Department and other Township, County, State or Federal
officials as prescribed by the Board.
a. Each minor plan or minor plat shall be prepared by a qualified professional pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 13:41-4.1 et seq. and licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey and
shall bear the signature, seal, license number and telephone number of the said
professional(s) provided, however, that all data and information unique to a
particular profession shall be signed and sealed by an individual licensed to practice
in said profession.
b. Each submission shall be drawn at an appropriate scale not less than one inch equals
50 feet and shall be submitted on one of four of the following standard sheet sizes
(8 1/2" x 13"; 15" x 21"; 24" x 36"; or 30" x 42"). All plan sheets shall be stapled
together and folded into quarters or eighths with the title block revealed. All sheets
shall be consecutively numbered.
c. Each minor plat or plan shall show the following information as applicable to a
minor subdivision or minor site plan, unless waived by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
1. Title block in accordance with the rules governing title blocks for professional
engineers (N.J.S.A. 45:8-36), including:
(a) Name of subdivision or development, Township of Springfield and Union
County with each sheet specifically titled with appropriately descriptive
words;
(b) Name, title, address and telephone number of subdivider or developer;
(c) Name, title, address and license number of the professional or
professionals who prepared the plat or plan;
(d) Name, title, address and signature line for the owner or owners of record;
§ 35-67.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-67.4
35:134
(e) North arrow and written and graphic scale;
(f) Date of original drawing and a list of specific revisions and dates;
(g) The individual revisions shall be highlighted, dated and noted, on the plan
and in the revision box.
2. A key map showing the entire tract and its relation to the surrounding area, at
a scale of one inch equals not more than 500 feet, but not less than one inch
equals 200 feet.
3. Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or his properly
authorized agent, or that the owner has given his consent under an option
agreement. If the applicant is a corporation or a partnership, the names and
addresses of all partners, or the names and addresses of all stockholders
owning 10% or more of any class of stock of the corporation;
4. Acreage figures (both with and without areas within public rights-of-way);
5. Approval signature lines:
(a) Chairman;
(b) Secretary;
(c) Township Engineer;
6. Existing block and lot number(s) of the lot(s) to be subdivided or developed as
they appear on the Township Tax Map, and proposed block and lot numbers
as provided by the Township Tax Assessor upon written request;
7. Tract boundary line in heavy solid line;
8. The location of existing and proposed property lines (with related lot areas,
dimensions and legal descriptions), streets, structures (with their numerical
dimensions and an indication as to whether existing structures will be retained
or removed), parking spaces, loading areas, recycling and trash dumpster
areas, driveways, watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, any
natural features such as treed areas, both within the tract and within 100 feet
of its boundary;
9. The location and width of all existing and proposed utility easements, the
use(s) for which they are intended to be limited, and the manner in which the
easements will be controlled;
10. Zoning districts affecting the tract, including district names and all area and
bulk requirements, with a comparison to the proposed development; and all
dimensions and other site data needed to insure conformity with the Land
Development Ordinance; and a photocopy of the applicable portion of the
Schedule of Limitations indicating the proposed use is permitted in the zone in
which it is located.
11. Proposed buffer and landscaped areas;
§ 35-67.4 LAND USE § 35-67.4
35:135
12. Delineation of flood plains, including both floodway and flood fringe areas;
and delineation of all wetlands and wetland buffer areas;
13. Contours as shown on the U.S.G.S. topographic sheets;
14. The name of all adjacent property owners as they appear on the most recent
tax list prepared by the Township Tax Assessor;
15. Certification from the Township Tax Collector that all taxes and assessments
are paid to date;
16. Completed application to the Union County Planning Board;
17. Completed copies of applications made to any other governmental agency with
jurisdiction over the application, except that any approvals or other actions
required of the Township Committee must be secured and presented in writing
with any minor site plan or minor subdivision application;
18. In the case of minor subdivision, existing and proposed monuments.
19. Proposals for soil erosion and sediment control as required by N.J.S.A.
4-24-39 et seq.
20. No minor subdivision or minor site plan involving any street(s) additional
right-of-way width as specified in the Master Plan or Official Map and the
street requirements of this chapter shall be approved unless such additional
right-of-way, either along one or both sides of said streets, as applicable, shall
be granted to the Township or other appropriate governmental agency;
21. Plans of proposed improvements and utility layouts including sewers, storm
drains and water lines, and feasible connections to gas, telephone and electrical
utility systems with appropriate documentation by an existing utility company
stating that service will be available before occupancy and will be sufficient
for the proposed development. Additionally, letters from the appropriate
County and State agencies granting approval for the extension of utility
service(s) under their respective jurisdiction shall be submitted with the
application;
22. Deed descriptions (including metes and bounds), easements, covenants,
restrictions and roadway dedications shall be submitted for approval and
required signatures prior to filing with the County Recording Officer;
23. A completed and signed application form, and proof of payment of all
application and escrow fees.
24. Floor plans and architectural elevations if applicable, prepared by a registered
architect, in the State of New Jersey in sufficient detail to accurately illustrate
the extent and nature of the proposed development;
25. For any site with existing buildings or other significant structural
development, a photograph of the site from each street from which the site will
have access.
d. The Board may request additional information of any applicant seeking minor site
§ 35-67.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-67.4
35:136
§ 35-68. SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY MAJOR SITE PLANS AND
PRELIMINARY MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 35-68.1. Application Procedure For Preliminary Major Site Plans and
Preliminary Major Subdivisions. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-68.2. Action By The Township. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
plan or subdivision approval if said information is deemed necessary by the Board
to make an informed decision on the application. Said information may include, but
not be limited to, an environmental impact statement, traffic and pedestrian impact
statement, parking study and community or fiscal impact statement. The request
for such additional information shall not be grounds to deem any application
incomplete.
a. The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer at least four weeks prior to
the meeting: 21 copies of each of the following: preliminary plans or preliminary
plat; the appropriate applications(s), which includes the application(s) for any
requested variance(s) and the applicable checklist(s) with the items of information
required therein; any protective covenants, easements and/or deed restrictions
applying to the subject site, whether recorded or unrecorded; evidence of payment
of the fee in accordance with Article X of this chapter; and an acknowledgment
signed by the applicant stating that the applicant is familiar with the procedure set
forth herein for submitting and acting upon preliminary major site plans and
preliminary major subdivisions and agrees to be bound by it. The Administrative
Officer shall process the application and shall issue an application number; said
number shall appear on all papers, maps, plats or plans and other documents
submitted for processing in conjunction with the application.
b. Promptly after the completeness review, the application documentation shall be
distributed by the Administrative Officer to each member of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, Board Attorney, Township
Planner, Township Engineer, Township Clerk, Zoning Officer, Township Fire
Department, Township Police Department, Board of Education, Township Tax
Assessor, and other Township officials and consultants as may be designated by the
Board.
c. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide appropriate County, State or
Federal agencies with copies of the subject application.
d. All application and escrow fees shall be made by certified or bank check at the time
of application.
a. The Administrative Officer shall review the application and shall certify its
completeness to the approving authority.
b. The Board shall review applications for preliminary major site plan approval
involving 10 acres of land or less and 10 dwelling units or less and/or preliminary
major subdivision approval involving 10 lots or less and shall grant or deny said
application within 45 days after the application is certified complete or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act
§ 35-67.4 LAND USE § 35-68.2
35:137
within the prescribed time period shall constitute approval of the application,
provided that any preliminary major site plan or preliminary major subdivision
application which includes any requested variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60 or N.J.S.A. 40-55D-70d shall be acted upon within 120 days or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
c. The Board shall review applications for preliminary major site plan approval
involving more than 10 acres of land or more than 10 dwellings and/or a
preliminary major subdivision approval involving more than 10 lots and shall grant
or deny said application within 95 days after the application has been certified
complete or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Board to act within the prescribed time period shall constitute
approval of the application, provided that any preliminary major site plan or
preliminary major subdivision application which includes any requested variance
relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 or N.J.S.A. 40-55D-70d shall be acted upon
within 120 days or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
d. Prior to any action by the Board, all reports and comments submitted by the
Development Review Committee, Township Planner, Township Engineer, other
Township agencies and consultants, and other governmental agencies shall be
entered into the record of the proceedings on the subject application.
e. In the case of planned developments only, the Board shall find the following facts
and conclusions prior to granting approval:
1. That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to the zoning provisions
specified for such planned developments, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c.
2. That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common space are
reliable, and the amount, location and purpose of the common open space are
adequate;
3. That provision through the physical design of the proposed development for
public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the amenities
of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment are adequate;
4. That the proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably adverse
impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established;
5. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates construction over
a period of years, that the terms and conditions intended to protect the interests
of the public and of the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are adequate.
f. All hearings held on applications for preliminary major site plan approval and/or
preliminary major subdivision approval and/or minor subdivision and minor site
plan approval shall require public notice of the hearing. The Board shall set the date,
time and place for the public hearing and shall inform the applicant of this at least
14 days prior to said hearing date. Notice of the hearing shall be given by the
applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
§ 35-68.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-68.2
35:138
§ 35-68.3. Effect of Preliminary Approval. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year
period from the date of the preliminary approval:
g. If the Board acts favorably on the preliminary plat or plan, the Township Engineer
and the Chairman and Secretary of the Board shall affix their signatures to at least
10 copies of the plan or plat with the notification that it has been approved. The
applicant shall furnish said copies to the Board.
h. Should minor revisions or additions to the plan or plat be deemed necessary, the
Board may grant preliminary approval subject to specified conditions and receipt of
revised plans within 30 days from the date of said approval. Should substantial
revisions be deemed necessary, the Board shall require that an amended plat or plan
be submitted and acted upon as in the case of the original application.
i. If the Board, after consideration and discussion of the preliminary plat or plan,
determines that it is unacceptable, a notation shall be made by the Chairman of the
Board to that effect on the plan or plat and a resolution adopted setting forth the
reasons for such rejection. One copy of the plat or plan and said resolution shall be
returned to the applicant within 10 days of the adoption of said resolution.
a. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was granted
shall not be changed including, but not limited to, use requirements; layout and
design standards for streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; and yard dimensions and
off-tract improvements; and, in the case of a site plan, any requirements peculiar to
site plan approval except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
Township from modifying, by ordinance, such general terms and conditions of
preliminary approval as may be related to public health and safety;
b. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration date of
preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections of the preliminary plan, as
the case may be;
c. That the applicant may apply for, and the appropriate Board may grant, extensions
on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least one year, but not to
exceed a total extension of two years, provided that if the design standards have
been revised by ordinance, such revised standards shall govern; and
d. In the case of a subdivision or of a site plan for an area 50 acres or more, the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in this section for such period of
time, longer than three years, as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and non-residential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval; economic conditions, and the
comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may thereafter grant an
extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of time, as shall be
determined by the Board to be reasonable taking into consideration the number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval; the potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
of the section or sections awaiting final approval; economic conditions, and the
§ 35-68.2 LAND USE § 35-68.3
35:139
§ 35-68.4. Submission Requirements For Preliminary Major Site Plans and
Preliminary Major Subdivisions (Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3). [Ord. No.
2003-18]
For residential developments the standards of the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) shall apply.
comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the design standards have
been revised, such revised standards may govern.
a. Each preliminary plan or preliminary plat shall be prepared by a qualified
professional pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:41-4.1 et seq. and licensed to practice in the
State of New Jersey and shall bear the signature, seal, license number and telephone
number of the said professional(s) provided, however, that all data and information
unique to a particular profession shall be signed and sealed by an individual
licensed to practice in said profession.
b. Each submission shall be drawn at an appropriate scale not less than one inch equals
50 feet and shall be submitted on one of the following standard sheet sizes 8 1/2" x
13"; 15" x 21"; 24" x 36"; 30" x 42". All plan sheets shall be stapled together and
folded into quarters or eighths with the title block revealed.
c. Each preliminary plan or plat shall show the following information as applicable to
a site plan or subdivision, unless waived by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
1. Title block in accordance with the rules governing title blocks for professional
engineers (N.J.S.A. 45:8-36), including:
(a) Name of subdivision or development, Township of Springfield, Union
County, with each sheet specifically titled with appropriately descriptive
words;
(b) Name, title, address and telephone number of subdivider or developer;
(c) Name, title, address and license number of the professional or
professionals who prepared the plat or plan;
(d) Name, title, address and signature lines for the owner or owners of record;
(e) North arrow and written and graphic scale;
(f) Date of original drawing and a list of specific revisions and dates;
(g) The individual revisions shall be highlighted, dated and noted, on the plan
and in the revision box.
2. A key map showing the entire tract and its relation to the surrounding areas, at
a scale of one inch equals not more than 500 feet, but not less than one inch
equals 200 feet;
3. Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or his properly
authorized agent, or that the owner has given his consent under an option
agreement. If the applicant is a corporation or a partnership, the names and
§ 35-68.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-68.4
35:140
addresses of all partners, or the names and addresses of all stockholders
owning 10% or more of any class of stock of the corporation;
4. Acreage to the nearest tenth of an acre (both with and without areas within
public rights-of-way);
5. Approval signature lines:
(a) Chairman;
(b) Secretary;
(c) Township Engineer;
6. Existing block and lot number(s) of the lot(s) to be subdivided or developed as
they appear on the Township Tax Map; proposed block and lot numbers as
provided by the Township Tax Assessor upon written request; and
identification of the property in question by street address;
7. The names and lot and block numbers of all property owners within 200 feet
of the extreme limits of the tract as shown on the most recent tax list prepared
by the Township Tax Assessor;
8. Tract boundary line in heavy solid line;
9. The location of existing and proposed property lines (with their related lot
areas, dimensions and legal descriptions) streets, watercourses, railroads,
bridges, culverts, drain pipes, and similar improvements;
10. Zoning districts affecting the tract, including district names and all area and
bulk requirements, with a comparison to the proposed development; and all
dimensions and other site data needed to insure conformity with the Land Use
Ordinance;
11. All existing and proposed wooded and landscaped areas and proposed
buffering and screening, identifying all trees over four inches in diameter,
except that where trees are in mass, only the limits thereof need be shown. A
landscaping plan shall be prepared and shall include details as to the size,
number, location and type of vegetation and method of planting to be used;
12. The location and delineation of natural features such as floodplains including
both flood way and flood fringe areas, wetlands and wetland buffer areas, and
slopes over 15%, both within the tract and within 100 feet of its boundary;
13. All existing and proposed watercourses shall be shown and accompanied by
the following information:
(a) When a stream is proposed for alteration, improvement or relocation or
where a drainage structure or fill is proposed over, under, in or along a
running stream, a report on the status of review by the State Department
of Environmental Protection, Division of Water Resources, shall
accompany the submission;
(b) Cross-sections of watercourses and/or drainage swales at an approximate
§ 35-68.4 LAND USE § 35-68.4
35:141
scale showing the extent of the flood plain, top of bank, normal water
levels and bottom elevations at the locations required by the Township
Engineer;
(c) The location and extent of drainage and conservation easements and
stream encroachment lines; and
(d) The location and type of adequate drainage provisions to reasonably
reduce and minimize exposure to flood damage;
14. Existing and proposed contours with intervals of one foot where slopes are less
than 2%; with intervals of two feet where slopes are between 2% and 15%;
and with intervals of five feet where slopes exceed 15%. All contour
information shall refer to a known datum. Existing contours shall be shown as
a dashed line; finished grades shall be shown as a solid line. Slopes 15% or
more in grade shall be shaded;
15. Proposals for soil erosion and sediment control as required by N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.;
16. The location of all existing structures, both within the tract and within 100 feet
of its boundary, with an indication of existing and proposed front, rear and side
yard setback distances and whether the existing structures and uses will be
retained or removed;
17. Size, height and location of all proposed structures including, but not limited
to, signs, fences and lighting facilities, and of all proposed buildings, including
loading areas and recycling and trash dumpster areas;
18. The proposed location, direction of illumination, power, type of proposed
outdoor lighting, and footcandle limits, including details of lighting poles,
shielding and light fixtures;
19. The location and design of any off-street parking area, showing size and
location of bays, aisles and barriers, curbing and paving specifications;
20. All means of vehicular access and egress to and from the site onto public
streets, showing the site and the location of driveways, curb cuts, and
depressed curbs, including the possible utilization of traffic signals,
channelization, acceleration and deceleration lanes, sight triangles, additional
width and other proposed devices necessary to promote a safe traffic
circulation pattern;
21. The application shall include plans and computations for any storm drainage
system including the following as may be required by the Township Engineer:
(a) All existing or proposed storm sewer lines within or adjacent to the tract
showing size and slope of the lines, direction of flow and the location of
each catch basin, inlet, manhole, culvert and headwall.
(b) A map drawn to scale showing the contributing area to each inlet or cross
drain.
§ 35-68.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-68.4
35:142
(c) A weighted run-off coefficient for each drainage area shall be determined
for use in the computations;
22. The location of existing utility structures such as water and sewer mains, utility
structures, gas transmission lines and high tension power lines on the tract and
within 200 feet of its boundaries;
23. Plans of proposed improvements and utility layouts including sewers, storm
drains and water lines, and feasible connections to gas, telephone and electrical
utility systems. If service will be provided, appropriate documentation by an
existing utility company, stating that service will be available before
occupancy and will be sufficient for the proposed development. Additionally,
letters from the appropriate County and State agencies granting approval for
the extension of utility service(s) under their respective jurisdiction shall be
submitted with the application;
24. Plans, typical cross sections and construction details, horizontal and vertical
alignments of the centerline of all proposed streets and of all existing streets
abutting the tract. The vertical alignments shall be based on U.S.G.S. vertical
datum or a more specific datum supplied by the Township Engineer, and shall
include curbing, sidewalks, storm drains, drainage structures and cross
sections every half and full station of all proposed streets and of all existing
streets abutting the tract. Sight triangles, the radius of curblines and street sign
locations shall be clearly indicated at the intersections;
25. Any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the land being
developed shall be submitted with the application and/or indicated on the
submitted plat or plan;
26. The location and width of all existing and proposed utility easements, the
use(s) for which they are intended to be limited, and the manner in which the
easements will be controlled;
27. The proposed permanent monuments shall be shown, in accordance with the
Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9;
28. The proposed number of shifts to be worked, the maximum number of
employees on each shift, and the hours of operation; and the estimated number
of vehicles that will use the site during peak traffic hours;
29. Certification from the Township Tax Collector that all taxes and assessments
are paid to date;
30. Any of the Township approvals or other actions required of the Township
Committee must be secured and presented in writing with any preliminary
major site plan or preliminary major subdivision application.
31. In the case of any site plan or subdivision submission of a planned
development, the applicant shall be required to submit all of the required
information for all of the properties comprising the planned development,
regardless of whether the applicant is seeking approval of the whole or a
section of the planned development; specifically, the applicant shall be
§ 35-68.4 LAND USE § 35-68.4
35:143
§ 35-69. SUBMISSION OF FINAL MAJOR SITE PLANS AND FINAL MAJOR
SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 35-69.1. Application Procedure For Final Major Site Plans and Final Major
Subdivisions. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
required to show the interrelationship of each portion of the project with
the whole of the project considering land use, traffic, open space, buffering,
drainage and surface water management, sewerage, potable water supply and
any other specific planning considerations as may be of particular relevance to
a particular planned development;
32. A completed and signed application form(s) and proof of payment of all
application and escrow fees.
33. Floor plans and architectural elevations, if applicable, prepared by a registered
architect of the State of New Jersey in sufficient detail to accurately illustrate
the extent and nature of the proposed development;
34. For any site with existing buildings or other significant structural
development, a photograph of the site from each street the site will have access
to;
d. The Board may request additional information of any applicant seeking major site
plan or subdivision approval if said information is deemed necessary by the Board
to make an informed opinion on the application. Said information may include, but
not be limited to an environmental impact statement, traffic and pedestrian impact
statement, parking studies, community or fiscal impact statement. The request for
such additional information shall not be grounds to deem any application
incomplete.
a. A final plan or final plat shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer within
three years after the date of preliminary approval or any authorized extension
thereof as permitted by Subsection 35-68.3 to the Administrative Officer at least
four weeks prior to the meeting: 21 copies of each of the following: final major site
plan or final major subdivision plat; appropriate application(s), which includes the
applications for any requested variance(s) and the applicable checklist(s) with the
items of information required therein; evidence of payment of fees in accordance
with Article X of this chapter; and an acknowledgment signed by the applicant
stating that the applicant is familiar with the procedure set forth herein for
submitting and acting upon final major subdivision plats and final major site plans,
and agrees to be bound by it. The Administrative Officer shall process the
application and shall issue an application number; said number shall appear on all
papers, maps, plans or plats and other documents submitted in conjunction with the
application.
b. Promptly after the completeness review, the application documents shall be
distributed by the Administrative Officer to each member of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be; Board Attorney; Township
Planner; Township Engineer; Township Clerk; Zoning Officer; Township Fire
Department; Township Police Department; Board of Education, and other
§ 35-68.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-69.1
35:144
§ 35-69.2. Action By The Township. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Township officials and consultants as may be designated by the Board.
c. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide appropriate County, State or
Federal agencies with copies of the subject application.
d. All applications and escrow fees shall be made by certified or bank check at the
time of application.
a. The completeness review authority shall review the application and shall certify its
completeness to the approving authority.
b. The Board shall review applications for final site plan approval and final
subdivision approval and shall grant or deny said application within 45 days after
the application has been certified complete or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within the prescribed time
period shall constitute approval of the application. An applicant shall comply with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.4 whenever the applicant wishes to claim
approval of his application for development by reason of the failure of the
municipal agency to grant or deny approval within the time period provided in the
Municipal Land Use Law.
c. Prior to any action by the Board, all reports and comments submitted by the
Development Review Committee, Township Planner, Township Engineer, Zoning
Official and other Township agencies and consultants shall be entered into the
record of the proceedings on the subject application.
d. The Board shall not approve an application for a final major site plan or final major
subdivision unless said application meets all conditions of the previously granted
preliminary approval and other requirements as may be imposed pursuant to
Subsection 35-68.3 of this chapter.
e. If the Board acts favorably on the final plan or plat, the Township Engineer and the
Chairman and Secretary of the Board shall affix their signatures to at least 10 copies
of the plan or plat with the notification that it has been approved. The applicant
shall furnish such copies to the Board for signing. Moreover, in the case of final
subdivisions only, the applicant shall include for signing one cloth copy and at least
two Mylar copies of the approved plat in addition to the 10 paper copies.
f. After approval of the final plan or plat by the Board, the Secretary of the Board
shall retain one copy of the signed plat or plan and shall furnish other copies to each
of the following within 10 days from the date of the adoption of a resolution:
Township Clerk, Township Engineer, Tax Assessor, Zoning Officer, Board of
Health, Fire Department, Police Department and other County, State or Federal
Officials as prescribed by the Board.
g. Within 95 days of the date of signing by the Board of a final subdivision plat, the
subdivider shall file a copy of same with the Union County Clerk. In the event of
failure to file within said 95 days, the approval of the major subdivision shall expire
and any further proceedings shall require the filing of a new application as in the
first instance. The Board, for good cause shown, may extend the filing for an
§ 35-69.1 LAND USE § 35-69.2
35:145
§ 35-69.3. Effect of Final Approval. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Final approval of a subdivision or site plan shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a period of two years from the date of final approval:
§ 35-69.4. Submission Requirements For Final Major Site Plans and Final Major
Subdivision (Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3). [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Each application for final major site plan approval and/or final major subdivision
approval shall provide the following:
additional 190 days.
h. If the Board, after consideration and discussion of the final plat or plan, disapproves
the submission, a notation to that effect shall be made by the Chairman of the Board
on the plat or plan. The Secretary of the Board, within 10 days of such adoption,
shall notify the applicant of such disapproval and forward the applicant a copy of
the plan and adopted resolution setting forth the reasons for the disapproval.
a. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted and all
other rights conferred upon the developer, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall
not be changed.
b. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval, the Board
may extend the period of protection for extensions of one year, but not to exceed
three extensions.
In the case of a site plan or subdivision for a planned development of 50 acres or more,
or in the case of a conventional subdivision or site plan of 150 acres or more, or site
plan for development of a non-residential floor area of 200,000 square feet or more,
the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in this subsection for such period
of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval; economic conditions; and the comprehensiveness of
the development.
The developer may apply for, and the Planning Board may thereafter grant, an extension
to final approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval; the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed; economic conditions;
and the comprehensiveness of the development.
a. All details stipulated in Subsection 35-68.4c of this chapter.
b. All additional details required at the time of preliminary approval, including a copy
of the resolution of approval by the approving authority.
c. A section or staging plan, if proposed, indicating the portion of the tract to be
considered for final approval as part of the current application and the relationship
of the portion of the tract to the remaining land area, including all applicable
comparisons such as parking spaces, building coverage, lot coverage, open space
areas and number of lots.
§ 35-69.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-69.4
35:146
§ 35-70. through § 35-79 (RESERVED)
d. Detailed architectural and engineering data including:
1. An architect's rendering of each building and sign or a typical building and
sign showing front, side and rear elevations.
2. Final cross sections, plans, profiles and established grades of all streets, aisles,
lanes and driveways, and construction documents (plans and specifications or
reference to specifications) for all public improvements.
3. Final plans and profiles of all storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
4. All dimensions of the exterior boundaries of any subdivision shall be balanced
and closed to a precision of one to 5,000 and the dimensions of all lot lines to
within one to 10,000. All dimensions, angles and bearings must be tied to at
least two permanent monuments not less than 300 feet apart and all
information shall be indicated on the plat. At least one corner of the
subdivision shall be tied horizontally to the New Jersey State Grid Coordinate
System and vertically to the U.S. Geodetic Survey System, with the data on
the plat as to how the bearings were determined.
5. Copies of any organization documents applicable to homeowners or
condominium association or open space organization established to maintain
common elements, such as articles of incorporation, the Master Deed, and
membership rules, regulations and bylaws, if same as to be used to guarantee
the maintenance of common elements.
6. Copies of any covenants or easements affecting the development.
7. A written instrument from each serving utility which shall evidence full
compliance or intended compliance with § 35-33 of this chapter. Upon
completion of the installation of all utilities, the developer also shall provide
the Township with four copies of "as built" plans showing the installed
location of all utilities.
§ 35-69.4 LAND USE § 35-70
35:147

ARTICLE X
Fees, Escrow, Inspections and Improvements
§ 35-80. FEES.
§ 35-80.1. Application Fees. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2010-11; Ord. No.
2012-13 § 4; Ord. No. 2015-22 § I(D); 3-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-07]
Application fees to cover the administrative expenses of the approving authority shall
be submitted to the Administrative Officer with the development application in the
amounts specified in this section. All payments of application fees shall be in the form
of a certified or bank check. Applicants seeking more than one approval shall pay the
combined fees for each approval requested.
Description Application Fee
a. Minor Site Plan $200
b. Preliminary Site Plan $600 plus
Each new dwelling unit $60
Each existing dwelling unit $40
Each 1,000 square feet of new nonresidential
floor area
$60
Each 1,000 square feet of total existing
nonresidential floor area
$40
c. Final Site Plan 50% of total preliminary fee
established in this section; 25% of
total preliminary escrow amount if
filed concurrently with the
preliminary submission
d. Minor Subdivision $300 plus $50 per new lot
e. Preliminary Major Subdivision $600 plus $50 per new lot
f. Final Major Subdivision $300 plus $25 per new lot
g. Variances
1. Appeals (40:55D-70a) $125 each
2. Interpretations (40:55D-70b) $125 each
3. Bulk (40:55D-70c) $200 for each variance
4. Use (40:55D-70d) $1,000
5. Permit (40:55D-34 & 35) $150
h. Conditional Uses $300
i. Zoning Review Fee
1. Residential
(a) New construction $100
§ 35-80 LAND USE § 35-80.1
35:149
Description Application Fee
(b) Addition or roof $50
(c) All others $35
2. Commercial or Industrial Building
(a) Non-interior work and new
construction
$200
(b) Interior work only $35
j. Appeals to Governing Body $200
k. Rezoning Request $250
l. Certified List of Property Owners $0.25 per name or $10, whichever
is greater
m. Informal Review of Concept Plan
1. Informal review fees shall be credited
toward application fees should a formal
application eventually be submitted.
$500
n. Site Plan Waiver Pursuant to Subsection
35-65.2d
$200
o. Appearance Before Technical Review
Committee
$300 per appearance
p. Other Applications As determined by approving
authority
q. Special Meetings.
1. In addition to all application fees, every applicant requesting a special meeting
of the approving authority shall make a payment of $2,000 for each special
meeting with said payment to be submitted to the Administrative Officer at
least two weeks before the meeting date. Such Special Meeting fee shall cover
the normal administrative and professional costs of such Special Meeting.
2. Should the circumstances of a Regular or Special Meeting necessitate that
extraordinary costs and fees are to be incurred, including but not limited to
rental or other costs associated with a meeting place and police attendance,
such costs shall be payable by and the responsibility of the applicant. Every
applicant requesting a Special Meeting shall make a payment to the
Administrative Officer at least two weeks before the meeting date, in an
amount to be determined by the Administrative Officer to reasonably cover
such costs. The Administrative Officer shall pay such costs on behalf of the
applicant, and shall then reimburse the applicant for any unexpended deposited
funds.
r. Resubmissions. The resubmission of any application previously withdrawn by an
applicant or dismissed without prejudice by the approving authority shall be
accompanied by a payment of all applicable application fees in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
§ 35-80.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-80.1
35:150
Description Application Fee
s. Amended Approvals. Applications for any amended site plan, subdivision or other
previously received approval shall be accompanied by a payment of 50% of all
applicable application fees required of the initial application.
t. Waiver of Fees. All application fees shall be nonrefundable. The Township
Committee shall reserve the right to waive the payment of any application fee for
any public, quasi-public or other applicant so qualified pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.
§ 35-80.2. Municipal Payments to Professionals for Services Rendered. [Ord. No.
2003-18]
§ 35-81. APPLICATION AND DOCUMENT REVIEW AND PREPARATION.
§ 35-81.1. Escrow Accounts. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
An escrow account shall be established, as hereafter set forth, for each development
application to cover the cost of professional charges for review of application, review
and preparation of documents, and other costs allowable by law.
§ 35-81.2. Escrow Amounts. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2008-6 § I]
Escrow account money shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer with the
development application in the amount specified in this section. All payments of
application fees shall be in the form of a certified or bank check. Applicants seeking
more than one approval shall pay the combined escrow fees of each approval requested.
a. The Chief Financial Officer of the Township shall make all payments to
professionals for services rendered to the Township or approving authority for
review of applications for development, review and preparation of documents,
inspection of improvements or other purposes under law. Such fees or charges shall
be established by resolution of the Township Committee of the Township of
Springfield.
b. The application review and inspection charges shall be limited only to professional
charges for review of applications, review and preparation of documents and
inspections of developments under construction and review by outside consultants
when an application is of a nature beyond the scope of the expertise of the
professionals normally utilized by the Township. The only costs that shall be added
to any such charges shall be actual out-of-pocket expenses of any such
professionals or consultants including normal and typical expenses incurred in
processing applications and inspecting improvements.
c. All deposits required of developers toward anticipated expenses for professional
services shall be placed in an escrow account as set forth herein. The amount of all
such deposits shall be reasonable in regard to the scale and complexity of the
proposed development and the amount of the initial deposit for each shall be set
forth herein.
§ 35-80.1 LAND USE § 35-81.2
35:151
Description Escrow Amount
a. Minor Site Plan $750
b. Preliminary Site Plan $1,500 plus
Each new dwelling unit $100
Each existing dwelling unit $50
Each 1,000 square feet of new floor
area
$200
Each 1,000 square feet of existing
floor area
$100
c. Final Site Plan 50% of total preliminary amount if filed as
separate application; 25% of total
preliminary escrow amount if filed
concurrently with the preliminary
submission
d. Minor Subdivision $300 per lot
e. Preliminary Major Subdivision $1,000 plus
Between 4 and 9 lots $225 per lot
10 or more lots $200 per lot
f. Final Major Subdivision 50% of total preliminary escrow amount if
filed as separate application; 25% of total
preliminary escrow amount if filed
concurrently with the preliminary
submission
g. Conditional Use $1,000
h. Variances
1. Appeals (40:55D-70a) $500
2. Interpretations (40:55D-70b) $500
3. Bulk (40:55D-70c) $200 per variance
4. Use (40:55D-70d) $2,000
5. Permit (40:55D-34 & 35) $1,000
i. Appeals to Governing Body $500
j. Rezoning Request and Other
Actions
$2,000 per rezoning request
k. Informal Review of Concept Plan $1,000
l. Other Review As determined by approving authority
§ 35-81.3. Court Reporter. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
If an applicant requires a certified court reporter, the cost of taking testimony,
transcribing it and providing a copy of the transcript to the Township shall be at the
§ 35-81.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-81.3
35:152
expense of the applicant, who also shall arrange for the reporter's attendance.
§ 35-82. REVIEW CHARGES AND PROCEDURES.
§ 35-82.1. Inspections. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
a. The cost of inspections shall be the responsibility of the developer. An escrow
account shall be established, as hereafter set forth, for each development application
to cover the cost of professional charges for inspections. The amount of the initial
deposit to be escrowed for anticipated municipal expenses shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2, as amended. The cost of such improvements shall be
estimated by the Township based on documented construction costs for public
improvements prevailing in the general area of the Township. Any appeal of such
determination shall be to the county construction board of appeals, pursuant to law.
All inspection costs resulting from utility company work shall be paid separately by
the applicant.
b. All inspection fees shall be in the form of certified or bank checks.
c. All improvements and utilities installed in connection with an approved site plan or
subdivision shall be inspected by the Township Engineer at the time of their
installation to ensure satisfactory completion.
d. The Township Engineer shall be notified at least two working days prior to the start
of any construction so that he or a qualified representative may be present at the
time the work is done.
e. Upon at least substantial completion of all required sanitary sewers or water mains,
and upon full completion of each of the following phases of work, the applicant
shall notify the Governing Body, in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of
the Township Clerk and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer, so that
he or a qualified representative may inspect at least the following work:
1. Road and road subgrade.
2. Curb and gutter forms.
3. Curbs and gutters.
4. Paving.
5. Sidewalk forms.
6. Sidewalks.
7. Drainage pipes and other drainage or flood control facilities.
8. Street name signs.
9. Monuments.
10. Shade trees and other final grading and landscaping.
11. Lighting improvements as required.
§ 35-81.3 LAND USE § 35-82.1
35:153
§ 35-82.2. Escrow Procedures. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
12. Other improvements as required by the site plan or subdivision approval.
f. Prior to notifying the Governing Body of the completion or substantial completion
of any improvements covered by a performance guarantee, the applicant shall
prepare and submit to the Township Engineer a set of the approved public
improvement and utility plans and profiles, signed and sealed by the appropriate
professional, and amended to read "as constructed."
g. The inspection of all improvements of which such notice has been given shall be
started within 10 days of notification. The inspector shall determine whether the
work is satisfactory and in agreement with the approved final drawings and
Township specifications. The general condition of the site shall also be considered.
h. Within 30 days of the final inspection, the Township Engineer shall prepare and file
with the Governing Body a detailed, written report indicating either his approval,
partial approval or rejection of the improvements inspected, with stated reasons for
any rejection. The cost of any approved or rejected improvements covered by
performance guarantee shall be set forth and certified.
i. In the event that final approval of a development has been granted in stages or
sections, and hence, the construction of the required improvements is to be
undertaken in stages or sections, bonding and inspection of improvements shall also
be in stages or sections.
j. Inspection by the Township of the installation of improvements and utilities shall
not operate to subject the Township to liability for claims, suits or liability of any
kind that may at any time arise because of defects or negligence during construction
or at any time thereafter, it being recognized that the responsibility to maintain safe
conditions at all times during construction and to provide proper utilities and
improvements is upon the developer and owner of the site.
a. Each payment charged to the deposit for review of applications and preparation of
documents and inspection of improvements shall be pursuant to a voucher from the
professional, which voucher shall identify the personnel performing the service, and
for each date the service performed, the hours spent to 1/4 hour increments, the
hourly rate and the expenses incurred.
b. All professionals shall submit vouchers to the Chief Financial Officer of the
municipality on a monthly basis in accordance with schedules and procedures
established by the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality.
c. If the services are provided by a municipal employee, the municipal employee shall
prepare and submit to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality a statement
containing the same information as required on a voucher, on a monthly basis.
d. The professionals shall send an informational copy of all vouchers or statements
submitted to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality simultaneously to the
applicant. The Chief Financial Officer of the municipality shall prepare and send
the applicant a statement which shall include an accounting of funds listing all
deposits, interest earnings, disbursements, and cumulative balance of the escrow
§ 35-82.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-82.2
35:154
§ 35-82.3. Close-out Procedures. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-82.4. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
accounts.
This information shall be provided on a quarterly basis, if monthly charges are
$1,000 or less, or on a monthly basis if monthly charges exceed $1,000.
e. If an escrow account or deposit contains insufficient funds to enable the
municipality or approving authority to perform required application reviews or
improvement inspections the chief financial officer of the municipality shall
provide the applicant with a notice of the insufficient escrow or deposit balance.
In order for work to continue on the development or the application, the applicant
shall within a reasonable time period post a deposit to the account in the amount to
be agreed upon by the municipality or approving authority and the applicant. In the
interim, any required health and safety inspections shall be made and charged back
against the replenishment of funds.
a. The following close-out procedure shall apply to all deposits and escrow accounts
and shall commence after the approving authority has granted final approval and
signed the subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of application review escrows
and deposits, or after the improvements have been approved in the case of
improvement inspection escrows and deposits.
b. The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the Chief Financial
Officer of the municipality and the approving authority, and to the relevant
municipal professionals, that the application or the improvements, as the case may
be, are completed.
After receipt of such notice, the professional shall render a final bill to the Chief
Financial Officer of the municipality within 30 days, and shall send a copy
simultaneously to the applicant.
c. The Chief Financial Officer of the municipality shall render a written final
accounting to the applicant on the uses to which the deposit was put within 45 days
of receipt of the final bill.
Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account, including interest, shall
be refunded to the developer along with the final accounting.
a. All professional charges for review of an application for development, review and
preparation of documents or inspection of improvements shall be reasonable and
necessary, given the status and progress of the application or construction.
b. Review fees shall be charged only in connection with an application for
development presently pending before the approving authority or upon review of
compliance with conditions of approval, or review of requests for modification or
amendment made by the applicant.
c. A professional shall not review items which are subject to approval by any State
governmental agency not under municipal jurisdiction except to the extent that
§ 35-82.2 LAND USE § 35-82.4
35:155
§ 35-82.5. Appeal. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-83. ON-SITE AND ON-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS.
consultation with a State agency is necessary due to the effect of State approvals in
the subdivision or site plan.
d. Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on a subdivision or site
plan or required by an approving resolution. Professionals inspecting improvements
under construction shall charge only for inspections that are reasonably necessary
to check the progress and quality of the work and such inspection shall be
reasonably based on the approved development plans and documents.
e. If the municipality retains a different professional or consultant in the place of the
professional originally responsible for development, application review or
inspection of improvements, the municipality or approving authority shall be
responsible for all time and expenses of the new professional to become familiar
with the application or the project, and the municipality or approving authority shall
not bill the applicant or charge the deposit or the escrow account for any such
services.
a. An applicant shall notify in writing the Township Committee with copies to the
Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and the professional whenever the
applicant disputes the charges made by a professional for service rendered to the
municipality in reviewing applications for development, review and preparation of
documents, inspection of improvements, or other charges made pursuant to law.
The Governing Body, or its designee, shall within a reasonable time period attempt
to mediate any disputed charges.
b. If the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, the applicant may
appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals any charge to an escrow
account or a deposit by any municipal professional or consultant.
An applicant or authorized agent shall submit the appeal in writing to the County
Construction Board of Appeals. The applicant or authorized agent shall
simultaneously send a copy of the appeal to the municipality, approving authority,
and any professional whose charge is the subject of the appeal.
c. An applicant shall file an appeal within 45 days from receipt of the informational
copy of the professional's voucher, except that if the professional has not supplied
the applicant with an informational voucher, the applicant shall file any appeal
within 60 days from receipt of the municipal statement of activity against the
deposit or escrow account.
d. An applicant may file an appeal for an ongoing series of charges by a professional
during a period not exceeding six months to demonstrate that they represent a
pattern of excessive or inaccurate charges. An applicant making use of this
provision need not appeal each charge individually.
§ 35-82.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-83.1
35:156
§ 35-83.1. Performance Guarantees. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
As a condition of final approval of a site plan, the applicant shall have installed all
improvements or furnished performance guarantees for the ultimate installation of any
required on-tract and on-site improvements. In the event that a performance guarantee is
to be furnished, the procedures outlined in § 35-85 shall be followed.
§ 35-83.2. Requirements for Certificates of Occupancy. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any building unless the Township
Engineer has certified that the site improvements necessary for the occupancy of the
building have been completed or have been completed to the extent necessary to allow
the safe occupancy of the building without inconvenience to the occupants of the
building. In cases where other required site improvements are incomplete, the applicant
shall agree in writing to complete said improvements within 60 days, and shall post a
performance guarantee to cover the completion and inspection of said improvements. An
additional 60 days extension may be granted by the Township Engineer under certain
circumstances.
§ 35-84. OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENT.
§ 35-84.1. Improvements to be Constructed at the Sole Expense of the Applicant.
[Ord. No. 2003-18]
In cases where the need for an off-tract improvement or improvements is created by
the proposed development and where no other property owners receive a special benefit
thereby, the approving authority may recommend to the Governing Body that it require
the applicant, as a condition of approval, to acquire lands at the applicant's expense
outside of the tract proposed for development and improve and dedicate such lands to
the Township or County in the manner provided hereafter and as otherwise provided
by law as if such improvements were on-tract improvements or, in lieu thereof, require
the developer to deposit with the Township a sum of money sufficient to allow the
municipality to acquire and improve such lands.
§ 35-84.2. Other Improvements. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
a. In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is created by the proposed
development and where the approving authority determines that properties outside
the development will also be benefited by the improvement, the approving authority
shall forthwith forward to the Governing Body a list and description of all such
improvements together with its request that the Governing Body determine and
advise the Board of the procedure to be followed in the construction or installation
thereof. The approving authority shall defer final action upon the site plan or
subdivision until receipt of the Governing Body's determination, or until the
expiration of 90 days after the forwarding of such list and description to the
Governing Body without such determination having been made, whichever occurs
first.
b. The Governing Body, within 90 days after receipt of said list and description, shall
determine and advise the Board whether:
§ 35-83.1 LAND USE § 35-84.2
35:157
1. The improvement or improvements are to be constructed or installed by the
municipality:
(a) As a general improvement, the cost of which is to be borne at general
expense (except as hereinafter otherwise provided as to the contribution
thereto by the developer); or
(b) As a local improvement, all or part of the cost of which is to be specially
assessed against properties benefited thereby in proportion to benefits
conferred by the improvements in accordance with Chapter 56 of Title 40
of the Revised Statutes (except as hereinafter otherwise provided as to a
contribution thereto by the developer); or
2. The improvement or improvements are to be constructed or installed by the
developer under a formula for partial reimbursement as hereinafter set forth.
c. If the Governing Body shall determine that the improvement or improvements shall
be constructed or installed under Subsection 35-84.2b1(a) hereinabove the
approving authority shall estimate, with the aid of the Township Engineer or such
other persons as have pertinent information or expertise the amount, if any, by
which the total cost thereof will exceed the total amount by which all properties,
including the proposed development, will be specially benefited thereby, and the
developer shall be liable to the municipality for such excess. Further, the Governing
Body shall adopt an ordinance authorizing and providing for the financing of the
improvement or improvements in a manner consistent with the obligation of the
developer for any excess of total costs over total benefits conferred, as set forth
above.
d. If the Governing Body shall determine that the improvement or improvements shall
be constructed or installed under Subsection 35-84.2b1(b) above, the approving
authority shall, as provided in Subsection 35-84.2c hereinabove, estimate the
difference between the total costs to be incurred and the total amount by which all
properties to be benefited thereby, including the development property, will be
specially benefited by the improvement, and the developer shall be liable to the
municipality therefor, as well as for the amount of any special assessments against
the development property for benefits conferred by the improvement or
improvements. Further, the Governing Body shall adopt an ordinance authorizing
and providing for the financing of the improvement or improvements and the
assessment of benefits arising therefore in a manner consistent with the obligation
of the developer with respect thereto, and proceedings under said ordinance shall
be in accordance with Chapter 56 of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes, except to the
extent modified by the obligation of the developer for any excess of total cost over
total benefits conferred, as set forth above.
e. If the Governing Body shall determine that the improvement or improvements are
to be constructed or installed by the developer under Subsection 35-84.2b2
hereinabove, the Board shall, in like manner, estimate the amount of such excess,
and the applicant shall be liable to the municipality therefore as well as for the
amount of any special assessments against the development property for benefits
conferred by the improvement or improvements. However, the developer shall be
entitled to be reimbursed by the municipality for the amount of any special
§ 35-84.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-84.2
35:158
§ 35-85. GUARANTEES.
§ 35-85.1. Estimate of Performance Guarantee. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-85.2. Approval by Attorney for the Approving Authority. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-85.3. Bonding and Cash Requirements. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
assessments against property other than the development property for benefits
conferred by the improvement or improvements, if, as, and when the special
assessments against such other property are received by the municipality. Further,
the Governing Body shall adopt an ordinance authorizing and providing for the
assessment against all properties, including the development property, of benefits
conferred by the improvement or improvements and proceedings under said
ordinance shall be in accordance with Chapter 56 of Title 40 of the Revised
Statutes. However, any such assessment against the development property shall be
marked paid and satisfied in consideration of the construction or installation of the
improvement or improvements by the developer.
a. No final development approval shall be granted until the satisfactory completion
and performance of all required improvements have been certified to the approving
authority by the Township Engineer unless the applicant shall have filed with the
municipality a performance guarantee as hereinafter provided assuring the
installation of such improvements on or before an agreed upon date. Guarantees
shall be for site improvements including but not limited to items such as grading,
paving, sidewalks, storm drainage, sanitary sewerage, potable water systems,
lighting and landscaping.
b. A performance guarantee estimate shall be prepared by the applicant's engineer and
submitted to the Township Engineer for review and approval. The estimate shall set
forth all requirements for improvements as established by the Board and their
estimated cost, with said estimates appended to the performance guarantee. At the
recommendation of the Township Engineer, the Governing Body shall pass a
resolution either approving or adjusting the performance guarantee.
a. The applicant shall present two copies of the performance guarantee in an amount
equal to 120% of the approved performance guarantee estimate for approval as to
form and execution by the attorney for the approving authority.
b. The Township attorney shall then notify the secretary of the approving authority
prior to the next regular meeting of the approving authority that the performance
guarantee is properly executed.
a. The performance guarantee shall be payable to the Township of Springfield and
shall be in the form of cash, certified check, a performance bond or other negotiable
instruments permitted under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, in which the applicant shall be
the principal, the bond to be provided by an acceptable surety company licensed to
do business in the State of New Jersey. The Township Treasurer shall issue a receipt
for such deposit and shall cause the same to be deposited in the name of the
Township in a bank named by the municipality to be retained as security for
completion of all required improvements and to be returned to the applicant upon
§ 35-84.2 LAND USE § 35-85.3
35:159
§ 35-85.4. Release of Performance Guarantee. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-85.5. Conditions for Acceptance of Improvements. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The approval of any development by the Township shall in no way be construed as
acceptance of any street or drainage system, or any other improvement, nor shall such
approval obligate the Township in any way to maintain or exercise jurisdiction over such
streets or drainage systems or other improvements. No improvement shall be accepted
completion of all required work or, in the event of default on the part of the
applicant, to be used by the Township to pay the cost of obtaining the completion
of all required improvements. Every bond, whether cash or surety, shall contain a
clause to the effect that a determination by the Township Engineer that the principal
has defaulted in the performance of his or her obligation shall be binding and
conclusive upon the surety and the principal.
b. 10% of the amount of the approved performance guarantee estimate shall be
deposited by the applicant in cash with the Township.
a. The Governing Body, by resolution, shall approve, partially approve, or reject the
improvements inspected on the basis of the final inspection report submitted by the
Township Engineer and release, partially release, or declare in default the
performance guarantee or portion thereof covering such improvements. The
Governing Body shall notify the applicant of such action in writing, by certified
mail, within 65 days of the notice of completion or substantial completion of
improvements.
b. The Governing Body shall take action on each performance guarantee. The
performance guarantee shall remain in full effect until released, partially released
or declared in default by resolution of the Governing Body.
c. The time allowed for the installation of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the Governing Body
by resolution, provided, however, that it is the policy of the Township that no such
extension shall be approved unless extenuating circumstances have prevented the
applicant from completing the improvements within the time allowed. As a
condition or as part of any such extension, the amount of the original performance
guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the case may be, to 120% of the
estimated cost of the installation of the remaining required improvements as
certified by the Township Engineer at the time of the passage of the resolution
extending the time.
d. Where partial approval of improvements is granted by the Governing Body, all but
120% of the cost of the outstanding improvements, or 30% of the amount of the
original performance guarantee, whichever is greater, shall be released.
e. If any improvements have not been installed in accordance with the performance
guarantee, the applicant and surety shall be liable thereon to the Township for the
reasonable costs over and above the 10% cash deposit on the improvements not
installed, and, upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the Township shall install such
improvements.
§ 35-85.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-85.5
35:160
by the Governing Body unless and until all of the following conditions have been met:
§ 35-85.6. Compliance. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
§ 35-85.7. Transfer of Deposit Where Improvements Are Not Authorized Within
10 Years. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
In any case in which an applicant shall deposit money with the municipality for the
completion of an improvement that is to be constructed pursuant to this chapter by the
municipality, the Governing Body of the municipality shall have enacted an ordinance
authorizing the improvement within 10 years after the date all other development
improvements are completed or said money shall be transferred to the municipal capital
improvements fund.
a. The Township Engineer shall have certified in writing that the improvements are
complete and in compliance with the requirements of this chapter;
b. The final site plan or subdivision application shall have been approved by the
Board; and
c. The applicant shall have filed with the Governing Body a maintenance guarantee in
an amount equal to not more than 15% of the original performance guarantee
estimate. The maintenance guarantee shall run for a period of two years. The
procedures and requirements governing such maintenance guarantee shall be
identical with the procedures and requirements set forth for a performance
guarantee in this chapter. The requirements for a maintenance guarantee may be
waived by the Governing Body only if the Township Engineer has certified to the
Governing Body that the improvements have been in continuous use for not less
than two years from the date that the Township Engineer certified completion of
such improvements and that during this period the applicant has maintained the
improvements in a satisfactory manner.
a. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any development or portion thereof
until all improvements are installed and have been approved by the Governing
Body, except that a certificate of occupancy for any development may be issued
after all utilities and other improvements, including the required stabilized base
course of streets and parking areas within the development, are installed, but prior
to the installation of the final or top course on said streets and parking areas.
b. Failure to comply with any of the conditions of a development approval subsequent
to the receipt of any certificates of occupancy, shall be construed to be a violation
of this chapter and shall be grounds for the revocation of the certificate of
occupancy. If the Township Engineer finds that any conditions of approval have not
been met, he shall give the applicant 10 days' written notice to comply with said
conditions; failure of the applicant to comply within the ten-day period will result
in the revocation of the certificate of occupancy. Nothing herein shall be construed
to inhibit any statutory authority from the performance of their duties. Such
violations may also be prosecuted, and any person who violates any provision of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties identified in
§ 35-99.
§ 35-85.5 LAND USE § 35-85.8
35:161
§ 35-85.8. Deposit of Funds. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
All moneys paid by an applicant pursuant to this chapter shall be paid over to the
Township Treasurer who shall provide a suitable depository therefor. Such funds shall be
used only for the improvements for which they were deposited or improvements serving
the same purpose, unless otherwise permitted by Ordinance.
§ 35-85.9. Redetermination of Assessment Upon Completion of Improvements.
[Ord. No. 2003-18]
Upon completion of off-tract improvements required pursuant to this chapter, the
developer's liability hereunder shall be recalculated in accordance with the actual, as
compared with the estimated, cost of improvements. To the extent that such recalculation
shall increase the amount of any cash deposit made by the applicant hereunder, the
developer shall forthwith pay the amount of such increase to the municipality. To the
extent that it shall decrease the amount thereof, the municipality shall forthwith refund
the amount of such decrease to the developer. In cases where improvements are specially
assessed against all benefited properties, recalculation shall be made by the municipal
assessing authority in the course of the special assessment proceedings. In other cases, it
shall be made by the Township Engineer.
§ 35-86. DEVELOPMENT FEE REGULATIONS.
§ 35-86.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 09-03 § I; Ord. No. 2014-11]
The purpose of this chapter is as follows:
a. In Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990), the
New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory development fees are
authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq.,
and the State Constitution, subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's
(COAH's) adoption of rules.
b. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46 section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide Non-
Residential Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), COAH is
authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable
housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and have a COAHapproved
spending plan may retain fees collected from nonresidential development.
COAH has granted the Township the right to retain collected nonresidential
development fees.
c. This chapter establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and expenditure
of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in accordance P.L. 2008,
c.46, §s 8 and 32-38. Fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used for the
sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This chapter shall be
interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees, codified at
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
d. Pursuant to the mandate of the New Jersey Supreme Court, set forth in the March
§ 35-85.8 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-86.1
35:162
§ 35-86.2. Basic Requirement. [Ord. No. 09-03 § I; Ord. No. 2014-11]
§ 35-86.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 09-03 § I; Ord. No. 2014-11]
The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary
development, a municipal construction project or a 100% affordable development.
COAH OR THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for the administration of
housing obligations in accordance with sound regional planning consideration in the
State.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option or
contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such
land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of property
as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided by the
current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in which the property
is situated, as determined in accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123
(C.54:1-35a through C.54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the impact of
development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety and well-being of
residents by producing durable, low-maintenance, resource-efficient housing while
making optimum use of existing infrastructure and community services.
§ 35-86.4. Nonresidential Development Fees. [Ord. No. 09-03 § I; Ord. No.
2014-11]
10, 2015, decision in the matter of The Adoption of N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97 by the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing, references herein to the Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH), shall be read to refer to the Superior Court of New
Jersey, or such other court or agency as designated by the Supreme Court of New
Jersey to exercise jurisdiction over such matters. [Added 4-18-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-06]
a. This chapter shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:96-5.1.
b. The Township shall not spend development fees until COAH has approved a plan
for spending such fees in conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C.
5:96-5.3.
a. Imposed Fees.
1. Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for developers of
the types of development specifically exempted, shall pay a fee equal to 2.5%
§ 35-86.1 LAND USE § 35-86.4
35:163
§ 35-86.5. Residential Development Fees. [Ord. No. 2014-11]
of the equalized assessed value of the land and improvements, for all new
nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
2. Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of development
specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from any additions to existing structures to
be used for nonresidential purposes.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure is
demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on
the difference between the equalized assessed value of the pre-existing land
and improvement and the equalized assessed value of the newly improved
structure, i.e. land and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy
is issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a negative
number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
b. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for Nonresidential
Development.
1. The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market rate
development shall be subject to the 2.5% development fee, unless otherwise
exempted below.
2. The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed value
resulting from alterations, change in use within existing footprint,
reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
3. Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the exemptions required
pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46, as specified in the Form N-RDF "State of New
Jersey Non-Residential Development Certification/Exemption" Form. Any
exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
4. A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46 shall be subject to
it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer applies, and shall make
the payment of the nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three
years after that event or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy
of the nonresidential development, whichever is later.
5. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a nonresidential
development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt from property taxation, the
owner of the property shall remit the fees required pursuant to this section
within 45 days of the termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances may be
enforceable by the Township as a hen against the real property of the owner.
a. Imposed Fees.
1. Residential developers, except for developers of the types of development
§ 35-86.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-86.5
35:164
§ 35-86.6. Collection Procedures. [Ord. No. 09-03 § I; Ord. No. 2014-11]
specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1 1/2% of the equalized
assessed value for residential development provided no increased density is
permitted.
2. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5)
(known as a "d" variance) has been permitted, developers shall be required to
pay a development fee of 6% of the equalized assessed value for each
additional unit that may be realized. However, if the zoning on a site has
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance
application, the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right during the twoyear
period preceding the filing of the variance application.
(Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a site that was
zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1 1/2% of the equalized assessed
value on the first two units; and the specified higher percentage up to 6% of the
equalized assessed value for the two additional units, provided zoning on the
site has not changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application.)
b. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for Residential
Development.
1. Affordable housing developments, developments where the developer is
providing for the construction of affordable units elsewhere in the
municipality, and developments where the developer has made a payment in
lieu of on-site construction of affordable units shall be exempt from
development fees.
2. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan approval prior
to the adoption of a municipal development fee ordinance shall be exempt
from development fees, unless the developer seeks a substantial change in the
approval. Where a site plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building
permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for
this purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the building
permit is issued.
3. Additions to or replacement of any existing residential structure that does not
increase the number of residential units shall be exempt from paying a
development fee. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-2666]
a. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval, for a
development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its staff to notify the
Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building permit.
b. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be provided with a
copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
66. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection b4, which provided an exemption for additions to
residential units which do not increase the number of residential units.
§ 35-86.5 LAND USE § 35-86.6
35:165
Certification/Exemption" to be completed as per the instructions provided. The
developer of a nonresidential development shall complete Form N-RDF as per
the instructions provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions provided in the
Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions and prepare estimated and
final assessments as per the instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
c. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building permit shall
notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first building permit for a
development which is subject to a development fee.
d. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor, based on the
plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized assessed value of the
development.
e. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all requests for the scheduling of
a final inspection on property which is subject to a development fee.
f. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final inspection, the
Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the previously estimated equalized
assessed value of the improvements of the development; calculate the development
fee; and thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
g. Should the Township fail to determine or notify the developer of the amount of the
development fee within 10 business days of the request for final inspection, the
developer may estimate the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent
with the dispute process set forth in Subsection b of section 37 of P.L. 2008, c.46
(C.40:55D-8.6).
h. The developer shall pay 100% of the calculated development fee amount prior to
the municipal issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the subject property.
i. Appeal of Development Fees.
1. A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees imposed by filing
a challenge with the Director of the Division of Taxation. Pending a review
and determination by the Director, which shall be made within 45 days of
receipt of the challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing
escrow account by the Township. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the
State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S.54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
credited to the prevailing party.
2. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed by filing a
challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a review and
determination by the Board, collected fees shall be placed in an interest
bearing escrow account by the Township. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the
State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S.54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed shall be
§ 35-86.6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-86.6
35:166
§ 35-86.7. Affordable Housing Trust Fund. [Ord. No. 09-03 § I; Ord. No. 2014-11]
§ 35-86.8. Use of Funds. [Ord. No. 09-03 § I; Ord. No. 2014-11]
credited to the prevailing party.
a. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund to be
maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of depositing
development fees collected from nonresidential and residential developers and
proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished controls.
b. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the affordable housing trust
fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and amount:
1. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
2. Developer contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in a
townhouse or other multistory attached development accessible;
3. Rental income from municipally operated units;
4. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
5. Recapture funds;
6. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
7. Any other funds collected in connection with the Township's affordable
housing program.
c. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the Township shall
provide COAH with written authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow
agreement between the municipality, TDBank, NA and COAH to permit COAH to
direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
d. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on eligible
affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
a. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved by COAH.
Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for any activity approved by
COAH to address the Township's fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant
or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but are not limited to:
preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units
and related costs, accessory apartment, market to affordable, or regional housing
partnership programs, conversion of existing nonresidential buildings to create new
affordable units, green building strategies designed to be cost saving and in
accordance with accepted national or State standards, purchase of land for
affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites,
financial assistance designed to increase affordability, administration necessary for
implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity
as permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in the
§ 35-86.6 LAND USE § 35-86.8
35:167
§ 35-86.9. Monitoring and Reporting. [Ord. No. 09-03 § I; Ord. No. 2014-11;
amended 4-18-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-06]
The Township shall prepare, maintain and adopt by resolution a spending plan as
approved by the Court. On or about July 1, of each year, commencing in 2018, the
Township shall provide annual reporting of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity,
to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing,
or Local Government Services, or other entity Designated by the State of New Jersey,
with a copy provided to the Fair Share Housing Center and posted on the Township
website, using forms developed for this purpose by the New Jersey Department of
approved spending plan.
b. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township for past housing activities.
c. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income households in
affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the
affordability assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of median
income by region.
1. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment assistance,
security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental assistance, assistance
with homeowners association or condominium fees and special assessments,
and assistance with emergency repairs.
2. Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of median income
may include buying down the cost of low- or moderate-income units in the
municipal Fair Share Plan to make them affordable to households earning 30%
or less of median income. The use of development fees in this manner shall
entitle the Township to bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.7.
3. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds from the
sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt from the affordability
assistance requirement.
d. The Township may contract with a private or public entity to administer any part of
its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the requirement for
affordability assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
e. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees, may be
expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries and benefits for
municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to develop or implement a new
construction program, a Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an
affirmative marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more
than 20% of the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for
such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and
compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related to
litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the Council's regulations
and/or action are not eligible uses of the affordable housing trust fund.
§ 35-86.8 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-86.9
35:168
Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing, or Local Government Services.
The reporting shall include an accounting of all Housing Trust Fund activity, including
the source and amount of funds collected and the amount and purpose for which any
funds have been expended.
§ 35-86.10. Ongoing Collection of Fees. [Ord. No. 09-03 § I; Ord. No. 2014-11]
The ability for the Township to impose, collect and expend development fees shall
expire with its substantive certification unless the Township has filed an adopted
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive
certification, and has received COAH's approval of its development fee ordinance. If the
Township fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development fees prior to the
expiration of substantive certification, it may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds
remaining within its municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into
the "New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to section 20 of
P.L. 1985, c.222 (C.52:27D-320). The Township shall not impose a development fee on
a development that receives preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration
of its substantive certification or judgment of compliance, nor shall the Township
retroactively impose a development fee on such a development. The Township shall not
expend development fees after the expiration of its substantive certification or judgment
of compliance.
§ 35-87. through § 35-95 (RESERVED)
§ 35-86.9 LAND USE § 35-87
35:169

ARTICLE XI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 35-96. ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2012-13, § 3]
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer, or other designated official of the Township
to enforce the provisions of this chapter. In addition, the Zoning Officer or the Assistant
Engineer shall have the power to approve or disapprove all applications for changes of
occupancy.
§ 35-97. CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
§ 35-97.1. Filing of Plot Plans. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
No construction, reconstruction, structural alteration, enlargement, movement,
demolition or change of use or occupancy for which a construction permit is required
pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code of the State of New Jersey shall be
undertaken until there has been filed with the Construction Code Enforcement Official
a plot plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions, radii and
angles of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location of all structure(s) or
building(s) supplemented by such other information as may be necessary to provide for
the enforcement of this chapter and the Uniform Construction Code and to determine the
propriety of the issuance of a Construction Permit therefor by the said Official.
§ 35-97.2. Conformance with Regulations. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
No construction permit shall be issued for the erection, construction, reconstruction,
structural alteration or moving of any building or structure or part thereof, unless the
plans and intended use indicate that such building or structure is designed and intended
to conform in all respects to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 35-97.3. Survey. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
After construction of the foundation footings of a building or structure, the owner shall
cause a survey to be made by a licensed surveyor, showing the location of such footing
with respect to the lot lines of the lot using the same datum used for sidewalk and/or
street pavement construction. A copy of such survey shall be filed with and approved
by the Township Engineer before any further construction is commenced. Said approval
shall be in writing and issued to the Construction Code Enforcement Official. Upon final
completion of a building or structure and before a certificate of occupancy is issued,
the owner shall furnish a final certified survey to the Township Engineer showing the
final grades at all corners of the building or structure to be substantially as originally
submitted. In the event that the final certified survey reflects substantial changes as the
corners of the building or structure as compared with the survey filed after construction
of the foundation footings, such survey must be accompanied by a detailed explanation
furnished by a licensed surveyor, detailing the reasons for said changes and certifying
that the changes will not adversely affect drainage conditions on the subject lot or
abutting lots. Other inspections will be required under the BOCA Code and the Uniform
Construction Code. If it is found that the change adversely affects the property and
adjacent lots, it shall be referred back to the reviewing Board or Agency.
§ 35-96 LAND USE § 35-97.4
35:171
§ 35-97.4. Recommendations of Other Officials. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Construction Code Enforcement Official shall have the authority to consult with and
receive the recommendations of the Fire and Police Departments, Township Planner,
Township Engineer and any other municipal agency or officer prior to the issuance of
any construction permit.
§ 35-97.5. Record of Permits. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The Construction Code Enforcement Official shall keep a record of all construction
permits applied for, whether approved or denied, together with copies of all plans and
specifications submitted with each application, which record shall be available for public
inspection. A monthly report of Construction Permits issued shall be filed with the
Township Assessor.
§ 35-98. CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
§ 35-98.1. Required. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Construction Code Enforcement
Official, it shall be unlawful to use or to permit the use of any building or structure, lot or
land, or part thereof which is created, erected, changed, converted, re-used, re-occupied,
altered or enlarged, in whole or in part, after the effective date of this chapter, or to use
any premises which are existing as of the effective date of this chapter for any purpose
other than the purpose for which they are already being used.
§ 35-98.2. Application. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
Prior to the occupancy of any building, structure, alteration or enlargement, or upon the
putting into use of any premises, lot or land where no building or structure is involved,
the owner or agent shall apply to the Construction Code Enforcement Official in writing
for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy pursuant to the provisions of this section.
Such application shall be made in duplicate on forms provided by the Construction
Code Enforcement Official. Such certificate, when issued by the Construction Code
Enforcement Official, shall show that such building or structure, premises, lot or land or
part thereof and the proposed use thereof are either in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter and of all other applicable Ordinances or have been permitted by the grant
of variances from this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Construction Code Enforcement
Official to issue a certificate of occupancy within 10 days after a written request for the
same shall be filed in his office by the owner or agent after having determined that such
building or structure, premises, lot or land and the proposed use thereof conform with
this chapter and all other applicable Ordinances.
§ 35-98.3. Fees. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be as established by Township Ordinance.
Said fee shall be payable at the same time as the fee is paid to the Office of the
Construction Code Enforcement Official for the issuance of a construction permit.
§ 35-97.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-98.4
35:172
§ 35-98.4. Proof of Completion of Work Required Prior to Issuance of Certificate.
[Ord. No. 2003-18; amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy the Construction Code Official
shall request to receive a letter from the Department of Engineering, Construction
Services and Code Enforcement indicating that all site work, including grading has been
satisfactorily completed.
§ 35-99. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2003-18; Ord. No. 2008-13
§ 1]
§ 35-100. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. No. 2003-18]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter or the
location of any district boundary shown on the Zoning Map that forms a part hereof shall
be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this
chapter as a whole or any part or provisions hereof other than the part so adjudged to be
invalid or unconstitutional.
§ 35-101. through § 35-109 (RESERVED)
a. Any owner or agent, and any person or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall erect, structurally alter, enlarge, rebuild or move
any building or buildings or any structure, or who shall put into use any lot or land
in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder, or
who shall refuse reasonable opportunity to inspect any premises, and who shall fail
to abate such violation or refusal within 10 days after written notice has been
serviced, either by mail or by personal service, shall, upon conviction, be liable to
the penalty of not more than $1,250 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both, or as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-5 of the Township Ordinances, whichever is
greater. Each and every day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate
and distinct violation.
b. The owner of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof, where anything
in violation of this chapter shall be placed or shall exist, and any architect, builder,
contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in connection therewith and who
may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall each be guilty of a
separate misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall each be liable to the fine
or imprisonment, or both, hereinbefore specified.
§ 35-98.4 LAND USE § 35-101
35:173

ARTICLE XII
Stormwater Control
§ 35-110. SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
§ 35-110.1. Policy Statement. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction through nonstructural or
low impact techniques shall be explored before relying on structural Best Management
Practices (BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural stormwater
management strategies and proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include
both environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent pollutants
from being placed on the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the
anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management
BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established performance standards for water
quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
§ 35-110.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish minimum stormwater management
requirements and controls for major developments.
§ 35-110.3. Applicability. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
§ 35-110.4. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements. [Ord.
No. 06-20 § I]
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant to this ordinance
are to be considered an integral part of development approvals under the subdivision and
site plan review process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure
required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, and general welfare. This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or
annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more
restrictive provisions or higher standards shall control.
a. This ordinance shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for the
following major developments that require preliminary or final site plan or
subdivision review:
1. Nonresidential major developments; and
2. Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted by the
Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
b. This ordinance shall also be applicable to all major developments undertaken by the
Township.
§ 35-110 LAND USE § 35-111
35:175
§ 35-111. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give
this ordinance its most reasonable application. The definitions below are the same as or
based on the corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-1.2.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving the
surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to public
transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board of
Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans and
implementing ordinance(s). The County review agency may either be:
A County planning agency; or
A County water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if the
ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed in New
Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not necessarily be limited
to, development of project requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan Center as
designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or
hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement
of any building or structure, any mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change
in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a State permit; any activity reviewed by the County
Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC),
and municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A.
4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments, or
dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody or to a particular point
along a receiving waterbody.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the Urban
Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New Jersey
Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream corridors; natural
§ 35-111 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-111
35:176
heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or threatened species; large areas of
contiguous open space or upland forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and
groundwater recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified
using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's Endangered
and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind,
ice, or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of material
so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any "development" that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or
clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE—An area designated by the State Planning Commission concentrating facilities
and activities which are not organized in a compact form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or phosphorus,
which is essential to and promotes the development of organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association,
Township of Springfield, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive substance (except those regulated under
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)), thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the State, or to a domestic
treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into the ground
and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or gravity as a product
of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map and
adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the focus for much of
the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State Development
§ 35-111 LAND USE § 35-111
35:177
and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and the official map of these
goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that
runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is captured by separate
storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment and
related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater management basin may
either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a
permanent pool (a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or nonstructural
strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other method intended to control
or reduce stormwater runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce or control the
infiltration or groundwater recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal
nonstormwater discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in storm
sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be influenced
by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily caused by the Atlantic
Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD —
A neighborhood given priority access to State resources through the New Jersey
Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey Enterprise
Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within the
boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface
water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 35-112. GENERAL STANDARDS. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management Measures.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan Planning Area
(PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
a.
b. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
c. Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhoods.
§ 35-111 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-112
35:178
§ 35-113. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS.
§ 35-113.1. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
a. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be developed to
meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality standards in § 35-113. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to
meet these standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
b. The standards in this ordinance apply only to new major development and are
intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water quality and water
quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge.
a. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of a major development in
accordance with § 35-118.
b. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of concentrated
flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as documented in the
Department' Landscape Project or Natural Heritage Database established under
N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink)
and/or Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
c. The following linear development projects are exempt from the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements
of Subsections 35-113.3 and 113.4:
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the disturbed
areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the existing
conditions are maintained to the maximum extent practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or trail with
a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access is made of permeable
material.
d. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff
quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements of Subsections 35-113.3 and
113.4 may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing public roadway or
railroad; or the construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the project that
cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that through the
use of nonstructural and structural stormwater management strategies and
§ 35-112 LAND USE § 35-113.1
35:179
§ 35-113.2. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies. [Ord. No. 06-20
§ I]
measures, the option selected complies with the requirements of Subsections
35-113.3 and 113.4 to the maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements of
Subsections 35-113.3 and 113.4, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other rights to areas,
including the potential to obtain through condemnation lands not falling under
Subsection 3 above within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections 35-113.3 and 113.4 that were not achievable on site.
a. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections 35-113.3 and
113.4 shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management
strategies set forth herein into the design. The applicant shall identify the
nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures identified in
Subsection b below into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall
identify the strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
b. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated into site design
shall:
1. Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas particularly
susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
2. Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the flow of runoff
over impervious surfaces;
3. Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and vegetation;
4. Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction to
post-construction. "Time of concentration" is defined as the time it takes for
runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to
the point of interest within a watershed;
5. Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
6. Minimize soil compaction;
7. Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages retention and planting
of native vegetation and minimizes the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
8. Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems discharging into and
through stable vegetated areas;
9. Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or exposure of
pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or minimize the release of those
§ 35-113.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-113.2
35:180
pollutants into stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are not
limited to:
(a) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of trash and debris
in drainage systems, including features that satisfy Subsection (c) below;
(b) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and debris
from drainage systems;
(c) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain spills or other
harmful accumulations of pollutants at industrial or commercial
developments; and
(d) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance, applying fertilizer in
accordance with the requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
c. Site design features identified under Subsection b9(b) above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm
drain inlets. For purposes of this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see Subsection 3 herein.
1. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they use a
grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect stormwater from that
surface into a storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle safe
grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines
(April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area
of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across
the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets,
the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates
on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
2. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in that
curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or
more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be
no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest dimension.
3. This standard does not apply:
(a) Where the review agency determines that this standard would cause
inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably be overcome
by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
§ 35-113.2 LAND USE § 35-113.2
35:181
§ 35-113.3. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
(b) Where flows from the water quality design storm as specified in
Subsection 35-113.4a are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood)
that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and
floatable materials that could not pass through one of the following:
(1) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide (this
option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(2) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(c) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with
one inch spacing between the bars, to the elevation of the water quality
design storm as specified in Subsection 35-113.4a; or
(d) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the New
Jersey Register listed historic property.
d. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management measure to meet the
performance standards in Subsections 35-113.3 and 113.4 shall be dedicated to a
government agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate County Clerk's office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction
that ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
e. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual
may be obtained from the address identified in Subsection 35-115.2, or found on
the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
a. This subsection contains minimum design and performance standards to control
erosion, encourage and control infiltration and groundwater recharge, and control
stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major development.
1. The minimum design and performance standards for erosion control are those
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39
et seq. and implementing rules.
2. The minimum design and performance standards for groundwater recharge are
as follows:
(a) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations at § 35-114,
either:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the site
and its stormwater management measures maintain 100% of the
§ 35-113.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-113.3
35:182
average annual preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for
the site; or
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that the
increase of stormwater runoff volume from preconstruction to postconstruction
for the two-year storm is infiltrated.
(b) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to projects within
the "urban redevelopment area," or to projects subject to Subsection 3
below.
(c) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
(1) Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High pollutant
loading areas are areas in industrial and commercial developments
where solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/unloaded,
stored, or applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded or
stored; areas where hazardous materials are expected to be present
in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4;
areas where recharge would be inconsistent with Department
approved remedial action work plan or landfill closure plan and
areas with high risks for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations
and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
(2) Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material." "Source
material" means any material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source
of pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater.
Source materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials;
intermediate products; final products; waste materials; by-products;
industrial machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and
detergents that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
(d) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the groundwater
table and design the site so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts.
Potential adverse hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to,
exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference with the proper
operation of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other subsurface
structures in the vicinity or downgradient of the groundwater recharge
area.
3. In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design engineer
shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff calculations at
§ 35-114, complete one of the following:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that for
stormwater leaving the site, post-construction runoff hydrographs for the
two-, ten-, and 100-year storm events do not exceed, at any point in time,
§ 35-113.3 LAND USE § 35-113.3
35:183
§ 35-113.4. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
the preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm events;
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that there is no
increase, as compared to the preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff
rates of stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and 100-year storm
events and that the increased volume or change in timing of stormwater
runoff will not increase flood damage at or downstream of the site. This
analysis shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses and
projected land uses assuming full development under existing zoning and
land use ordinances in the drainage area;
(c) Design stormwater management measures so that the post-construction
peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and 100-year storm events are 50%,
75% and 80%, respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction stormwater runoff that is
attributable to the portion of the site on which the proposed development
or project is to be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damages
below the point of discharge; or
(d) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity analysis in
accordance with Subsections (a), (b) and (c) above shall only be applied
if the increased volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood
damages below the point of discharge.
b. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the definition of
major development shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District
for review and approval in accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and
erosion control. For the purposes of this section, "agricultural development" means
land uses normally associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for
sale. Such uses do not include the development of land for the processing or sale of
food and the manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
a. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the postconstruction
load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80% of
the anticipated load from the developed site, expressed as an annual average.
Stormwater management measures shall only be required for water quality control
if an additional one-quarter (1/4) acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater
runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed
under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from
this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two
hours. Water quality calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain
from the water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the
volume of runoff may take into account the implementation of non-structural and
structural stormwater management measures.
§ 35-113.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-113.4
35:184
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 HO 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
b. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents the presumed
removal rates for certain BMPs designed in accordance with the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection 35-115.2, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in Subsection 35-115.2. TSS reduction shall
be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative
removal rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design
engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved alternative rate or
method of calculating the removal rate shall be provided to the Department at the
following address: Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
c. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required 80% TSS
reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate
TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AxB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
§ 35-113.4 LAND USE § 35-113.4
35:185
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS % Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater Wetland 90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment Device See § 35-115.1c
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
d. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS removal rate shall
apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site in
which case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
e. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to reduce, to the
maximum extent feasible, the post-construction nutrient load of the anticipated load
from the developed site in stormwater runoff generated from the water quality
design storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and structural measures
that optimize nutrient removal while still achieving the performance standards in
Subsections 35-113.3 and 113.4.
f. Additional information and examples are contained in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual, which may be obtained from the address
identified in Subsection 35-115.2.
g. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4, stormwater
management measures shall be designed to prevent any increase in stormwater
runoff to waters classified as FW1.
h. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along all waters
designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial or intermittent streams
that drain into or upstream of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS
Quadrangle Maps or in the County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14
drainage area. These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional recreational
significance, exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional fisheries
significance of those established Category One waters. These areas shall be
designated and protected as follows:
1. The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water resource protection
area in accordance with one of the following:
(a) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be provided on
each side of the waterway, measured perpendicular to the waterway from
§ 35-113.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-113.4
35:186
the top of the bank outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where
the bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation
allowed to follow natural succession is provided.
(b) Encroachment within the designated special water resource protection
area under Subsection (a) above shall only be allowed where previous
development or disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only
be allowed where applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection area will be
maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the
remaining special water resource protection area be reduced to less than
150 feet as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
centerline of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be subject to review
and approval by the Department.
2. All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through the special
water resource protection area and shall comply with the Standard for Off-Site
Stability in the "Standards For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
3. If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the special water
resource protection area cannot comply with the Standard For Off-Site
Stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the special water
resource protection area, provided that:
(a) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet of the Category
One waterway;
(b) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this section shall
achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal rate;
(c) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on the receiving
waterway;
(d) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(e) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the appropriate
Department staff and Soil Conservation District staff to identify
necessary stabilization measures; and
(f) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be subject to review
and approval by the Department.
§ 35-113.4 LAND USE § 35-113.4
35:187
§ 35-114. CALCULATION OR STORMWATER RUNOFF AND
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE.
§ 35-114.1. Stormwater Runoff. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
4. A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a regional stormwater
management planning committee as an element of a regional stormwater
management plan, or by a municipality through an adopted municipal
stormwater management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection h herein has been approved by the Department
of Environmental Protection, then the provisions of the plan shall be the
applicable special water resource protection area requirements for that
waterway. A stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
Subsection h shall maintain or enhance the current functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area as defined in Subsection
1(a) above. In no case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow the
reduction of the Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
5. Paragraph h does not apply to the construction of one individual single family
dwelling that is not part of a larger development on a lot receiving preliminary
or final subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
a. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the following methods:
1. The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) methodology,
including the NRCS Runoff Equation and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as
described in the NRCS National Engineering Handbook Section 4 —
Hydrology and Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
2. The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational Method for
hydrograph computations.
b. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater recharge, there
is a presumption that the preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a
wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient"
applies to both the NRCS methodology at Subsection a1 and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection a2 above. A runoff coefficient or a
groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may be used on all or a
portion of the site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has
existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover
with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In addition,
there is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the land use
type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or
with good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is
§ 35-113.4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-114.1
35:188
§ 35-114.2. Groundwater Recharge. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the following:
The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for Evaluating Ground
Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is available from the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or
at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New
Jersey, 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
§ 35-115. STRUCTURAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURES.
§ 35-115.1. Standards, Guidelines and Use of Treatment Devices. [Ord. No. 06-20
§ I]
cultivation).
c. In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design engineer shall account
for all significant land features and structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions,
hedgerows, or culverts that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates and
volumes.
d. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design engineer shall
consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes of pervious and
impervious surfaces separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of
stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the NRCS Technical
Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods may be
employed.
e. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management measure is below
the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design
engineer shall take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of structural
stormwater management measures.
a. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to take into
account the existing site conditions, including, for example, environmentally
critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water
table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns;
and the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to minimize
maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure proper
functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet structure
as appropriate, and shall have parallel bars with one inch spacing between the
bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For elevations higher
than the water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure
shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or
1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one inch
§ 35-114.1 LAND USE § 35-115.1
35:189
§ 35-115.2. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In addition, the design of
trash racks must comply with the requirements of § 35-116.2a.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed, constructed,
and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion resistant. Measures that are
consistent with the relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this
requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin, the orifice
size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the minimum safety
standards for stormwater management basins at § 35-116.
b. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other stormwater management
measures may be utilized provided the design engineer demonstrates that the
proposed measure and its design will accomplish the required water quantity,
groundwater recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 35-113.
c. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements of § 35-113,
provided the pollutant removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
a. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be found in the
documents listed at Subsections 1 and 2 below, which are available from Maps and
Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State
Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as amended.
Information is provided on stormwater management measures such as:
bioretention systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells, extended
detention basins, infiltration structures, manufactured treatment devices,
pervious paving, sand filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater
Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as amended.
b. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
obtained from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey"
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and incorporated into
N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be obtained by contacting the
State Soil Conservation Committee or any of the Soil Conservation Districts
listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone number
of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
§ 35-115.1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-115.2
35:190
§ 35-116. SAFETY STANDARDS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
BASINS.
§ 35-116.1. Applicability. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through the proper design
and operation of stormwater management basins. This section applies to any new
stormwater management basin.
§ 35-116.2. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape
Provisions. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; (609)
292-5540;
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
3. The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location,
address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation District may be
obtained from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625, (609) 292-5540.
a. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and prevent the clogging
of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet from the
stormwater management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin outlets in
accordance with the following:
1. The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six-inch spacing
between the bars.
2. The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect the hydraulic
performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
3. The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to exceed 2.5
feet per second under the full range of stage and discharge, Velocity is to be
computed on the basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
4. The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid, durable, and
corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand a perpendicular live
loading of 300 lbs./feet square.
b. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the overflow structure. If
an outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the following
requirements:
1. The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but removable for
emergencies and maintenance.
2. The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
3. The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be rigid, durable, and
corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to withstand a perpendicular live
§ 35-115.2 LAND USE § 35-116.2
35:191
§ 35-116.3. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater management basins
may be granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing agency
(municipality, County or Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute
a threat to public safety.
§ 35-116.4. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin.
[Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
§ 35-117. REQUIREMENTS FOR A SITE DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER
PLAN.
§ 35-117.1. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
loading of 300 lbs./feet square.
c. For purposes of this subsection, escape provisions means the permanent installation
of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide easily accessible means of
egress from stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins shall
include escape provisions as follows:
1. If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure, escape provisions
shall be incorporated in or on the structure. With the prior approval of the
reviewing agency pursuant to Subsection 35-116.3, a freestanding outlet
structure may be exempted from this requirement.
2. Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new stormwater
management basins having a permanent pool of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet.
Such safety ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet
to six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be located one to 1 1/2
feet above the permanent water surface. See Subsection 35-116.4 for an
illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
3. In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior slope for an
earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be steeper than three horizontal
to one vertical.
a. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development subject to this
ordinance, the applicant shall submit all of the required components of the Checklist
for the Site Development Stormwater Plan at Subsection 35-117.3 as part of the
submission of the applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
§ 35-116.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-117.1
35:192
§ 35-117.2. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
The applicant's site development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision
or site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which municipal
approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall consult the Township Engineer
to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to determine if
the project meets the standards set forth in this ordinance.
§ 35-117.3. Checklist Requirements. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
The following information shall be required:
b. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the standards set forth in this
ordinance.
c. The applicant shall submit 10 copies of the materials listed in the checklist for site
development stormwater plans in accordance with Subsection 35-117.3.
a. Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require upstream tributary
drainage system information as necessary. It is recommended that the topographic
base map of the site be submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the
limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or greater,
showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as appropriate may indicate the
following: existing surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible
soils, perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and flood plains along with their appropriate buffer strips,
marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property lines, and significant natural and
man-made features not otherwise shown.
b. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of the natural and
man-made features of the site and its environs. This description should include a
discussion of soil conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the
site. Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular opportunities or constraints
for development.
c. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of the
topographical base map indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings,
roads, parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater management and
sediment control, and other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly
show areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover, including lawns
and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground water elevations. A written
description of the site plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
d. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide a
demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 35-112 through 35-115 are
being met. The focus of this plan shall be to describe how the site is being
developed to meet the objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater
quality and stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management and
§ 35-117.1 LAND USE § 35-117.3
35:193
§ 35-118. MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.
§ 35-118.1. Applicability. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
All developments subject to the requirements of this ordinance shall comply with the
requirements of this section.
§ 35-118.2. General Maintenance. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
source controls whenever possible.
e. Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following information, illustrated on
a map of the same scale as the topographic base map, shall be included:
1. Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface contours, land area to
be occupied by the stormwater management facilities and the type of
vegetation thereon, and details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
2. Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during and after
construction, including discharge provisions, discharge capacity for each
outlet at different levels of detention and emergency spillway provisions with
maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
f. Calculations.
1. Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the
predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for the design storms
specified in § 35-113.
2. When the proposed stormwater management control measures (e.g.,
infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils
report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs
or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil borings or soil
pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability
and distribution of soils present at the location of the control measure.
g. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the stormwater
management facility shall meet the maintenance requirements of § 35-118.
h. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or board reviewing
an application under this ordinance may, in consultation with the municipal
engineer, waive submission of any of the requirements in Subsections a through f
herein, when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will
not materially affect the review process.
a. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of a major development.
b. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative maintenance tasks and
schedules; cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash
removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
§ 35-117.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-118.2
35:194
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including replacement).
Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management measures are available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance
plan identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public agency
or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for maintenance, the
plan shall include documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater
management facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
c. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred to the owner or
tenant of an individual property in a residential development or project, unless such
owner/tenant owns or leases the residential development or project.
d. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under Subsection b is not a
public agency, the maintenance plan and future revisions based on Subsection g.
shall be recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
e. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to maintain the
function of the stormwater management measure, including repairs or replacement
to the structure; removal of sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas;
snow and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation; and
repair or replacement of non vegetated linings.
f. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Subsection b shall
maintain a detailed log of all preventative and corrective maintenance for the
structural stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all maintenancerelated
work orders.
g. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Subsection b shall
evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust
the plan and the deed as needed.
h. The person responsible for maintenance identified under Subsection b shall retain
and make available, upon request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and
documentation required by Subsections f and g.
i. The requirements of Subsections c and d do not apply to stormwater management
facilities that are dedicated to and accepted by the municipality or another
governmental agency.
j. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public
safety or public health, or if it is in need of maintenance or repair, the municipality
shall so notify the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and repair of the
facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal Engineer or his designee. The
municipality, in its discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting
maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to
perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality or County may immediately
proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
§ 35-118.2 LAND USE § 35-118.2
35:195
§ 35-119. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 06-20 § I]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or uses any
building, structure or land in violation of this ordinance, shall upon conviction, be liable
to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5. Each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
k. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Township from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
§ 35-118.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-119
35:196
ARTICLE XIII
Wind and Solar Energy
§ 35-120. SMALL WIND AND SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
§ 35-120.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-31 § II]
§ 35-120.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-31 § II]
ADMINISTRATOR — The Township of Springfield Zoning Officer.
APPEARANCE, COLOR, AND FINISH — The wind generator and the tower shall
remain painted or finished in the color or finish that was originally applied by the
manufacturer, unless a different color or finish is approved by the Administrator.
BOARD — The Township of Springfield or other authority having jurisdiction such as
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
GENERATOR — Equipment that converts energy from the wind and solar into
electricity. This term includes all associated mechanical and electrical conversion
components necessary to generate, store and/or transfer energy.
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER OR MET TOWER — A structure designed to support
the gathering of wind energy resource data, and includes the tower, base plate, anchors,
guy cables and hardware, anemometers (wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes,
booms to hold equipment anemometers and vanes, data logger, instrument wiring, and
a. The primary purpose of a wind or solar energy system will be to provide power for
the principal use of the property whereon said system is to be located and shall not
be for the generation of power for commercial purposes, although this provision
shall not be interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess power generated from time to
time from a wind or solar energy system designed to meet the energy needs of the
principal use. For the purposes of this subsection, the sale of excess power shall be
limited so that in no event an energy system is generating more energy for sale than
what is otherwise necessary to power the principal use on the property.
b. Wind and solar energy systems shall only be permitted as an accessory use on the
same lot as the principal use. All energy systems require approval from the Zoning
Officer and Construction Bureau within the Department of Engineering,
Construction Services and Code Enforcement prior to installation for residential
properties, and the Planning Board for nonresidential properties. Applications for
an energy system shall include information demonstrating compliance with the
provisions of this subsection. In the event that the Zoning Officer or Construction
Bureau within the Department of Engineering, Construction Services and Code
Enforcement does not believe the provisions of this subsection will be satisfied, an
applicant may request a variance. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-24]
c. Applicability of Section. This section shall apply to systems intended for the
provision of the electrical or mechanical power needs of the owner/operator of the
system; also, such a system shall be for one main building and its accessory
buildings only. For systems intended for uses other than the ones stated, the
Planning Board approval shall be required. Said approval shall cover the location
of the system (shown on a survey of the property).
§ 35-120 LAND USE § 35-120.2
35:197
any telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow
characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind information or to
characterize the wind resource at a given location.
OWNER — The individual or entity that intends to own and operate the small wind
energy system and/or a solar energy system in accordance with this Article.
ROTOR DIAMETER — The cross sectional dimensions of the circle swept by the
rotating blades of a wind-powered energy generator.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy system, as defined in this
subsection, that:
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A solar generator and all associated equipment,
including any base, foundation, structural support, wire, batteries or other components
necessary to fully utilize the solar generator.
TOTAL HEIGHT — In relation to a wind energy system utilizing a propeller blade
rotating on an axis horizontal to the ground, the vertical distance from the ground to the
tip of a wind generator blade when the tip is at its highest point. Total height means,
in relation to a wind energy system utilizing an axis vertical to the ground, the vertical
distance from the ground to the top of the axis.
TOWER — A monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that supports a wind
generator.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind generator and all associated equipment,
including any base, blade, foundation, nacelle, rotor, tower transformer, vane, wire,
inverter, batteries or other component necessary to fully utilize the wind generator.
§ 35-120.3. Standards. [Ord. No. 2010-31 § II]
a. Is used to generate electricity; and
Has a nameplate capacity of 10 kilowatts or less but in no instances more than the
average annual electrical usage of the building it serves.
b.
a. A small wind energy system shall be a permitted use in all zones, as an "accessory
structure," subject to the following requirements:
1. Minimum Lot Size. One-half acre, provided the lot size conforms to the height
requirements below.
2. Minimum Setbacks. For lots between 1/2 acre and three acres, wind turbines
shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to 100% of the height
of the structure including the blades. For lots larger than three acres, wind
turbines shall be set back from all property lines a distance of equal to 200%
of the height of the structure including the blades. No portion of the wind
generator shall extend beyond any overhead utility lines, unless written
permission is granted by the utility that owns and/or controls the lines.
3. Wind turbines shall not be permitted in any front yard.
4. Maximum Height. Freestanding wind turbines shall not exceed the maximum
height permitted for a principal building in the zone in which it is located.
§ 35-120.2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-120.3
35:198
5. No more than one wind turbine shall be permitted per property.
6. Wind turbines in residential zones mounted on roofs, shall not extend above
the roofline or exceed the maximum height permitted in the zone by more than
two feet. Wind turbines in nonresidential zones may be mounted on the roof
but shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the edge of the roof and shall
not extend more than 15 feet above the maximum building height permitted in
the zone.
7. Wind turbines on residential properties shall have a nameplate capacity of 10
kilowatts or less but in no instances more than the average annual electrical
usage of the building it serves.
8. Noise. All wind energy systems shall comply with the following:
(a) Between a residential use or zone, the sound levels shall comply with the
State of New Jersey ambient nighttime noise standards.
(b) In all other cases at a common property line sound levels of the wind
energy system shall not exceed 50 dBA.
(c) These levels may be exceeded during short-term events such as utility
outages and/or severe windstorms.
(d) Wind turbines shall be designed with an automatic brake or other similar
device to prevent over speeding and excessive pressure on the tower
structure.
9. Wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted, except to the extent
required by the FAA or other applicable authority.
10. All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and
secured to prevent unauthorized access.
11. The tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide step bolts, a
ladder, or other publicly accessible means of climbing the tower for a
minimum height of 12 feet above the ground.
12. All moving parts of the wind energy system shall be a minimum of 15 feet
above ground level.
13. The blades on the wind energy system shall be constructed of a corrosiveresistant
material.
14. All guy wires or any part of the wind energy system shall be located on the
same lot as the energy system.
15. A permit may be denied if in the discretion of the Township Engineer or
Assistant Township Engineer the proposed small wind energy system is shown
to be unsafe at a proposed location.
b. Solar Energy Systems.
1. Solar panels shall be permitted as a rooftop installation in any zoning district.
§ 35-120.3 LAND USE § 35-120.3
35:199
The solar panels shall not exceed a height of eight inches from the rooftop.
In no event shall the placement of the solar panels result in a total height
including building and panels than what is permitted in the zoning district in
which they are located for the principal building.
2. Solar panels shall be permitted as ground arrays in accordance with the
following:
(a) All ground arrays shall be set back a distance of 20 feet from all property
lines in a residential zoning district or in conformance with the bulk
standards for accessory structures in commercial districts as provided
herein.
(b) Ground arrays shall not be permitted in a front yard.
(c) Ground arrays shall be located so that any glare is directed away from an
adjoining property.
(d) Ground arrays shall not exceed a height of 15 feet.
c. Wind and solar energy systems shall not be used for displaying any advertising
except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the system.
In no case shall any identification be visible from a property line.
d. The design of wind or solar energy systems shall, to the extent reasonably possible,
use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend into the
natural setting and existing environment.
e. An applicant shall locate a wind or solar energy system so that tree removal is not
required to the extent practical.
f. The installation of a wind or solar energy system shall conform to the National
Electric Code as adopted by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
g. The installation of a wind or solar energy system is subject to all Jersey Central
Power and Light Company requirements for interconnection.
h. Signs. There shall be no signs that are visible from any public road posted on a
small wind generator system or any associated building, except for the
manufacturer's or installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner
identification.
i. Utility Notifications and Interconnection. Small wind energy and solar systems that
connect to the electric utility shall comply with the New Jersey's Net Metering and
Interconnection Standards for Class I Renewable Energy Systems at N.J.A.C.
14:4-9.
j. Met Towers. A met tower shall be permitted under the same standards, permit
requirements, restoration requirements and permit procedures as a small wind
energy system.
k. Standards for and Regulation of Small Wind Energy Systems.
1. Construction. Tower construction shall be in accordance with the appropriate
§ 35-120.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-120.3
35:200
sections of the Basic Building Code as adopted by the State of New Jersey,
and any future amendments and/or revisions to same.
2. Electromagnetic Interference (EMI). Wind energy conversion system
generators and alternators shall be filtered and/or shielded so as to prevent the
emission of radio frequency energy which would cause any harmful
interference with radio and/or television broadcasting or reception and shall
comply with the provisions of Section 47 of the Federal Code of Regulations,
Part 15 and subsequent revisions governing said emissions.
3. The structural design shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer,
registered in the State of New Jersey, certifying that the structural design
complies with all of the standards set forth for safety and stability in all
applicable codes then in effect in the State of New Jersey and all sections
referred to hereinabove. The support tower shall be designed to survive a wind
of 120 mph with a three second, 140 mph gust. The design calculations shall
include a soil boring at the tower location and a soils analysis. If the soils of
the site are not satisfactory for the intended construction, the plans shall be
designed to eliminate or overcome the poor soils conditions.
4. Labeling Requirements. A minimum of one sign shall be posted near ground
level on the tower structure warning of high voltage. In addition, the following
information shall be posted on a label or labels on the generator or alternator
of the small wind energy system.
(a) The maximum power output of the system and the wind speed at which it
is achieved.
(b) Nominal voltage and maximum current.
(c) Manufacturer's name and address, serial number and model number.
(d) Maximum survival wind speed and the emergency and normal shutdown
procedures.
5. Utility Company Notification. Jersey Central Power and Light Company shall
be notified in writing of any proposed interface with that company's grid prior
to installing such interface and shall conform to any legislated requirements
governing installations of wind energy conversion systems so as to comply
with the Utility Tariff specifications.
6. Safety. The wind energy conversion system manufacturers shall document that
the wind energy conversion system model has operated safely in atmospheric
conditions for a period of not less than three months and has provided energy
not less than the equivalent of 25% of its predicted annual energy output under
a twelve-mile-per-hour annual wind regime.
l. Miscellaneous.
1. All electric lines/utility wires shall be buried under ground.
2. Any mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for operation,
including a building for batteries and storage cells, shall been closed with a
§ 35-120.3 LAND USE § 35-120.3
35:201
six-foot high fence. The supporting tower shall also be enclosed with a sixfoot
high fence unless the base of the tower is not climbable for a distance of
12 feet.
3. When a building is necessary for storage cells or related mechanical
equipment, the building may not exceed 140 square feet in area nor eight feet
in height and must be located at least the number of fee equal to the height of
the tower from any property line.
m. Abandonment.
1. A small wind energy system or ground array(s) solar energy system that is outof-
service for a continuous twelve-month period will be deemed to have been
abandoned.
2. The Administrator may issue a Notice of Abandonment to the owner of a small
wind energy or ground array solar energy system that is deemed to have been
abandoned. The notice shall be sent return receipt requested.
3. The owner shall have the right to respond to the Notice of Abandonment
within 30 days from notice receipt date.
4. If the owner provides information that demonstrates the small wind energy or
ground array solar energy system has not been abandoned, the Administrator
shall withdraw the Notice of Abandonment and notify the owner that the
notice has been withdrawn.
5. If the Administrator determines that the small wind energy or ground array
solar energy system has been abandoned, the owner of the energy system shall
remove the facility in its entirety at the Owner's sole expense within six
months after the owner received the Notice of Abandonment.
6. When an owner of a wind or solar energy system has been notified to remove
same and has not done so six months after receiving said notice, then the
Administrator may remove such system and place a lien upon the property for
the cost of the removal. If removed by the owner, a demolition permit shall be
obtained and the facility shall be removed. Upon removal, the site shall be
cleaned, restored and revegetated to blend with the existing surrounding
vegetation at the time of abandonment.
n. Permit Requirements.
1. Permit. A zoning permit shall be required for the installation of a small wind
energy and/or solar energy system. Installation of a small wind energy and/or
solar energy system on a nonresidential property shall require site plan
approval. A nonresidential application may be eligible for waiver of site plan
approval subject to the recommendation of the Development Review
Committee and approval of the Planning Board.
2. Documents. The zoning permit or site plan application shall be accompanied
by a plot plan which includes the following:
(a) Property lines and physical dimensions of the property;
§ 35-120.3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-120.3
35:202
§ 35-120.4. Violations. [Ord. No. 2010-31 § II]
§ 35-120.5. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2010-31 § II]
(b) Location, dimension, and types of existing major structures on the
property;
(c) Location, dimension, and type of the proposed energy system;
(d) The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the property;
(e) Any overhead utility lines; and
(f) Small wind energy system specification, including manufacturer and
model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type (freestanding or guyed).
3. Fees. The application for a zoning permit for a small wind energy and/or solar
energy system must be accompanied by the fee required.
4. Expiration. A permit issued pursuant to this ordinance shall expire if:
(a) The energy system is not installed and functioning within 24 months from
the date the permit is issued; or
(b) The energy system is out of service or otherwise unused for a continuous
twelve-month period.
o. Zoning Permit Procedure.
1. An owner shall submit an application to the Administrator for a zoning permit
for a small wind energy and/or solar energy system. The Administrator shall
submit the application to the Fire Chief and Township Engineer for fire and
structural safety review.
2. The Administrator shall issue a permit or deny the application within one
month as consistent with Municipal Land Use Law of the date on which the
application is received.
3. If the application is approved, the Administrator will return one signed copy
of the application with the zoning permit and retain the other copy with the
application.
4. If the application is rejected, the Administrator will notify the applicant in
writing and provide a written statement of the reason why the application was
rejected. The applicant may appeal the Administrator's decision pursuant to the
appropriate appeal authority. The applicant may reapply if the deficiencies
specified by the Administrator are resolved.
a. It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a small wind and/or
solar energy system that is not in compliance with this ordinance.
b. Small wind and/or solar energy systems installed prior to the adoption of this
ordinance are exempt from the requirements of this ordinance, except for the
provisions regarding abandonment.
§ 35-120.3 LAND USE § 35-120.5
35:203
§ 35-120.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-31 § II]
§ 35-120.7. Severability. [Ord. No. 2010-31 § II]
The provisions of this ordinance are severable, and the invalidity of any section,
subdivision, paragraph or other part of this ordinance shall not affect the validity or
effectiveness of the remainder of the ordinance.
a. This ordinance shall be administered by the Administrator or other official as
designated.
b. The Administrator may enter any property for which a permit has been issued under
this ordinance to conduct an inspection to determine whether the conditions stated
in the permit have been met.
c. The Administrator may issue orders to abate any violation of this ordinance.
d. The Administrator may issue a citation for any violation of this ordinance.
e. The Administrator may refer any violation of this ordinance to legal counsel for
enforcement.
a. Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this ordinance shall be
subject to enforcement and penalties as stipulated in chapter and section of the
appropriate zoning code.
b. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Township of Springfield
from using any other lawful means to enforce this ordinance.
§ 35-120.5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § 35-120.7
35:204
Board of Health
§ 35-120.7 LAND USE § 35-120.7
35:205

Chapter BOH-AO
BOARD OF HEALTH ADOPTING ORDINANCE
§ 35-120.7 BOARD OF HEALTH ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-120.7
BOH-AO:1

Chapter BH1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Editor's Note: Ordinance No. BOH 2-2005 was adopted on April 13, 2005;
Ordinance No. BOH 2-2009 was adopted March 11, 2009.
§ 35-120.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 35-120.7
BH1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
§ BH1-1. POWERS OF BOARD. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § II; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § 11]
The Board shall exercise its powers in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:3-31 et seq. and Title
8 of the New Jersey Administrative Code, which are hereby incorporated by reference.
§ BH1-2. ADOPTION OF CODE. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § II; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § II]
All the ordinances of the Board of Health of the Township of Springfield of a general
and permanent nature, as codified, are ordained as general ordinances of the Board of
Health and are adopted as part of the Revised General Ordinances of the Board of Health
of the Township of Springfield, County of Union, State of New Jersey.
§ BH1-3. WHEN EFFECTIVE. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § II; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § II]
All the provisions of that part of the Revised General Ordinances of the Board of Health
of the Township of Springfield, County of Union, State of New Jersey, adopted by
the Board of Health shall be in force and effect on and after the effective date of this
Article.67
§ BH1-4. REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § II;
Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § II]
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of Health of the
Township of Springfield prior to April 13, 2005, and contained in this Revised General
Ordinances of the Board of Health, Township of Springfield, County of Union, State
of New Jersey, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this Article68,
except as hereinafter provided in Section BH1-5; and excepting all ordinances adopted
by the Board of Health or Township Council affecting Public Health or environmental
policy not included in this Revised General Ordinances of the Board of Health of the
Springfield Board of Health, Township of Springfield, County of Union, State of New
Jersey.
§ BH1-5. EXCEPTIONS TO GENERAL REPEAL. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § II;
Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § II]
The repeal provided for in Section 1-4, of this Article shall not affect:
a. Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any
contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Article.
b. Any prosecution, action, suit, or other proceeding pending or any judgment
67. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. BOH 2-2005 was adopted on April 13, 2005; Ordinance No. BOH 2-2009 was adopted
March 11, 2009.
68. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. BOH 2-2005 was adopted on April 13, 2005; Ordinance No. BOH 2-2009 was adopted
March 11, 2009.
§ BH1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH1-5
BH1:3
§ BH1-6. COPIES OF CODE ON FILE. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § II; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § II]
Sufficient copies of that part of the Revised General Ordinances of the Board of Health
adopted by the Board of Health of the Township of Springfield, Union County, New
Jersey, have been filed in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health of the
Township of Springfield and shall remain there for the use and examination of the public
until final action is taken on this Article.
§ BH1-7. ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS TO CODE. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005
§ II; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § II]
Any and all additions or amendments to said Revised General Ordinances of the Board
of Health, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Health
of the Township of Springfield to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be
incorporated in said Revised General Ordinances of the Board of Health so that reference
to the Revised General Ordinances of the Board of Health of the Township of Springfield
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
§ BH1-8. AVAILABILITY OF CODE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION. [Ord. No.
BOH 2-2005 § II; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § II]
One copy of that part of the Revised General Ordinances of the Board of Health adopted
by the Board of Health of the Township of Springfield, Union County, New Jersey,
shall be and remain on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health of the
Township of Springfield and made available to persons desiring to examine same if this
Article shall be adopted and while the same shall be in effect.
§ BH1-9. SEVERABILITY OF CODE PROVISIONS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005
§ II; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § II]
Every section of that part of the Revised General Ordinances of the Board of Health
of the Township of Springfield adopted by the Board of Health and every part of each
section is an independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or
part thereof to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause does not affect the
validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
§ BH1-10. SEVERABILITY OF ORDINANCE PROVISIONS. [Ord. No. BOH
2-2005 § II; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § II]
Each section of the ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of any section or
part thereof to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
rendered on or prior to the effective date of this Article.
c. Any provision of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health of the Township
of Springfield creating employments, positions, or offices and fixing duties therefor
which are not provided in the Revised General Ordinances of the Board of Health
hereby adopted and which are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
§ BH1-5 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH1-11
BH1:4
§ BH1-11. EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS ARTICLE. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § II;
Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § II]
This Article shall take effect immediately after final adoption and publication according
to law.
§ BH1-12. AMENDMENTS, REVISIONS, CHANGES, AND DELETIONS
ADOPTED UPON ADOPTION OF THE REVISED GENERAL ORDINANCES
OF THE BOARD OF HEALTH. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § II; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § II]
In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health of the Township of
Springfield for adoption and revision as part of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Board of Health of the Township of Springfield, County of Union, State of New Jersey,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
of the Township of Springfield that all such changes be adopted as part of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Board of Health of the Township of Springfield, County
of Union, State of New Jersey, as if the ordinances so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
§ BH1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § BH1-12
BH1:5

Chapter BH2
ANIMALS
§ BH2-1. INOCULATION REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005
§ III; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § III]
No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog or cat within the municipal limits of
the Township of Springfield which is not inoculated against rabies; provided, however,
that dogs or cats which have not attained the age of six months shall not be required
to be inoculated, and further provided that any dog or cat may be exempt from the
requirements of such inoculation for a specified period of time by the Board of Health
upon the presentation of a certificate from a veterinarian stating that, because of infirmity
or other physical condition, the inoculation of such dog or cat for said specified period
of time shall be deemed inadvisable by said veterinarian.
§ BH2-2. ANNUAL INOCULATION. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § III; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § III]
The inoculation against rabies shall be performed each year and shall be performed prior
to the procurement of the dog or cat license required by ordinance of the Township of
Springfield, or evidence shall be presented at the time of procurement of the dog or cat
license by the dog or cat owner that a three-year inoculation has been performed and that
the inoculation has not expired.
§ BH2-3. PURPOSE AND INTENT. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § III; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § III]
§ BH2-4. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § III; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ III]
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH — Shall mean the agency of the Township of Springfield
("Township") charged with enforcing the requirements of Title 26 of the New Jersey
Statutes and created pursuant to Chapter 2 of the Township Code.
a. It is imperative that the public is protected from the effects of rabies epizootic to the
greatest extent technically and economically possible. Wildlife rabies cannot be
controlled, but spill over into our domestic animal population is preventable. This
Article is intended to serve as a means of developing a long-term solution to the
rabies problem, as well as implementation of appropriate measures to reduce the
problem before demands for solutions and protection overwhelm available
resources and capabilities to effectively respond to those demands.
b. An effective barrier can only be established if both dogs and cats are required to
have rabies vaccination. By instituting and maintaining mandatory dog and cat
licensing and vaccination, the Board of Health will be able to assess the level of
immunity in these species within the Township and provide needed resources to
meet the rabies challenge.
§ BH1-12 ANIMALS § BH2-4
BH2:1
CAT — Shall mean any member of the domestic feline species: male, female or
neutered.
CAT OR DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any cat or dog which has attained
the age of seven months, or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, where cats for sale are kept or displayed.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — Shall mean any person or agency designated or certified
by the State of New Jersey to enforce provisions relating to licensing and vaccination of
dogs and cats.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the licensing authority is hereby designated
as the Township Clerk.
LICENSING YEAR — Shall mean the period from January 1 to December 31 of the
following year during which time the license required by this Article shall be in effect.
NEUTERED—Shall mean rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — Shall mean every person having custody of a dog or cat and every person
who has such dog or cat in his or her keeping or who harbors or maintains a dog or cat
or knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by that
person. The owner of a dog or cat shall be considered the initial owner of its puppies or
kittens. A person who continually feeds a stray dog or cat shall also be considered its
owner.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or
institution.
§ BH2-5. RABIES VACCINATION. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § III; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § III]
a. Vaccination and License Requirements. No person shall own, keep, harbor or
maintain any dog or cat over seven months old unless it is vaccinated and licensed
and except in compliance with the provisions of this Article. This section shall not
apply to cats held in a cattery, a State or Federal research facility, a veterinary
establishment where dogs or cats are kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical or other
treatments or licensed animal shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
b. Vaccination. Except as provided in paragraph d, all dogs or cats shall be vaccinated
against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium
of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, and with a rabies
vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture and the United
States Department of Human Services.
c. Vaccination Certificate. The owner of each dog or cat must, as evidence of such
vaccination, produce a certificate of vaccination, which shall be in a form
recommended by the State and, if no form is so recommended by the State, in a
form approved by the Board of Health. Said vaccination must be current through at
least November 30 of the following licensing year.
§ BH2-4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH2-5
BH2:2
§ BH2-6. LICENSING REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § III; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § III]
d. Exemptions. Any dog or cat may be exempt from the vaccination requirements for
a specified period of time by the Board of Health upon presentation of a
veterinarian's certificate stating that, because of an infirmity of other physical
condition, regimen or therapy, the inoculation of such dog or cat is deemed
inadvisable.
a. License Number Displayed. Any person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog or cat
of licensing age shall annually apply for and procure from the licensing authority
through the Township Clerk, upon payment of the prescribed fee, a license and
official registration tag with license number for each dog or cat so owned, kept or
harbored and shall place upon such dog or cat a collar or other device with the
license number securely fastened or displayed. Acceptable methods of displaying a
license number shall include, but are not limited to, breakaway or elastic collars.
License tags are not transferable.
b. Time for Applying for License.
1. The owner of any dog or cat in the Township shall make application for a
license or renewal thereof on or before January 1 of each year. Only one
license and registration tag shall be required in the licensing year for any dog
or cat in the Township of Springfield.
2. In the case of dogs or cats that become licensing age after January 31 but
before December 31 of the same year, the owner shall make application for a
license tag for such dog or cat within 10 days after acquisition of age
attainment. If a dog or cat becomes licensing age during the month of January,
the owner need only make application for a license tag for such dog or cat prior
to January 31 for the new licensing year.
c. Dogs or Cats Brought into Jurisdiction.
1. Any person who brings into or causes to be brought into the Township any dog
or cat currently licensed in another municipality in this State or any other state
through, at least, December 31 of the current licensing year and providing
evidence to the licensing authority through the Township Clerk of the
registration tag shall be permitted to keep said dog or cat within the Township
through the current licensing year ending December 31 so long as said dog or
cat is vaccinated against rabies through November 30.
2. Except as provided in paragraph c1 above, any person who brings into or
causes to be brought into the Township any unlicensed dog or cat, shall not be
permitted to keep the same within the Township for a period of more than 10
days unless such person shall have applied for a license and registration tag for
each such dog or cat within that time period.
d. Application, Contents, Preservation of Information. The application for a dog or cat
license or renewal thereof shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the
dog or cat, also the name, street and post office address of the owner and the person
who shall keep or harbor such dog or cat. The information on said application and
§ BH2-5 ANIMALS § BH2-6
BH2:3
the registration number issued for the dog or cat shall be preserved for a period of
three years by the licensing authority.
e. License Forms and Tags. License forms and official tags shall be furnished by the
licensing authority through the Township Clerk and shall be numbered serially, and
shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the municipality.
f. Evidence of Inoculation. The licensing authority shall not grant a license and
official registration tag for any dog or cat unless the owner provides a vaccination
certificate pursuant to Section BH2-5c above or the dog or cat has been certified
exempt as provided in Section BH2-5d above. The rabies inoculation shall be
administered by a duly licensed veterinarian permitted by law to do it.
g. License Fee Schedule. Effective January 1, 2006, and for each successive licensing
year or portion thereof a payment of $9 for each unneutered dog or cat and $6 for
each neutered dog or cat. Persons who fail to obtain a license as required within the
time period specified herein shall be subject to a delinquent fee of $2 per month,
with a maximum of $10.
h. Fees, Renewals; Expiration Date of License. The fee for the renewal of license and
registration tag shall be the same as for an original license. Each original license
and registration tag and renewal thereof shall expire on the 31st day of December,
in the following year.
i. Loss of License. If a license tag is misplaced or lost, the licensing authority through
the Township Clerk may issue a duplicate license and/or registration tag for that
particular at a fee of $1, effective January 1, 2006 at a fee of $5.
j. Proof of License. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person owning,
keeping, maintaining or harboring a dog or cat, upon request of any health official,
police officer, animal control officer or other authorized person.
k. Interfering with Persons. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone
authorized or empowered to perform any duties under this Article.
l. Disposition of Fees Collected.
1. License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions of
this Article shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the Township of Springfield,
and shall be placed in a trust account of the Township of Springfield and shall
be used for the following purposes only:
(a) Collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs or cats liable to seizure.
(b) For local prevention and control of rabies.
(c) Providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the Board of Health
for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to rabies.
(d) For administering the provisions of this Article.
2. Such money shall be used to help defray the costs incurred by a resident of the
Township to pick up injured, deceased or wild animals that do not belong to
them.
§ BH2-6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH2-7
BH2:4
§ BH2-7. IMPOUNDMENT AND RECOVERY OF DOGS OR CATS. [Ord. No.
BOH 2-2005 § III; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § III]
a. An agent designated by the licensing authority may take dogs or cats into custody
and impound and later destroy them, release them to the owner, or offer them for
adoption, as provided in this section, in the following situations:
1. The owner does not produce a current license or registration tag for a dog or
cat required to be licensed.
2. A dog or cat is suspected to be a stray, abandoned, diseased, or to have bitten
a person or other animal, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:4-82.
b. If any dog or cat is taken into custody whose owner is known or which is wearing a
registration tag, an authorized agent shall attempt to contact the owner. If the dog
or cat is not claimed by the owner or contact cannot be made with the owner within
48 hours of seizure, a notice in writing will be sent to the owner stating that the dog
or cat has been seized and is subject to being offered for adoption or destroyed if
not claimed within 14 days after the service of the notice.
c. Notice under this section shall be deemed to be effective if served personally, or by
leaving it at the person's usual last known place of abode or at the address given in
the license application or by mailing to any such address by United States mail,
postage prepaid.
d. An authorized agent of the licensing authority may cause a dog or cat to be offered
for adoption or destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible and
consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:22-19, 14 days after seizure, provided
that:
1. The dog or cat was not wearing a valid registration tag at the time of seizure
and the owner is unknown;
2. A notice was served as provided and the dog or cat was not claimed; or
3. The owner or person keeping or harboring a dog or cat, which was unlicensed
at the time of seizure, does not, within seven days, produce a valid license and
registration tag for the dog or cat.
e. Whether or not the dog or cat is claimed, the owner is responsible for:
1. All maintenance charges for the dog or cat.
2. All expenses involved in preparing the dog or cat for submission to appropriate
authorities.
f. No impounded dog or cat shall be sold or otherwise made available for the purpose
of experimentation.
g. After observation, any impounded dog or cat shall be reported immediately to the
Health Officer of the Township.
h. If an owner requests pickup of a dog or cat to be disposed, including any puppies or
kittens born to the parent dog or cat, the owner shall be responsible for all expenses
§ BH2-7 ANIMALS § BH2-7
BH2:5
§ BH2-8. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § III; Ord.
No. BOH 02-2009 § III]
Where no other penalty is established by law, any person who violates any portion of this
Article shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $50 for each offense, except that if
a person is merely delinquent in licensing said dog or cat, such person shall pay a fine of
$2 per month to a maximum of $10. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
in connection with disposal of the unwanted animal(s).
§ BH2-7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH2-8
BH2:6
Chapter BH3
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES
§ BH2-8 FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES § BH2-8
BH3:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
§ BH3-1. ADOPTION OF STANDARDS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § IV; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § IV]
A Code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and beverage vending
machines and licensure thereof, prohibiting the sale or possession with intent to sell
through vending machines of adulterated or misbranded foods or drinks, authorizing
inspection of vending machines and operations connected therewith and fixing penalties
for violations is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69 to 26:3-69.6. A copy
of said Code is annexed hereto and made part hereof without the inclusion of the text
thereof herein.
§ BH3-2. TITLE. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § IV; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § IV]
The Code established and adopted by this Article is described and commonly known as
the "Sanitation Requirements for the Vending of Food and Beverages" N.J.A.C. 8:24,
Chapter 24.
§ BH3-1 FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES § BH3-2
BH3:3

ARTICLE II
Licensing
§ BH3-3. LICENSES REQUIRED. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § IV; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § IV]
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk or employee,
either for himself or for any other person or for any body corporate or as an officer of any
corporation, or otherwise, to maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location
in this municipality one or more machines or devices offered for public use which, upon
insertion of a coin, coins or token or by other means, dispenses unit servings of food
or beverages, either in bulk or package, without first having applied for and procured a
license for each such machine or device from the Board of Health of this municipality or
without complying with any and all of the provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending
Machine Code of New Jersey (1961), as adopted and/or amended by this Board.
§ BH3-4. LICENSE FEES; EXPIRATION OF LICENSES. [Ord. No. BOH
2-2005 § IV; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § IV]
§ BH3-5. APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF LICENSES. [Ord. No.
BOH 2-2005 § IV; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § IV]
Application for and issuance of the licenses referred to in BH3-3 above shall be made
in conformity with the provisions of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of
New Jersey (1961), as adopted or amended by the Board of Health of this municipality.
Such licenses are not transferable.
§ BH3-6. SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR REINSTATEMENT OF
LICENSES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § IV; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § IV]
Licenses issued under the authority of this Article may be suspended, revoked or
reinstated by the Board of Health of this municipality pursuant to the provisions of
the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961), as adopted or
amended by said Board of Health.
§ BH3-7. INTERSTATE COMMERCE. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § IV; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § IV]
No provision of this Article shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful burden on
either interstate commerce or any activity of the State or Federal government.
a. The fees for licenses as required by Section BH3-3 above for the purpose of raising
revenue for regulation and control to be paid annually to this municipality are
hereby fixed as follows: a license fee of $50 per machine (effective January 1,
2006), per year, for all food and beverage vending machines, except for those as
noted in Section BH3-3, which shall be exempt from the payment of any fee.
b. All licenses issued under the authority of this Article shall expire on the 31st day of
December each year.
c. License fees shall be paid to the Board of Health.
§ BH3-3 FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES § BH3-8
BH3:5
§ BH3-8. NUISANCES DECLARED. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § IV; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § IV]
Premises on which food and beverage vending machines or devices are operated and
maintained in violation of the provisions of this Article are hereby declared to be
nuisances and detrimental to the public health.
§ BH3-9. RECOVERY OF COSTS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § IV; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § IV]
The Board of Health may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred by it in
the removal or abatement of any nuisance, as declared in Section BH3-8 of this Article,
from any person who shall have caused or allowed such nuisance to exist or from any
owner, tenant or occupant of premises who, after notice in writing, fails to abate said
nuisance within such time as shall be specified therein, but not less than five days from
the date of service thereof. A duplicate of the notice shall be left with one or more of the
tenants or occupants of the premises. If the owner resides out of the State or cannot be
so notified speedily, such notice shall be left at that place or premises with a tenant or
occupant thereof or posted on the premises, and such action shall be considered proper
notification to the owner, tenant or occupant thereof.
§ BH3-10. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § IV; Ord.
No. BOH 02-2009 § IV]
Where no other penalty is established by law, any person, firm or corporation who shall
violate any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine of not less than $50, nor more than $2,000. Each day the same is violated shall be
deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ BH3-8 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH3-10
BH3:6
Chapter BH4
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
§ BH4-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § V; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § V]
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the meanings indicated:
OFFAL, REFUSE, RUBBISH, GARBAGE AND COMBUSTIBLE AND
NONCOMBUSTIBLE WASTE—Shall be interchangeable and shall mean and include
the following:
§ BH4-2. REFUSE RECEPTACLES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § V; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § V]
§ BH4-3. PREPARATION OF REFUSE FOR COLLECTION. [Ord. No. BOH
2-2005 § V; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § V]
a. Refuse, garbage and combustible and/or noncombustible waste solids.
Animal and/or vegetable waste solids resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
b.
Combustible waste, yard trimmings, rags, wood, cardboard and waste solids of
a nonvolatile or non-explosive nature. This section shall not apply to building
materials, trees, branches, earth, stones or industrial wastes.
c.
d. Non-putrescible solid wastes of both combustible and noncombustible wastes.
Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including
garbage, rubbish, ashes and solid market and industrial wastes.
e.
a. The owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of every dwelling house or other
premises where waste accumulates shall provide and keep on such premises
sufficient and suitable receptacles with tight-fitting covers for receiving and holding
the waste.
b. Sufficient is defined for the purpose of this section to be at least one receptacle for
each family unit or other occupant of a premises and at least one receptacle for each
commercial or business establishment where release shall accumulate; but each
occupant of a premises shall provide sufficient receptacles to store all waste which
may be accumulated between the times when such refuse is disposed of as
hereinafter provided.
c. Suitable is defined to be a watertight metal, rubber or plastic receptacle with a tightfitting
cover so constructed as to prevent spilling or leakage of its contents.
d. Receptacles shall be conveniently located on premises for the storage of refuse and
maintained in such a manner with the cover in place as to prevent creation of a
nuisance or menace to public health.
a. Garbage shall be thoroughly and completely drained of all liquids and placed in a
suitable container.
§ BH3-10 GARBAGE AND REFUSE § BH4-3
BH4:1
§ BH4-4. FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION. [Ord. No. 2-2005 § V; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § V]
§ BH4-5. REFUSE DISPOSAL. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § V; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § V]
§ BH4-6. LICENSING, RATES AND COLLECTION. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005
§ V; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § V]
The licensing of refuse collection, the setting of rates for residential service and the
appropriate rules and regulations covering the same are now under the jurisdiction of
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
§ BH4-7. VIOLATION AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § V; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § V]
Where no other penalty is established by law, any person violating any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50, or more than $2,000. Each day the
same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
b. Combustible or noncombustible waste of such a nature that it cannot be deposited
in a receptacle shall be securely and properly tied into bundles or packages to
prevent spilling or scattering.
a. The person occupying any premises whereon a business or industry is conducted
shall arrange for the removal of refuse from such premises each day unless
sufficient and suitable facilities are provided and used for the storage of such refuse
within a building on such premises until the refuse is removed.
b. The person occupying any premises shall be required to arrange for the pickup or
collection of refuse from the premises at least once a week when the premises is
being occupied and used by such person.
a. Every person, whether he is the owner, tenant or occupant of any dwelling house,
and every owner, lessor or agent of an apartment house or tenement house shall
cause all garbage and refuse to be removed from the premises of which he is the
owner, tenant or occupant thereof at least twice each week.
b. No garbage or refuse shall be burned, buried or otherwise disposed of by any person
on any property not licensed by the State of New Jersey for such disposal.
§ BH4-3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH4-7
BH4:2
Chapter BH5
SANITARY REGULATIONS
§ BH4-7 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH4-7
BH5:1

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ BH5-1. TITLE. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
This chapter shall be known and designated as the "Sanitary Code of the Board of Health
of the Township of Springfield, Revision of 2005."
§ BH5-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ VI]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
herein given to them:
AGENT—Shall mean the authorized agent or authorized agents of the Board of Health
of the Township of Springfield.
BOARD — Shall mean the Board of Health of the Township of Springfield, or its
official representative, except where otherwise specified, when the Board is not in
session.
LICENSE — Shall mean a written authorization which may be granted at its discretion
by the Board or its agent, upon payment of the required fee, permitting the conduct of a
designated business or the performance of specified acts for the period stipulated and in
strict accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Sanitary Code and laws of
the State of New Jersey.
PERMIT — Shall mean a temporary authorization to do a single act or acts of short
duration, but in all other respects shall be the same as a license.
PERSON — Shall mean any person or persons, corporation or association of persons;
and "he," "his," or "him" shall include those of the female sex.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Springfield, New Jersey.
§ BH5-3. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ VI]
a. Any member of this Board or any of its agent(s) of the Board of Health shall make
inspections and examinations required to be enforced by the Board, for any
provision of this chapter, or any ordinance, regulation, resolution, or order of this
Board upon exhibiting official identification. In making said inspection and
examination, it shall be lawful for said person to enter in or upon any premises,
public or private, for the purpose of health protection to the extent permitted by
N.J.S.A. 26:3-45 et seq.
b. Any person who shall prevent, obstruct or resist any member agent(s) of this Board,
acting under and by the authority of this Board in the performance of his duty shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000 and not less than $50 in the discretion
of the Court, upon conviction thereof. In the event a property owner or occupant
fails to abate any nuisance as directed by the Board, the Board may in a summary
manner abate such nuisance and may recover the expenses relative to same through
a civil action. Further, the Board may institute an action for injunctive relief in the
Superior Court and may recover costs attendant to the same.
§ BH5-1 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-3
BH5:3
§ BH5-4. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord.
No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
c. Every notice or order required to be served by this Board may be served personally
by any member of this Board or any of its agent(s) or by any member of the Police
Department of the Township. Notice may be served by mail, addressed to the last
known place of residence, or by posting it in a conspicuous place on the premises.
a. Where no other penalty is established by law, any person who shall violate or fail
to comply with the provisions of any section of this chapter, or any part thereof, or
with any order of this Board or of its agents made in pursuance thereof shall be
subject, unless otherwise specifically provided, to a fine for each offense of not
more than $2,000 and not less than $50 in the discretion of the Court, upon
conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the Township.
b. In addition to the penalty above set forth, each day that such violation of this
chapter, or refusal or neglect to comply with a written order of this Board or of its
agents made in pursuance thereof, shall continue may be considered a separate
offense with a like penalty therefor.
§ BH5-3 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH5-4
BH5:4
ARTICLE II
Nuisances
§ BH5-5. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ VI]
For the purposes of this Article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
NUISANCE — Shall mean anything which is detrimental or damaging to health, or
which is potentially detrimental or damaging to health, or impacts the general well being
of the public's health as determined by this Board.
§ BH5-6. SPECIFIC NUISANCES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § VI]
a. The following specific acts; conditions and things are each and all of them declared
to constitute public health nuisances and are prohibited:
1. Garbage.
(a) Depositing, maintaining, or permitting to be deposited or maintained, or
accumulating in or upon any public or private street or thoroughfare or
place; or in or upon any property or building any wastewater, sewage,
garbage, offal, excrement; any dead animal or part thereof; any decaying
or putrescible matter; any oyster or clam shells; or any foul, putrid or
decaying liquid or substance.
(b) Allowing any garbage, excrement, leaves, branches, vegetative matter or
any other offensive or decomposed solid or fluid matter or substance to
leak or escape from any cart, wagon, vehicle or other container in which
the same may be conveyed or contained.
2. Excrement. Permitting any human excrement or material containing human
excrement to remain or flow upon the surface of the ground or to remain or
flow in any open ditch or stream; burying, plowing under or otherwise
disposing of such excrement or permitting the same to be done within 100 feet
of any stream, well, lake, spring or other source of water used for drinking or
other domestic purposes; or depositing or permitting to be deposited any such
material in any place where it is likely to gain access to such water or to appear
again above the surface of the ground.
3. Use of any privy vault(s) and cesspool(s).
4. Toilet Accommodations. Any premises that are not provided with suitable
toilets in good working order.
5. Buildings.
(a) Permitting any building or portion thereof occupied or intended to be
occupied by human beings to be or remain in a state of uncleanliness
detrimental to the health of the occupants or of the public.
(b) Permitting any building which is inhabited by human beings or which is
§ BH5-5 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-6
BH5:5
occupied by human beings for any purpose to be without an adequate
supply of running water at any time while being occupied.
(c) Permitting any filthy or unhealthful plumbing fixtures of or in a building
used or occupied by human beings for any purpose, regardless of whether
such condition shall be the result of leakage, stoppage or any other cause.
6. Stables or Kennels. Any stable or kennel that is not provided with watertight
floors properly graded, trapped and drained to a sewer or septic system if no
sewer is available.
7. Insects, Larvae, Pupae, Rodents and Vermin.
(a) Maintaining or permitting to be maintained any pool, pond, ditch, stream
or other body of water or any cistern, privy vault, cesspool, rain barrel or
other receptacle containing liquid in which mosquito larvae or pupae may
or do exist.
(b) Maintaining or allowing to be maintained any condition, which causes or
engenders the breeding of flies, mosquitoes, termites, carpenter ants,
roaches or other insects of public health significance.
(c) Maintaining or allowing to be maintained any condition, which causes or
engenders the breeding of rodents (rats or mice) or other vermin of public
health significance.
(d) Failure to provide for written proof of inspection and treatment, as
appropriate, by a State licensed pest control service for insects, rodents or
other vermin upon notice of violation from any agent of the Board of
Health for all public or private property.
8. Vermin or Insect Exterminators. The regulations covering this item are
covered in N.J.A.C. 7:30-1.
9. Smoke. Emission from any premises of any smoke, gases, soot, stench or other
substance in quantity or strength sufficient to cause potential injury or damage
to health.
10. Slaughtering. Killing, skinning or dressing of any animal intended for food, to
be sold for human consumption, without permission from this Board.
11. Animals. The keeping of horses, cows, goats, rabbits, guinea pigs, dogs, cats
or other animals under unsanitary conditions.
12. Spitting. Spitting upon the floor, steps, platform or upon the interior of any
street or railway car, bus or other public conveyance or upon the floors,
staircases or any part of any building or upon the sidewalks or crosswalks of
any street, alley, lane or public place.
13. Obnoxious Trades. The carrying on of any trade or business in such a manner
as to be obnoxious or offensive or which may be attended with unhealthful
odors or which may be attended by such conditions or noises as may be
potentially detrimental to health.
§ BH5-6 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH5-6
BH5:6
14. Common Towels. The supplying or furnishing of any roller towel (except such
roller towel which can be mechanically adjusted for individual use or except
individual paper towels) or of any towel for use by more than one person
without intermediate laundering, in any hotel, schoolhouse, restaurant,
boardinghouse, bakery, clubhouse, washroom or public lavatory or in any
place where a number of people congregate.
15. Food Establishments. Refer to Chapter 24 "Sanitation in Retail Food
Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines," of the State
Sanitary Code.
16. Plants. Permitting poison ivy, ragweed or any other poisonous plant, to exist
or to grow upon any public or private property within 50 feet of any public
sidewalk, public street, party line or building or permitting any ragweed or
other noxious or harmful weed to grow upon any property, either public or
private.
17. Animal Feeding. The keeping, maintenance, and/or feeding of stray cats or
wild animals is prohibited. The maintenance and/or feeding of privately owned
cats and/or dogs in such a manner as to create unsanitary conditions, attract
vermin, or be potentially detrimental to health or create a public nuisance is
hereby prohibited.
b. In addition to the preceding subsections, whatever is detrimental to health or
whatever is potentially injurious or dangerous to health is hereby declared to be a
health nuisance.
§ BH5-6 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-6
BH5:7

ARTICLE III
Dairy Products
§ BH5-7. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ VI]
For the purposes of this Article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
FLUID MILK PRODUCTS — Shall mean cream, sour cream, vitaminized milk,
butternut skimmed milk, homogenized milk, reconstituted or recombined milk, milk
beverages, cream beverages and all other beverages containing, in whole or in part, milk
or cream.
MILK — Shall mean the lacteal secretion obtained by the complete milking of one or
more healthy mammals properly fed and kept, excluding that obtained within 15 days
before and five days after calving, kidding or giving birth or such other period as may be
necessary to render the milk practically colostrum free.
MILK PRODUCTS — Shall mean cream, ice cream, ice cream mix, sherbets, cream
cheese or other food for human consumption made from milk or cream, or both.
§ BH5-8. LICENSING; FEES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § VI]
§ BH5-9. ICE CREAM, SHERBETS AND ICES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI;
Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
The requirements concerning the sale, production and handling of ice cream, sherbets
and ices shall be governed by the Law and Regulations Governing the Manufacture,
Handling, Sale and Distribution of Ice Cream, Sherbet and Ices of the State of New
Jersey, as set forth in Title 24, Chapter 2, Article I of the Revised Statutes, Title 24,
Chapter 10, Article 7 of the Revised States and Title 24, Chapter 17, Article 1 of the
Revised Statutes, its amendments and supplements, which are made a part of this Article
as though incorporated in it and set out at length.
a. No person shall sell or deliver or have in possession for sale or delivery in the
Township any milk, milk products or fluid milk products without first obtaining
from this Board a license for such sale or delivery. Each license issued under the
provisions of this Article shall expire on the 31st of December following the issuing
of the same.
b. A fee of $5 shall be paid before any license required by this Article shall be issued.
§ BH5-7 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-9
BH5:9

ARTICLE IV
Water and Ice
§ BH5-10. LICENSING. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ VI]
See Article V, Food and Drink.
§ BH5-11. WATER. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
a. Construction of Wells. This is part of N.J.A.C. 7:9D-1 et seq. and shall be governed
thereby.
b. No person shall construct or maintain any well or other supply of water used for
drinking or household purposes which is polluted in any manner that may render
such water injurious to health or which is so situated, constructed or maintained that
it may become so polluted. This Board or its agent shall be permitted to enter the
premises at any time for the purpose of taking samples of water for analysis.
c. All water dispensers, coolers, containers or devices used in connection with the sale
or distribution of drinking water shall meet the approval of the Board and be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 8:21-5 et seq.
§ BH5-10 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-11
BH5:11

ARTICLE V
Food and Drink
§ BH5-12. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ VI]
For the purposes of this Article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
APPROVED — Shall mean any article of food or drink, a source of food or drink, a
method, a device or a piece of equipment, which meets the requirements of this Board or
the State Department of Health.
EMPLOYEE—Shall mean any person who handles food or drink during preparation or
serving or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensil or who is employed
in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served, including the term "person" as
further defined.
ENFORCING OFFICIAL — Shall mean the Health Officer or other official possessing
a license issued by the State Department of Health under the provisions of N.J.S.A.
26:1A-41 who is designated by the Board of Health to enforce this chapter, except
plumbing inspectors and public health laboratory technicians.
FOOD — Shall mean all confectionery and every article used as food or as drink for
human consumption, and all articles used for components of any such article.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, firm, corporation, association, society or
partnership and its agents or employees.
RETAIL FOOD-HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS—Shall mean restaurants, taverns,
box-lunch establishments, bakeries, meat markets, delicatessens, luncheonettes, caterers,
soda fountains, food vending vehicles, grocery stores and any other place in which
food or drink is prepared or stored for public consumption, distribution or sale at retail,
including vehicles used in connection therewith and all places where water for drinking
or culinary purposes is available for public use.
SALE — Shall mean every delivery of food, whether the same is by direct sale or the
solicitation or acceptance of an order for food, including the exchange, barter, traffic in,
keeping and exposing for sale, displaying for sale, serving with meals, delivering for
value, peddling, possessing with intent to sell and the gratuitous delivery or gift of any
food by any licensee or person to whom a food certificate has been issued or by any other
person.
SANITIZE — Shall mean the process of rendering eating or drinking utensils free from
disease producing bacteria so that they have been cleansed and disinfected as to have a
total bacterial count of not more than 100 per utensil when sampled in accordance with
approved methods in an approved laboratory.
UTENSILS—Shall mean any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, containers or
other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact.
§ BH5-13. LICENSING; FEES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § VI]
a. No person shall conduct, maintain or operate a food establishment without first
obtaining from this Board a license, certificate, permit, or license so to do.
§ BH5-12 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-13
BH5:13
b. Fees in accordance with the following schedule shall be paid before any license
required in this Article shall be issued, except that payment of a fee may be waived
by the Board of Health at its discretion for any municipal facility, church, school or
building which does not receive any remuneration for the dispensing of food or
drink upon receipt of a written application for fee waiver from the person
conducting, maintaining or operating such an establishment:
Food and Vending Fee
Retail food establishments (food stores 9,999 square feet or
less)
$125
Retail food establishments (food stores over 10,000 square
feet)
375
Restaurants, (49 seats or less) 125
Restaurants, (over 50 seats) 375
Milk license (set by State Statute) 5
Mobile food license 75
Food vending machines 50
Temporary retail food operations temporary license (not good
for more than 24 hours)
75
Nonprofit organizations must obtain a license annually. The fee may be waived on
application to the Board for a waiver of the licensing fee based on nonprofit status.
c. There is hereby established a fee for reinspection of any retail food establishment
receiving a posting of Conditional Satisfactory or Unsatisfactory in the amount of
$100 (first conditional or unsatisfactory posting); $250 (second conditional or
unsatisfactory within 12 months); mandatory Board Hearing (third conditional or
unsatisfactory within 12 months).
This is in recognition of the fact that repeated "Conditionally Satisfactory, and
Unsatisfactory" ratings represent a hazard to the public health and repeat
inspections are costly. The repeat inspections and cost reimbursement fees shall not
in any way preclude, preempt, interfere with or be a substitute for legal action in
the courts or before the Board of Health to assure correction of the violations. Such
fees are in addition to the annual license fee and shall not be considered penalties,
but such fees shall be charged and shall be paid to offset the costs and expenses of
such reinspection by the Board of Health.
d. The cost of laboratory tests required because of a complaint or suspect food illness
or a retest required because of unsatisfactory results on the prior test shall be
assessed to the Retail Food Establishment or added onto the annual license fee. This
is in recognition that the food establishment license fees established by this Code
are not adequate to cover additional costs incurred by the regulatory agency as a
result of such tests.
e. Licenses issued under the provisions of this Article, unless sooner forfeited or
revoked by this Board, shall expire annually on the 31st day of December of each
year. A late fee of $50 per month shall be assessed for each month or portion thereof
§ BH5-13 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH5-13
BH5:14
§ BH5-13A. OTHER (NON-FOOD) LICENSING; FEES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005
§ VI; Ord. No. 6-2005; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
Public Swimming Pools:
Swimming Pools/Recreation Bathing: (Nonresidential)
Plan Review $25
Construct $250
Alter $250
Operate $250
Pet Shops/Kennels:
Pet shop $50
Dog kennel $50
Septics:
Plan review/approval $175
Permit to install septic system $175
Permit to conduct business of cleaning tanks $175
Wells:
Permit to install well (alter or construct) $175
Vital Statistics:
Certified copies of birth and marriage $10 each
Certified copies of death $8 each
Certified copies of domestic partnership $10 each
Burial permit (Set by State Statute 26:6-17 et seq.) $5 each
Disinterment permit (Set by State Statute 26:6-17 et seq.) $5 each
Transit permit (Set by State Statute 26:6-17 et seq.) $5 each
Marriage license (Set by State Statute 37:1-12, 12.1 et
seq.)
$28
a license is renewed after January 31st.
f. New food establishments licensed on or after July 1st through December 31st, shall
pay 1/2 of the annual fee for a license to operate.
g. A license may be suspended or revoked for a violation by the holder of any
provisions of this Article or chapter after an opportunity for a hearing by this Board
or its authorized representative.
h. No license is transferable by sale or otherwise.
i. Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in such establishment or, if an
itinerant establishment, shall be readily available for display.
j. All fees for licenses shall be paid to the Board of Health.
§ BH5-13 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-13A
BH5:15
Domestic partnership fee (Set by State Statute 37:1-12,
12.1 et seq.)
$28
Miscellaneous Permits:
Boarding homes for children $100
Incinerators $100
Cosmetology permit $50 annually
Hair styling permit $50 annually
Nail salons permit $50 annually
All existing ordinances of the Township of Springfield Board of Health imposing or
establishing fees for licenses, permits and other charges are hereby amended to the extent
necessary and applicable to effect the foregoing changes in fees.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this ordinance or code shall be
declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction such declaration shall not
in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the remaining provisions.
These revised fees shall take effect as of January 1, 2006 after final adoption and
publication in accordance with law.
§ BH5-14. EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF UNWHOLESOME
FOOD AND DRINK. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
The enforcing official may take and examine samples of food, drink and other substances
in accordance with Chapter 24, Regulation 8.4, of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code.
§ BH5-15. INSPECTION OF RETAIL FOOD-HANDLING
ESTABLISHMENTS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
The enforcing official shall inspect every retail food-handling establishment in
accordance with Chapter 24, Regulation 8.2 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code.
§ BH5-16. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § VI]
Retail food-handling establishments shall comply with the rules and regulations as set
forth in Chapter 24 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, Construction, Operation and
Maintenance of Retail Food Establishments.
§ BH5-17. CLOSURE FOR INFECTION. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § VI]
Refer to Regulation 8.8 in Chapter 24 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code.
§ BH5-18. CONDEMNATION. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § VI]
Refer to Regulation 8.4 in Chapter 24 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code.
§ BH5-13A SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH5-19
BH5:16
§ BH5-19. FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATION. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI;
Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
§ BH5-20. COMMON DRINKING CUP. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § VI]
No person in charge of or in control of any park, playground, railroad station, theater,
hotel, boardinghouse, factory or any other public place shall furnish or permit any
common drinking cup or utensil to be used.
a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD—Shall mean and include any substance used or intended to be used as food
or drink for human consumption.
FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATION — Shall mean a certificate issued by the
Board of Heath of Springfield or any other agency recognized by the Board of
Health of Springfield. A food handler's certification shall be valid for two years
from the initial date of issue.
SUPERVISOR — Shall mean any person charged with the responsibility of
overseeing the operations, including the supervision of employees engaged in the
preparing, processing and sale of food or drink intended for human consumption,
be it for on- or off-premises consumption.
b. Certificate Required.
1. No establishment shall be open for business in the preparing, processing and
sale of food or drink intended for human consumption without having a
supervisor on the premises who has a food handler's certificate.
2. In the event that such establishment operates 24 hours a day, at least one
person on each shift shall complete the aforesaid course.
3. The food handler's certificate shall not be issued or granted to any person
unless the person seeking such food handler's certificate shall have first
completed an approved course of general instruction in health education,
sanitation, personal hygiene, food protection, dishwashing procedures and
other related health matters.
c. Application for Certificate; Course.
1. No establishment shall operate for more than 90 days without the supervisors
employed in that establishment applying for a food handler's certificate.
2. No establishment shall operate for more than six months without the
supervisors employed in that establishment completing an approved course of
instruction in food-handling techniques.
d. No person to whom a food handler's certificate is issued or granted shall give, loan,
transfer or permit the same to be used by any other person, for any purpose
whatsoever.
§ BH5-19 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-20
BH5:17

ARTICLE VI
Communicable Diseases
§ BH5-21. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ VI]
For the purposes of this Article, the terms used herein are defined as follows:
CLEANSING — Shall mean the thorough removal of dust and other contaminating
material in such a way as to prevent the entry thereof, as far as may be possible, into
other rooms or dwellings; washing with soap and hot water; and scouring, airing and
exposure to sunlight.
DISINFECTION — Shall mean the application of disinfecting substances to infected
materials in sufficient concentration and for a sufficient length of time to destroy
pathogenic bacteria. When gaseous disinfectants are used, all cracks, crevices and
openings shall first be closed.
ISOLATION — Shall mean the placing apart of infected persons for the purpose of
preventing contact with other persons and the establishment of restrictions directly
surrounding such persons.
QUARANTINE — Shall mean the condition resulting from restrictive measures which
are applied to household premises or areas of greater magnitude for the prevention of the
spread of communicable diseases to other areas.
§ BH5-22. LIST OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005
§ VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
§ BH5-23. REPORTS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
All reports of cases or suspected cases of reportable diseases shall be governed by the
rules and regulations as set forth in N.J.S.A. 26:4-15 to 4-26.
§ BH5-24. QUARANTINE AND ISOLATION. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord.
No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
a. The diseases as set forth and revised in Chapter H of the State Sanitary Code shall
be reportable in the manner prescribed.
b. The following cases are also reportable by State law: all animal bites.
a. Whenever a report of a communicable disease is received, the person infected shall,
at the discretion of this Board, be isolated or quarantined as this Board may order
or direct.
b. In establishing isolation or quarantine, the Board shall define the place and the
limits of the area within which the infected person is to be isolated. No person
except the attending physician or nurse shall enter or leave the area of isolation
without the permission of this Board. Isolation or quarantine shall be continued
until it is determined by examination that the person no longer has the disease in an
infectious state.
§ BH5-21 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-24
BH5:19
§ BH5-25. ILLEGAL EXPOSURE TO DISEASE. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI;
Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
§ BH5-26. ATTENDANCE AT SCHOOLS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § VI]
The regulations covering this are covered in N.J.S.A. 26:4-6 and are governed thereby.
§ BH5-27. EXAMINATION OF CARRIERS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord.
No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
This Board may, if it shall be deemed necessary, require a person believed to be a carrier
of disease germs to furnish specimens for examination. It shall be the duty of such
person to furnish the necessary specimens for examination or to permit the Board or its
representative to collect such specimens.
§ BH5-28. EXAMINATION FOR DIAGNOSIS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI;
Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
Whenever this Board shall deem it necessary to establish the true character of any
disease which, in its opinion, may be communicable, a medical examination of the
person infected may be required, and such specimens of secretions or other material
for examination shall be taken from such person, and it shall be the duty of such
person to submit to such examination and furnish such necessary specimens. No person
shall interfere with or prevent the securing of such specimens. The Board may cause
any person suspected to be infected with a communicable disease to be isolated or
quarantined until medical or laboratory examinations show that the person is free of the
causative organisms of disease.
§ BH5-29. ANIMAL DISEASES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § VI]
c. After the isolation or quarantine of any person infected with or exposed to a
communicable disease shall have been established, such person shall not leave the
apartment or premises where he is isolated or quarantined, nor shall any other
person remove such person or permit him to be removed, unless a permit for such
removal shall have been issued first by this Board.
a. No person shall expose or permit the exposure of anyone to any communicable
disease or its causative agent.
b. No person suffering from a communicable disease or harboring the causative
organism of any communicable disease and no articles, which may tend to
propagate or spread such disease shall be brought into the Township without
permission from the Health Officer. Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of
any person that such persons or articles have been brought into this Township
without the permission of the Board, he shall immediately give notice thereof to
this Board. No person shall remove any such diseased person or infected article
from any house or place without approval of the Board.
a. Every veterinarian who shall attend any animal within this Township having or
§ BH5-24 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH5-29
BH5:20
§ BH5-30. INDUSTRIAL AND OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES. [Ord. No. BOH
2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
This is covered under the rules and regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration and is governed thereby.
§ BH5-31. DEATHS AND BURIALS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § VI]
Whenever death has been caused by communicable disease, the transportation, care,
disposal and burial of the body shall be in accordance with the regulations regarding
same as required by the State Sanitary Code and in accordance with such further
regulations as this Board may direct.
suspected of having rabies, glanders, anthrax or any other communicable disease
transmittable to humans shall, within 12 hours thereafter, report in writing to this
Board the location of such diseased animal, the type and character of the disease
and the name and address of the owner.
b. It shall be the duty of any person having knowledge of any dog, cat or other animal
infected with rabies or suspected of being infected with rabies within this Township
to forthwith notify the Board and, if possible, give a description of the animal, the
location where it may be found and the name and address of the owner or the person
having custody thereof.
c. Whenever a dog, cat or other animal shall have bitten any person, the owner or
person in charge thereof shall securely confine such animal for the purpose of
observation in such a manner and for such a period as may be designated by this
Board.
§ BH5-29 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-31
BH5:21

ARTICLE VII
Barbershops, Beauty Shops and Massaging Establishments
§ BH5-32. REGULATIONS AND LICENSING. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § VI]
a. Barbershops. The regulation and licensing of barbers and barbershops is now vested
in the State Board of Barber Examiners.
b. Beauty Shops. The regulation and licensing of beauty shops is now governed by the
State Beauty Culture Control Board.
§ BH5-32 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-32
BH5:23

ARTICLE VIII
Sanitation of Buildings in General
§ BH5-33. QUARTERS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. [Ord. No. BOH
2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
Whenever it shall be decided by this Board that any building or part thereof in this
Township is unfit for human habitation by reason of its being infected by disease, or by
reason of its being in a condition dangerous to health or life or likely to cause sickness
among the occupants or not in a proper state of cleanliness, and written notice of such
decision shall have been personally served upon the owner, occupant or lessee if the
same can be found in this State, or otherwise affixed conspicuously on the building or
any part thereof so decided to be unfit for human habitation, such building or part thereof
shall, within 10 days, be vacated or, in case of special emergency, within such shorter
time as in said notice may be specified.
§ BH5-34. PLUMBING FACILITIES FOR HABITABLE BUILDINGS. [Ord.
No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
No person shall construct or maintain any building intended or permitted to be occupied
as human living quarters or any building intended or permitted to be used as a store or
office, which shall not be equipped with adequate and operative plumbing.
§ BH5-35. HEATING. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
a. Heating of Residences.
1. Every owner of a building or buildings occupied as residences by two or more
families, and where such owner has agreed to supply heat, shall provide heat
on each day whenever the outside temperature shall fall below 55° F. so that
the temperature of the apartment where one or more persons reside shall
always be kept at 68° F. or above.
2. Every person, whether he is the owner, lessor or agent of a building
constructed to be occupied as residences by two or more families, and where
such person has agreed to supply heat, shall provide heat so that the
temperature of the apartment where one or more persons reside shall always
be kept at 68° F. or above whenever the outer or street temperature shall fall
below 55° F.
b. Heating of Business Buildings. Every person, whether he is the owner, lessor or
agent of a building to be used for offices or business purposes who shall have
agreed to supply heat to the tenant, shall provide heat on each day whenever the
outside temperature shall fall below 55° F. so that the temperature of said office or
place of business shall always be kept at 68° F. or above while occupied; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to buildings or portions thereof used and
occupied for trades, businesses or occupations where high or low temperatures are
essential or unavoidable.
§ BH5-33 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-35
BH5:25

ARTICLE IX
Boarding Homes
§ BH5-36. OPERATION OF BOARDING HOMES FOR CHILDREN. [Ord. No.
BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VI]
Boarding homes for children shall be operated in accordance with Chapter 6 of the State
Sanitary Code.
§ BH5-37. LICENSING; FEE. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VI; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § VI]
Application for a license shall be accompanied by a fee of $100 and shall be issued for a
period of one year.
§ BH5-36 SANITARY REGULATIONS § BH5-37
BH5:27

Chapter BH6
SEWAGE DISPOSAL; SCAVENGERS
§ BH6-1. SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS, LATERALS AND EVAPORATION
BEDS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VII; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VII]
No person shall construct, alter or aid in the construction or alteration of any individual
subsurface sewage disposal system or part thereof without first meeting prescribed
standards of N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1 et seq., as current and including future revisions.
§ BH6-2. DRAINS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VII; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VII]
These regulations are now under the jurisdiction of the Construction Official of the
Township.
§ BH6-3. CORRECTION OF DEFECTIVE SYSTEMS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005
§ VII; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VII]
No person shall construct or maintain or permit to be maintained any sewage disposal
system, which discharges directly or indirectly on the surface of the ground, or any such
system, which emits objectionable odors. Should this condition be found to exist on any
premises in this Township, the owner, occupant or lessee of said premises shall forthwith
have the cesspool, septic tank or privy cleaned and immediately thereafter have such
changes made in construction so that the system functions properly and without offense.
Should said owner, occupant or lessee fail within the time specified to comply with a
notice from this Board or its agent that the sewage disposal system on the premises
owned, occupied or leased by him violates this section, this Board or its agent shall
have said cesspool, septic tank or privy cleaned as often as it may deem necessary.
The expense of such cleaning shall be charged against said premises and collected as
prescribed by law.
§ BH6-4. CLEANING CESSPOOLS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VII; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § VII]
These regulations are covered under N.J.A.C. 7:9-2.1 et seq.
§ BH6-5. PRIVIES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VII; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VII]
These regulations are covered under N.J.A.C. 7:9-2.1 et seq.
§ BH6-6. SEWER CONNECTIONS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VII; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § VII]
The owners of property along the line of any sanitary sewer are hereby required to
connect their houses and other buildings with such sewers by means of connections that
shall be constructed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Uniform Construction
Code.
§ BH6-7. SCAVENGERS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VII; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ BH5-37 SEWAGE DISPOSAL; SCAVENGERS § BH6-7
BH6:1
§ VII]
§ BH6-8. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VII; Ord.
No. BOH 02-2009 § VII]
a. Licensing.
1. No person shall clean or empty any cesspool, septic tank, privy vault or other
receptacle constructed for human excrement without first obtaining a
scavenger's license from this Board.
2. Each license issued under the provisions of this section shall expire on the 31st
day of December following the issuance of the same.
b. Fees. $175 shall be paid for each license.
c. Equipment. All apparatus, means, appliances, vehicles or conveyances to be used
in the cleaning or emptying of any cesspool, septic tank, privy vault or other
receptacle constructed for human excrement shall be approved by this Board before
being used and shall at all times thereafter be subject to the inspection of this Board.
d. Cleansing. Any scavenger who shall commence to clean or empty any cesspool,
septic tank, privy vault or other receptacle constructed from human excrement shall,
without interruption or delay, proceed with the work until it is completed and the
material removed from the premises, and such material shall be disposed of in such
manner and place as shall first be approved by this Board.
a. Where no other penalty is established by law, any person who shall violate or fail
to comply with the provisions of any section of this chapter, or any part thereof, or
with any order of this Board or of its agents made in pursuance thereof shall be
subject, unless otherwise specifically provided, to a fine for each offense of not
more than $2,000 and not less than $50, in the discretion of the court, upon
conviction thereof of the Municipal Court of the Township.
b. In addition to the penalty above set forth, each day that such violation of this
chapter or refusal or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or
refusal or neglect to comply with a written order of this Board or of its agents made
in pursuance thereof shall continue may be considered a separate offense with a like
penalty therefor.
§ BH6-7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH6-8
BH6:2
Chapter BH7
EXTERIOR LEAD PAINT REMOVAL
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance BOH 98-3, adopted April 6,
1998.
§ BH7-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VIII; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ VIII]
§ BH7-2. PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005
§ VIII; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § VIII]
a. Lead base paint shall mean paint that contains more than 0.5% by dry weight of
lead as determined by a laboratory certified by the State of New Jersey or that
contains more than one milligram of lead per square centimeter of paint surface
when measured by an x-ray fluorescence (XRF) analyzer.
b. Person shall mean any individual, corporation, employee, company, association,
firm or partnership.
c. Confined power sanding shall mean the use for the removal of lead paint of electric
or hydraulic powered sanding tools that have attachments that while sanding paint
simultaneously vacuums dust and chips into a HEPA filtered vacuum device or
otherwise contain and control chips and dust from being released into the
environment.
d. Unconfined power sanding shall mean the use for the removal of paint of electric
or hydraulic powered sanding tools that do not have attachments that while sanding
paint simultaneously vacuums dust and chips into a HEPA filtered vacuum device
or otherwise contain and control chips and dust from being released into the
environment.
e. HEPA vacuum shall mean a high efficient filter that filters out fine particles of dust
at 99.7% of fine particles at 0.3 microns in size.
f. Permit shall mean a permit obtained through the Health Department for the removal
of exterior lead paint, or paint suspected of containing lead at a fee of $10 per
structure.
a. No person shall remove lead base paint, or paint suspected of containing lead on the
exterior surfaces of a house or other structure without obtaining a permit through
the Health Department and prominently displaying same at the proposed work site.
b. No person shall remove lead base paint, or paint suspected of containing lead on the
exterior surfaces of a house or other structure by the method of unconfined power
sanding.
c. When exterior lead base paint is removed by confined power sanding or other
methods such as scraping, manual sanding or power washing, drop cloths or other
ground cover shall be used to catch chips and dust from the process of paint
removal. Chips and dust that fall onto the ground shall be cleaned to sight.
§ BH6-8 EXTERIOR LEAD PAINT REMOVAL § BH7-2
BH7:1
§ BH7-3. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VIII; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § VIII]
§ BH7-4. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VIII; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ VIII]
d. Prior to removal of exterior lead base paint, windows of the structures being painted
shall be closed and sealed with tape or other barrier to prevent entry of chips and
dust into the interior of the house.
e. Following paint removal, cleanup of dust and chips on window surfaces, driveways,
sidewalks and other ground surfaces shall be done. Paint dust and chips shall not be
dispersed by blowers or hose water. Paint chips and dust collected shall be placed
in double plastic bags of not less than three mils each of thickness and not weighing
more than 20 pounds.
f. Collected paint chips and dust may be left with the owner or resident and shall be
disposed of in accordance with local regulations covering regular municipal
household garbage collection.
g. Hoses to vacuums shall not be longer than 50 feet or more than recommended by
the vacuum manufacturer, whichever is less. If the vacuum is attached to a "Y"
connector, each hose shall not be more than 25 feet in length.
h. HEPA filters shall be replaced as necessary in order to keep the vacuum system
operating properly. Excessive amounts of dust shall not be allowed to escape during
power sanding operations.
i. Contractors shall give written notification to property owners and occupants as to
the nature of the job being performed, the hazards of lead and the procedures being
employed for lead paint cleaning.
j. Contractors involved in lead paint removal will provide their workers with
disposable overalls, which must be worn during the removal of lead paint and
discarded daily.
a. This chapter shall be enforceable by the Health Officer, Registered Environmental
Health Specialist(s), or other designated official(s) or person(s) as appointed by the
Health Officer.
b. This chapter shall take effect after final passage and publication according to law.
a. Where no other penalty is established by law, any person who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $50 and not
more than $2,000. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
b. In lieu of issuing a summons or complaint in Municipal Court, an order to
immediately cease unconfined power sanding, and to clean and remove leaded paint
chips/dust within a reasonable time period may be issued by the enforcement
official.
§ BH7-2 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH7-5
BH7:2
§ BH7-5. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § VIII; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § VIII]
If any section, paragraph, subparagraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall be
adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the specific section, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause or provision so adjudged and the remainder of the chapter shall be
deemed valid and effective.
§ BH7-5 EXTERIOR LEAD PAINT REMOVAL § BH7-5
BH7:3

Chapter BH8
(RESERVED)
§ BH7-5 (RESERVED) § BH7-5
BH8:1

Chapter BH9
NOISE
§ BH9-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § X; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ IX]
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms not defined in this
chapter have the same meaning as those defined in N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
DEMOLITION — Shall mean any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Shall mean any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electricity, telephone,
sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rightsof-
way, dredging navigational waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Shall mean either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER—Shall mean a properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is part of the
normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING UNIT BUILDING—Shall mean any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments, condominiums, co-ops,
multiple family houses, townhouses, and attached residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY—Shall mean any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — Shall mean an employee of: (1) a local, County or
regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County Environmental Health
Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise enforcement activities: or (2) a
municipality with a department-approved noise control ordinance and the employee has
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having boilers,
incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air conditioners, laundry rooms,
utility provisions or health and recreational facilities, or other similar devices or
areas, either in the interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source
of elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel of land; or
1.
A building, which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and residential
property, located above, behind, below or adjacent.
2.
§ BH7-5 NOISE § BH9-1
BH9:1
received noise enforcement training and is currently certified in noise enforcement. The
employee must be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized
to issue a summons in order to be considered a Noise Control Officer.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Shall mean any sound that can be detected by a person
using his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source under
investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification or reproduction
device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to verify
plainly audible sound. The Noise Control Officer need not determine the title, specific
words, or the artist performing the song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY—Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased or controlled by a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Shall mean any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINES — Shall mean either (a) the imaginary line including its
vertical extension that separates one parcel of real property from another; (b) the vertical
and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of a multi-dwelling unit building;
or (c) on a multi-use property, the interface between the two portions of the property
on which different categories of activity are being performed (e.g., if the multi-use
property is a building which is residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the
real property line would be the interface between the residential area and the commercial
area).
WEEKDAY — Shall mean any day that is not a Federal holiday, and beginning on
Monday at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Shall mean beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ BH9-2. APPLICABILITY. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § X; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ IX]
a. This model noise ordinance applies to sound from the following property
categories:
1. Industrial facilities;
2. Commercial facilities;
3. Public service facilities;
4. Community service facilities;
5. Residential properties;
6. Multi-use properties;
7. Public and private rights-of-way;
§ BH9-1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH9-2
BH9:2
§ BH9-3. DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND POLICY. [Ord. No. BOH
2-2005 § X; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § IX]
Whereas excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, safety, and the
quality of life; and whereas a substantial body of science and technology exists by which
excessive sound may be substantially abated; and, whereas the people have a right to,
and should be ensured of, an environment free from excessive sound.
Now, therefore, it is the policy of the Township of Springfield to prevent excessive
sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of the citizens or degrade the
quality of life.
This chapter shall apply to the control of sound originating from sources within the
Township of Springfield.
§ BH9-4. NOISE CONTROL OFFICERS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § X; Ord. No.
BOH 02-2009 § IX]
8. Public spaces; and
9. Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
b. This model noise ordinance applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
1. Commercial facilities;
2. Public service facilities;
3. Community service facilities;
4. Residential properties;
5. Multi-use properties; and
6. Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
c. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of the electromechanical
functioning of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not meet or exceed 10
seconds.
a. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by Noise Control Officers. A
person shall be qualified to be a Noise Control Officer if the person meets the
criteria set forth in the definition above and completes, at a frequency specified by
the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.11, a noise certification and recertification
course which are offered by the Department of Environmental Sciences of Cook
College, Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey or any other noise certification
or recertification courses which is offered by an accredited university and approved
by the Department.
b. Sound measurements made by a Noise Control Officer shall conform to the
procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that the interior sound level
measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in Section BH9-5b
§ BH9-2 NOISE § BH9-4
BH9:3
§ BH9-5. MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE SOUND LEVELS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005
§ X; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § IX]
and c of this regulation and with the definition of "real property line" as contained
herein.
c. Noise Control Officers shall have the power to:
1. Coordinate the noise control activities of all departments in the Township of
Springfield and cooperation with all other public bodies and agencies to the
extent practicable;
2. Review the actions of the Township of Springfield and advise of the effect, if
any, of such actions on noise control;
3. Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or approval
by other departments or boards, for compliance with this chapter;
4. Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter for sound levels
which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in Tables I and II, when
measured at a receiving property located within the designated jurisdiction of
the Noise Control Officer, in accordance with Section BH9-7 below;
5. Cooperate with Noise Control Officers of adjacent municipalities in enforcing
one another's municipal noise ordinances.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any source of sound
on any source property listed in Section BH9-2a above in such a manner as to create
a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound level limits set forth in Tables I and
II when measured at or within the real property line of any of the receiving
properties listed in Table I, except as specified in paragraph b below.
b. When measuring total sound or residual sound within a multi-use property, or
within a residential unit when the property line between it and the source property
is a common wall, all exterior doors and windows shall be closed and the
measurements shall be taken in the center of the room most affected by the noise.
Residual sound shall be measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2. When
measuring total sound or residual sound, all sound sources within the dwelling unit
must be shut off (e.g. television, stereo). Measurements shall not be taken in areas
which receive only casual use such as hallways, closets and bathrooms.
c. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or within the
same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a multi-use property (e.g.
sound generated within a commercial unit of a multi-use property building and
received within a residential unit of the same building) or multi-dwelling unit
building. In addition, indoor measurements shall be taken if the property line
between the receiving property and the source property is a common wall, such as
in a multi-dwelling unit building. The allowable sound level standards for indoors
are as shown in Tables I and II.
d. Impulsive Sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound shall not
equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., impulsive sound,
§ BH9-4 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH9-5
BH9:4
§ BH9-6. TABLE I MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE A-WEIGHTED SOUND
LEVELS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § X; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § IX]
§ BH9-7. TABLE II MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE OCTAVE BAND SOUND
PRESSURE LEVELS IN DECIBELS. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § X; Ord. No. BOH
02-2009 § IX]
which occurs less than four times in any hour shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels.
Impulsive sound, which repeats four or more times in any hour shall be measured
as an impulsive sound and shall meet the requirements as shown in Table I.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any source of sound
on any source property listed in Section BH9-2a above in such a manner as to create
a sound level that equals or exceeds the sound levels listed below.
A. Outdoors
Receiving Property Category
Residential property, or
residential portion of a multiuse
property
Commercial facility,
public service facility,
nonresidential portion
of a multi-use
property, or
community service
facility
Time 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 24 hours
Maximum A-Weighted sound
level standard dB
65 50 65
B. Indoors
Receiving Property
Category
Residential property,
or residential portion
of a multi-use
property
Commercial
facility*, or
nonresidential
portion of a
multi-use
property
Time 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m. - 7:00
a.m. 24 hours
Maximum AWeighted
sound level
standard dB
55 40 55
* In those instances when a commercial facility shares a common wall/ceiling/
floor with another commercial facility that is producing the sound.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any source of sound
on any source property listed in Section BH9-2a above in such a manner as to create
a sound pressure level that equals or exceeds the sound levels listed below in one or
more octave bands.
§ BH9-5 NOISE § BH9-7
BH9:5
§ BH9-8. RESTRICTED USES AND ACTIVITIES. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § X;
Ord. No. BOH 02-2009 § IX]
b. When octave measurements are made, the sound from the source must be constant
in level and character. If octave band sound pressure level variations exceed plus or
minus 2 dB in the bands containing the principal source frequencies, discontinue
the measurement.
TABLE II.
Maximum Permissible Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels in Decibels
Receiving
Property
Residential property, or
residential portion of a
multi-use property
Residential property, or
residential portion of a
multi-use property
Commercial facility,
public service
facility,
nonresidential
portion of a multiuse
property or
community service
facility
Commercial
facility*, or
nonresidential
portion of a multiuse
property
Outdoors Indoors Outdoors Indoors
Octave Band
Center
Frequency, Hz
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level, dB
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level, dB
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level, dB
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level, dB
Time
7:00 a.m. -
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m. -
7:00 a.m.
7:00 a.m. -
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m. -
7:00 a.m. 24 hours 24 hours
31.5 96 86 86 76 96 86
63 82 71 72 61 82 72
125 74 61 64 51 74 64
250 67 53 57 43 67 57
500 63 48 53 38 63 53
1,000 60 45 50 35 60 50
2,000 57 42 47 32 57 47
4,000 55 40 45 30 55 45
8,000 53 38 43 28 53 43
* In those instances when a commercial facility shares a common wall/ceiling/
floor with another commercial facility that is producing the sound.
a. Except as provided in paragraph b below, the provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4.
b. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound level limits set
forth in Tables I and II, except as provided for in paragraph b below.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Tables I and II, the following standards shall
§ BH9-7 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH9-8
BH9:6
apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth below:
1. Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment shall not be operated between the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable limits set forth in
Tables I and II. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall be
operated with a muffler. At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and
II do not apply to noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping
and yard maintenance equipment;
2. Commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance
equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be operated on a residential
property or within 250 feet of a residential property line when operated on
commercial or industrial property, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or Federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the limits set
forth in Tables I and II.
In addition, commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, utilized on commercial
or industrial property shall meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler. At all other times, the limits set
forth in Tables I and II do not apply to commercial or industrial power tools
and landscaping and yard maintenance equipment;
3. Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work, shall not be
performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends and Federal
holidays, unless such activities can meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II.
All motorized equipment used in construction and demolition activity shall be
operated with a muffler. At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and
II do not apply to construction and demolition activities;
4. Motorized snowblowers, snow throwers, and lawn equipment with attached
snowplows shall be operated at all times with a muffler. At all times, the limits
set forth in Tables I and II do not apply;
5. An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle must be activated in
such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its operation within five
minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15 minutes for impulsive sound
after it has been activated. At all times, the limits set forth at Tables I and II do
not apply;
6. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that is plainly audible at a
residential property line between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.;
7. Personal vehicular music amplification equipment shall not be operated in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction
from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
§ BH9-8 NOISE § BH9-8
BH9:7
§ BH9-9. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § X; Ord. No. BOH 02-2009
§ IX]
§ BH9-10. SEVERABILITY AND REPEALER. [Ord. No. BOH 2-2005 § X; Ord.
No. BOH 02-2009 § IX]
8. Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a public space or public rightof-
way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any
direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., sound from such equipment
shall not be plainly audible by any person other than the operator;
9. Sound levels exceeding the limits set forth in Table I and Table II shall be
prohibited between residential units within the same multi-dwelling unit
building. Measurements shall be taken indoors as per Section BH9-5b and c.
a. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for an enforcement
document to be issued to the violator by the Noise Control Officer according to
procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.6. The recipient of an enforcement
document shall be entitled to a hearing in Municipal Court having jurisdiction to
contest such action.
b. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil
penalty for each offense of not more than $3,000. If the violation is of a continuing
nature, each day during which it occurs shall constitute an additional, separate, and
distinct offense.
c. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law or
statutory cause of action, or legal remedy, from any person for injury or damage
arising from any violation of this chapter or from other law.
a. If any provision or portion of a provision of this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional, preempted by Federal or State law, or otherwise invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of the chapter shall not be
invalidated.
b. All ordinances or parts of ordinances, which are inconsistent with any provisions of
this chapter, are hereby repealed as to the extent of such inconsistencies.
§ BH9-8 SPRINGFIELD CODE § BH9-10
BH9:8
Disposition List
§ BH9-10 NOISE § BH9-10
BH9:9

Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
This Disposition List for Supplementation provides a listing of the ordinances used in
the preparation of Code Supplements. The word Special after the ordinance description
indicates material that is special in nature and has not been included in the Code.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2011-01 1-25-2011 Revokes Springfield Improvement
Team, 2-65
15
2011-02 1-25-2011 Revokes residency requirement for
Township Attorney, 2-19.1
15
2011-03 2-15-2011 Springfield Pool Day Camp Age
restrictions, 27-6.7, 27-6.11, hours of
operation, 27-6.10, camp sessions,
27-8.3, fees 27-8.4
15
2011-04 2-22-2011 Rename Police Division to Police
Department and Fire Division to Fire
Department, 2-40, 2-41, 2-42
15
2011-05 4-12-2011 CAP, Special 15
2011-06 4-12-2011 Special Improvement District, Ch. 33 15
2011-07 5-10-2011 On street resident parking only, 7-12A;
parking time limited on certain streets,
7-11; parking prohibited at all times,
7-13
15
2011-08 4-26-2011 Through streets, 7-19 15
2011-09 5-24-2011 Smoking prohibited at Municipal Pool,
27-6.11
15
2011-10 5-24-2011 Special Improvement District, Chapter
33, Appendix A
15
2011-11 5-24-2011 Pool barrier requirements, 13-4.2 15
2011-12 6-14-2011 Parking time limited on certain streets,
7-11; municipal parking lots, 7-12;
public parking lots and hourly fee
parking, 7-38
15
2011-13 7-13-2011 Municipal parking permit, 7-12;
regulation of municipal parking lots,
7-38.3
15
2011-14 Not enacted 15
§ BH9-10 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:1
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2011-15 7-12-2011 No parking at all times, 7-13 15
2011-16 7-12-2011 Tax Collector-powers and duties,
2-17.2
15
2011-17 7-12-2011 Appropriation, Special 15
2011-18 7-12-2011 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-13 15
2011-19 7-26-2011 Stop intersections, 7-20; yield
intersections, 7-22
15
2011-20 9-13-2011 Authorizes joint use agreement of
JCP&L and Congregation Israel,
Special
15
2011-21 12-6-2011 Dumpsters and storage containers,
3-12
15
2011-22 9-13-2011 Salary, Special 15
2011-23 9-13-2011 Bond, Special 15
2011-24 10-11-2011 Waiver of construction permit fees for
construction necessitated by material
disaster, 12-1.14
15
2011-25 11-15-2011 Environmental Commissionmaintenance
of natural resource
inventory, 2-66.8
15
2011-26 12-20-2011 Bond, Special 15
2011-27 12-20-2011 Commercial vehicles parking-appeal,
4-5.4; exemption, 4-5.6
15
2011-28 12-20-2011 Non-life hazard uses, 18-1.10 15
2011-29 12-20-2011 Parking time limited on certain streets,
7-11, parking prohibited certain hours
certain streets, 7-14
15
2012-01 2-14-2012 Parking time limited, 7-11 16
2012-02 3-27-2012 Pay-to-play, 2-85.9 16
2012-03 2-14-2012 Bingo and raffles, 4-19 16
2012-04 2-28-2012 Bond 16
2012-05 3-27-2012 Amend § 27-2 - delete use of alcoholic
beverages; rename Games; use in
parks prohibited, 27-2.1
16
2012-06 3-27-2012 Uniform Construction Code Fee
Schedule, 12-1.14
16
2012-07 4-10-2012 Hiring and promotions-Fire
Department, 2-42.10, 2-42.13
16
§ DL-1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § DL-1
DL:2
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2012-08 4-10-2012 Community Pool-Day Camp fees,
27-8.3, 27-8.4
16
2012-09 4-10-2012 CAP 16
2012-10 4-10-2012 No right turn on red, 7-24 16
2012-11 4-24-2012 Schedule of fees-Plumbing, Electrical,
Fire, Certificates, 12-1.14
16
2012-12 4-24-2012 Springfield Improvement Team, 2-65 16
2012-13 5-8-2012 Rename Development Review
Committee to Technical Review
Committee, 35-66; Definitions, 35-7;
Enforcement Officer, 35-96; Fees,
35-80.1
16
2012-14 4-24-2012 Police Department, 2-41.1 16
2012-15 4-24-2012 Salary range, Special 16
2012-16 5-8-2012 Bond, Special 16
2012-17 6-26-2012 Board of Health, 2-58 16
2012-18 6-12-2012 Municipal parking permit, 7-12; public
parking lots and hourly fee parking,
7-38
16
2012-19 7-16-2012 Ballot question-shall the Township
establish a Charter Commission,
Special
16
2012-20 6-12-2012 Park hours, 27-1; prohibited uses,
permits, 27-2
16
2012-21 7-16-2012 Assessments-Payment, 33-5.3 16
2012-22 7-16-2012 Salary range, Special 16
2012-23 7-16-2012 Alarm systems, 17-1 — 17-18 16
2012-24 7-16-2012 Fee - use of police vehicle, 2-41 16
2012-25 7-16-2012 Peace and good order, 3-22 16
2012-26 8-28-2012 Delete parking spaces reserved for use
of First Aid only, replace with
Springfield Public Library Patron/First
Aid Parking Lot, 7-7.4
16
2012-27 9-27-2012 Police Department fees, 2-41.12;
Administrative fees, 2-91.2
16
2012-28 Not adopted 16
2012-29 10-9-2012 Lease agreement, Special 16
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:3
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2012-30 10-23-2012 Eliminate Department of Public
Safety, 2-40; amend Police
Department, 2-41; designate Township
Committee as Appropriate Authority;
Emergency Management Coordinator
and Deputy Coordinator, 2-32; amend
Fire Department, 2-42.2, 2-42.5
16
2012-31 11-13-2012 Special Improvement District, 33-3,
33-5.2, Appx. A
16
2012-32 11-13-2012 Appropriation, Special 16
2012-33 12-18-2012 Fire Prevention-Non-life hazard uses,
18-1.10
16
2012-34 12-18-2012 Organization of departments, 2-11;
Department of Administration, 2-12,
2-12.1, 2-12.5; Township Clerk,
2-13.6; Department of Finance, 2-15,
delete 2-15.1, 2-15.2; Chief Financial
Officer-Duties, 2-16.6; Department of
Law, 2-19; Prosecutors-powers and
duties, 2-20.2; Public Defenders,
powers and duties, 2-21.2;
Construction Code Official, 2-22.2
16
2012-35 12-18-2012 Police Department, 2-41.1; Special law
enforcement officers, 2-41.13
16
2013-01 1-22-2013 Board of Health, 2-58 17
2013-02 2-12-2013 Recreation Committee meetings,
2-67.5
17
2013-03 4-9-2013 Municipal Pool fees, 27-6.7; day camp
fees, 27-8.3; 27-8.4
17
2013-04 4-30-2013 CAP Bank, Special 17
2013-05 4-30-2013 Amend Police Revised Manual, 2-41.8 17
2013-06 4-30-2013 Amend Fire Department Revised
Manual, 2-42.8
17
2013-07 4-30-2013 Land Use - Zoning Map amendment,
35-10.1; single family residential
districts, location of permanent
generators, 35-15.1; accessory uses
and structures, 35-15.5; fences and site
triangles, 35-22.1; architectural design
standards, 35-30.1; 35-30.3; signs,
35-31.2, 35-31.4, 35-31.5; 35-31.8
17
§ DL-1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § DL-1
DL:4
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2013-08 5-28-2013 Bond, Special 17
2013-09 5-28-2013 Bond, Special 17
2013-10 5-28-2013 Bond, Special 17
2013-11 5-28-2013 Rapid response key program, 2-42.13 17
2013-12 5-28-2013 Alarm systems, Ch. 17 17
2013-13 6-11-2013 Salary, Special 17
2013-14 7-23-2013 Temporary no parking-snow plowing,
7-3.3
17
2013-15 9-10-2013 Energy and natural gas aggregation
program, 2-87
17
2013-16 9-24-2013 Appropriation, Special 17
2013-17 12-17-2013 Disband Springfield Improvement
Team, 2-65
17
2014-01 3-11-2014 Pool Utility-Bond, Special 18
2014-02 5-13-2014 CAP Bank, Special 18
2014-03 5-13-2014 Bond, Special 18
2014-04 5-13-2014 Adds 29-4, Fertilizer application and
use
18
2014-05 Not adopted 18
2014-06 6-10-2014 Amends 2-42.13, promotion to Deputy
Fire Chief
18
2014-07 6-10-2014 Sale of property, Special 18
2014-08 Not adopted 18
2014-09 7-22-2014 Adds 2-92, direct deposit for municipal
employees
18
2014-10 Not adopted 18
2014-11 8-19-2014 Amends 35-86, Development fee
regulations
18
2014-12 10-14-2014 Amends Ch. 23, Personnel Policies 18
2014-13 10-14-2014 Amends 4-5, Commercial vehicles 18
2014-14 11-10-2014 Amends 7-37.1, regulation and
movement of traffic on municipal and
Board of Education Property
18
2014-15 Not adopted 18
2014-16 11-25-2014 Add § 2-41.14, Police Department
Promotion Policy and Procedures
18
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:5
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2015-01 2-10-2015 Salary ranges, Special 19
2015-02 2-24-2015 Creates Ch. 24, Recreation
Background Checks
19
2015-03 2-24-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-17, vehicles
over designated weight excluded from
certain streets
19
2015-04 3-10-2015 Bond, Special 19
2015-05 3-10-2015 Creates Ch. 9, Smoking 19
2015-06 3-24-2015 Amends Ch. 27, Parks, Pool and
Recreation Areas; 27-6.7, fees for
municipal pool
19
2015-07 4-14-2015 Adopts Redevelopment Plan for Block
706, Lots 10-17, Special
19
2015-08 4-14-2015 Amends Ch. 18, Fire Prevention;
18-1.10, non-life hazard uses
19
2015-09 4-28-2015 Appropriation, Special 19
2015-10 5-26-2015 CAP Bank, Special 19
2015-11 5-12-2015 Bond, Special 19
2015-12 6-9-2015 Amends Ch. 19, Streets and
Sidewalks; 19-1, right of way and
street openings and subsurface
disturbances
19
2015-13 6-9-2015 Amends Ordinance No. 2015-07;
adopts Redevelopment Plan for Block
706, Lots 10-17, Special
19
2015-14 6-9-2015 Adopts Redevelopment Plan for Block
208, Lots 6, 8 and 9 and Block 209,
Lot 6
19
2015-15 7-21-2015 Amends Ch. 2, Administration; 2-67,
Recreation Council
19
2015-16 8-11-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; adds 7-7.5,
parking spaces for Springfield Town
Hall Business Only during set hours;
amends 7-13, parking prohibited at all
times; 7-20, stop intersections; 7-22,
yield intersections; 7-24, no right turn
on red
19
2015-17 9-8-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-20, stop
intersections
19
§ DL-1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § DL-1
DL:6
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Supp. No.
2015-18 9-8-2015 Amends Ch. 27, Parks, Pools and
Recreation Areas; 27-6.7, feesmunicipal
swimming pools
19
2015-19 10-27-2015 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
amends title of Article II to be Officers
and Employees; deletes 2-11,
Organization of Departments; amends
2-12.5, duties and responsibilities of
Township Administrator; amends
2-13.6, duties and responsibilities of
Township Clerk; deletes 2-15,
Department of Finance; amends
2-16.6, duties of Chief Financial
Officer; renumber Assistant Township
Treasurer to be 2-16.7; 2-19, rename
from Department of Law to Township
Attorney; adds 2-19.3, Supervisory
Authority; amends 2-22.1,
appointment of Construction Official;
2-22.2, duties-Construction Official;
adds 2-22.11, Zoning Official; amends
2-23.2, duties-Township Engineer;
adds 2-25, Supervisor of Public Works
19
2015-20 12-8-2015 Amends Ch. 4, General Licensing; 4-5,
Commercial Vehicles
19
2015-21 12-8-2015 Amends Ch. 35, Land Use
Regulations; amends 35-10.1, Zoning
Map amendments-deletes AH-7/RCA
Zone and replaces with S-75/AH Zone;
35-15.7; development criteria for S-75/
AH Zone
19
2015-22 12-22-2015 Amends Ch. 35, Land Use
Regulations, 35-22.1, fences; 35-43.4,
Restoration-nonconforming uses and
structures; 35-80, fees
19
2015-23 12-22-2015 Salary, Special 19
2015-24 Not adopted 19
2015-25 12-22-2015 Amends Ch. 15, Property
Maintenance; 15-3, definitions; adds
15-6, vacant and abandoned properties;
15-7, administrative provisions; 15-8,
violations and penalties; 15-9, conflict
with other provisions; 15-16, brush,
grass and debris
19
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:7
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2016-01 2-23-2016 Parks, Pool and
Recreational Areas
Amendment
Ch. 27 20
2016-02 3-8-2016 Building, Housing and
Hotels Amendment
Ch. 12 20
2016-03 3-8-2016 Building, Housing and
Hotels Amendment
Ch. 12 20
2016-04 3-8-2016 Administration: Police
Department; Fire
Department;
Department of
Recreation Amendment
Ch. 2, Art. III 20
2016-06 3-8-2016 Parks, Pool and
Recreational Areas
Amendment
Ch. 27 20
2016-07 3-22-2016 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 20
2016-08 5-17-2016 Personnel Policies
Amendment
Ch. 23 20
2016-10 5-24-2016 Sewers Amendment Ch. 20 20
2016-12 5-24-2016 Sewers Amendment Ch. 20 20
2016-15 7-18-2016 Building, Housing and
Hotels Amendment
Ch. 12 20
2016-16 7-18-2017 Administration: Police
Department; Fire
Department;
Department of
Recreation Amendment
Ch. 2, Art. III 20
2016-17 9-13-2016 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 20
2016-18 9-13-2016 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 20
2016-19 9-13-2016 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 20
2016-20 9-13-2016 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 20
2016-23 10-13-2016 Alarm Systems
Amendment
Ch. 17 20
2016-24 10-13-2016 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 20
2016-25 11-22-2016 Administration: Police
Department; Fire
Department;
Department of
Recreation Amendment
Ch. 2, Art. III 20
2016-26 11-22-2016 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 20
§ DL-1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § DL-1
DL:8
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2016-27 12-13-2016 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 20
2016-28 12-13-2016 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 20
2017-01 2-14-2017 Parks, Pool and
Recreational Areas
Amendment
Ch. 27 20
2017-02 3-28-2017 Parks, Pool and
Recreational Areas
Amendment
Ch. 27 20
2017-05 4-4-2017 General Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 4 20
2017-06 4-18-2017 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 20
2017-07 5-23-2017 Alcoholic Beverage
Control Amendment
Ch. 6 20
2017-08 5-23-2017 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 20
2017-10 7-17-2017 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 20
2017-11 7-17-2017 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 20
2017-12 9-12-2017 Animal Control
Amendment
Ch. 5 20
2017-16 11-13-2017 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 20
2017-17 11-28-2017 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 20
2017-18 12-19-2017 Animal Control
Amendment
Ch. 5 20
2018-01 2-13-2018 Animal Control
Amendment
Ch. 5 20
2018-02 2-13-2018 Parks, Pool and
Recreational Areas
Amendment
Ch. 27 20
2018-04 3-27-2018 Alcoholic Beverage
Control Amendment
Ch. 6 20
2018-05 4-10-2018 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 20
2018-07 4-24-2018 General Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 4 20
2018-08 4-24-2018 Administration:
Officers and Employees
Amendment
Ch. 2, Art. II 20
2018-09 5-22-2018 Building, Housing and
Hotels Amendment
Ch. 12 20
2018-12 7-17-2018 Building, Housing and
Hotels Amendment
Ch. 12 20
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:9
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2018-13 7-17-2018 Sewers Amendment Ch. 20 20
2018-15 8-14-2018 Alcoholic Beverage
Control Amendment
Ch. 6 20
2018-16 9-11-2018 Parks, Pool and
Recreational Areas
Amendment
Ch. 27 20
2018-17 11-5-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 20
2018-20 11-27-2018 Administration:
Officers and Employees
Amendment
Ch. 2, Art. II 20
2018-21 11-27-2018 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 20
2018-23 12-28-2018 Parks, Pool and
Recreational Areas
Amendment
Ch. 27 20
2018-24 12-18-2018 Administration:
Officers and Employees
Amendment; General
Licensing Amendment;
Building, Housing and
Hotels Amendment;
Streets, Sidewalks and
Driveways Amendment;
Sewers Amendment;
Land Use Amendment
Ch. 2, Art. II;
Ch. 4; Ch. 12;
Ch. 19; Ch.
20; Ch. 35
20
2019-01 2-12-2019 Parks, Pool and
Recreational Areas
Amendment
Ch. 27 1
2019-02 3-12-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 1
2019-03 5-14-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 1
2019-07 5-7-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 1
2019-08 7-16-2019 Building, Housing and
Hotels Amendment
Ch. 12 1
2019-10 6-25-2019 Sewers: Sanitary
Sewers Amendment
Ch. 20, Art. I 1
2019-11 9-10-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 1
2019-12 10-22-2019 Sewers: Sanitary
Sewers Amendment
Ch. 20, Art. I 1
§ DL-1 SPRINGFIELD CODE § DL-1
DL:10
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-13 11-26-2019 Parks, Pool and
Recreational Areas
Amendment
Ch. 27 1
2019-15 12-10-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 1
2019-16 12-10-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 1
2019-17 12-10-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 1
2020-01 2-11-2020 Streets, Sidewalks and
Driveways Amendment
Ch. 19 2
2020-02 2-11-2020 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 2
2020-05 3-10-2020 Sewers Amendment Ch. 20 2
2020-06 3-10-2020 Building, Housing and
Hotels Amendment
Ch. 12 2
2020-07 3-10-2020 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 2
2020-08 4-28-2020 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 2
2020-09 4-28-2020 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 2
2020-10 4-28-2020 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 2
2020-11 5-26-2020 Land Use Amendment Ch. 35 2
2020-15 7-14-2020 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 15 2
2020-16 9-22-2020 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 2
2020-17 9-22-2020 Sewers Amendment Ch. 20 2
2020-18 9-22-2020 Shade Trees
Amendment
Ch. 28 2
2020-20 10-13-2020 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 2
2020-21 10-13-2020 Building, Housing and
Hotels Amendment
Ch. 12 2
2020-22 10-13-2020 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 15 2
2020-24 10-13-2020 General Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 4 2
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:11


Zone standards
District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width Minimum Lot Depth Front Yard Rear Yard Side Yard Feet Max. Building Coverage Max. Lot Coverage Max. Floor Area Ratio Maximum Height Feet
R-120 22,000 sq. ft. 120 160 50 50 33% 20 15 22.5 2.5 stories 35 
R-75 10,000 sq. ft. 75 110 30 30 26% 10 25 27 2.5 35 
R-60 7,500 sq. ft. 600 100 30 30 26% 8 25 36 - 2.5 35
R-M - 200 200 50 25 - 30 35 45 - 2.5 35 