Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
General Penalty
[Adopted 5-22-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-15 (§ 1-9B of the 1977 Code)]
§ 1-1. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-31]
Any individual who shall be convicted of violation of any chapter, section,
subsection or provision of the Code of the Borough of South River which
does not have a specifically enumerated penalty provision shall be subject,
upon conviction, to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than
$2,000, imprisonment for not more than 90 days and/or a period of
community service not to exceed 90 days, in the discretion of the Judge
imposing the same.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-31]
§ 1-2. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of South River
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council
of the Borough of South River, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of
Chapters 1 through 350, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as the “Code of the Borough of South River,”
hereinafter known and referred to as the “Code.”
§ 1-3. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1977 Code and all other
general and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this
Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-4. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-5. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of South
River by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided by law,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-6. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the “Code of the Borough of South
River” shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-7. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of South River, pursuant to law, shall cause
this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the Mayor and Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-10. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
South River to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-11. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 1-12
1:6
§ 1-12. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which
are inconsistent with the ordinances in the Code are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency as of the effective date of this Adopting
Ordinance.
§ 1-14. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-13 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to May 15, 2006.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 1-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-15. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
N. Ordinance No. 2005-38.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Statutory references. Throughout the Code, references to repealed or
outdated state statutes have been updated and revised to reflect the
current statute. “N.J.S.A.” has been used consistently throughout the
Code.
C. Fees. In the following sections, fees have been moved to Chapter 155
and reference made to the Chapter 155, Fees: §§ 62-11, 99-3B(1),
103-6, 103-8, 103-10A, 103-14, 103-38, 108-3, 108-5, 108-8, 110-5,
112-4, 124-8, 129-7C, 147-3A(1)(c), 147-3A(2)(c), 147-3A(3)(c)[1],
147-3A, 147-7A and C, 147-16A, 147-18, 147-19, 147-30, 157-1D, 157-2,
169-9B(2) and D, 169-12C, 198-6, 198-13, 209-17, 241-7, 255-3B, 255-5,
255-6, 255-13, 258-27, 263-3, 275-6B, 282-3B, 284-10D and E, 289-19A,
295-12A, 295-13B(3) and E, 300-6, 300-12B and D, 310-14, 315-2C,
319-17B, 333-17A and C, 333-19A and B, 333-21A and C, 333-32A, B(1)
and E, 344-4, 344-11A, C, E and F, and 350-8I(2)(a).
D. Violations and penalties. In the following sections, the penalties have
been revised to refer to the general penalty found in Chapter 1, Article
I, General Penalty: §§ 22-20, 99-5, 103-24, 103-29, 103-32, 108-18,
108-24, 108-29, 110-13, 112-13, 124-10, 133-5, 147-27, 151-5, 169-13L,
174-8, 183-2, 198-21, 209-21A, 214-17, 232-6, 236-5, 241-9, 246-7,
253-5A, 255-15, 258-5, 258-12, 258-17, 258-19, 262-3, 263-6, 267-3,
275-29B, 279-4C, 282-9, 284-26, 287-9, 289-3, 289-7, 289-12, 289-15,
289-26, 300-13, 306-20E, 310-23, 315-11, 315-18, 319-23, 324-7,
333-5A, 333-9, 333-28, 333-36, 333-40, 339-4, 344-19, and 350-28C(1).
§ 1-14 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 1-15
1:8
E. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth below in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
F. Global nomenclature changes. The following nomenclature revisions
have been made throughout the Code:
(1) “Magistrate” to “Judge.”
(2) “Recreation Commission” and “Commissioners of Parks and
Recreation” to “Recreation Department.”
(3) “Environmental Commission” to “Environmental/Shade Tree
Commission.”
(4) “Dog Warden” to “Animal Control Officer.”
(5) “Board of Public Works” to “Utilities Department.”
(6) “Superintendent of the Board of Public Works” to “Utility
Engineer.”
(7) “Building Inspector” and “Construction Code Official” to
“Construction Official.”
1. Editor’s Note: In accordance with § 1-15E, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: “Amended (added, deleted) 9-18-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-31.” Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Borough offices.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 9
ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 1-15 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 1-15
1:10
ARTICLE I
Scope of Department
[Adopted 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6 (Ch. 4, Art. I, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 9-1. Organization and authority.
There shall be a Department of Administration in the Borough of South
River under the supervision and control of the Director of Administration.
The Director shall be a member of the Borough Council and shall be
appointed at the annual organizational meeting in January of each year. The
Department of Administration shall exercise supervision and control over
the Borough Clerk and such other agencies, officers or employees of the
Borough as may be designated from time to time by the Borough Council.
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1
1:11

ARTICLE II
Borough Clerk; Deputy Borough Clerk
[Adopted 8-18-1969 by Ord. No. 1969-15 (Ch. 4, Art. II, of the 1977
Code); amended in its entirety 12-5-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-67]
§ 9-2. Establishment of office; salary.
§ 9-3. Duties.
§ 9-4. Hours of work.
The Borough Clerk and the office of the Borough Clerk and Deputy Borough
Clerk shall perform its duties during the days and hours established for the
other administrative offices of the Borough.
§ 9-5. Attendance at meetings of Council.
The Borough Clerk shall attend all regular and special meetings of the
governing body and such business or agenda sessions as may be required by
the Mayor and Council and shall attend such other meetings, conferences
A. There is hereby established the office of the Borough Clerk of the
Borough of South River, which office shall consist of a full-time Borough
Clerk, a full-time Deputy Borough Clerk and such Assistant Clerks and
other clerical help and personnel as may be necessary to properly
conduct the business of the Borough Clerk's office.
B. The salary of the Borough Clerk, the Deputy Borough Clerk, the
Assistant Clerks and other clerical help and personnel shall be
determined and fixed by the Salary Ordinance.2
A. The Borough Clerk, the Deputy Borough Clerk, the Assistant Borough
Clerk and the Borough Clerk's office shall perform such duties as may
be required by the governing body which are not inconsistent with the
duties of a Borough Clerk and shall perform those duties as may be
required from time to time by ordinance, resolution or such other action
as may be taken by the Mayor and Council.
B. The Borough Clerk shall be the custodian of all Borough property
pertaining to his office.
C. The Borough Clerk, the Deputy Borough Clerk and such Assistants shall
perform such duties as are or may be required by the laws of the State
of New Jersey.
D. The Deputy Borough Clerk shall act in the capacity of the Borough
Clerk in the Borough Clerk's absence.
E. The Borough Clerk shall issue and approve the granting of bingo and
raffle licenses. [Added 2-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-4]
2. Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 9-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-5
1:13
and gatherings pertaining to municipal affairs as may be directed by the
Mayor and Council.
§ 9-6. Accountability.
§ 9-7. Licensing authority.
The Borough Clerk shall administer the licensing provisions of the various
chapters of the Code of the Borough of South River which provide for the
issuance of licenses or permits by the Clerk. He shall keep a proper record
of all applications for licenses and of all licenses issued and shall account to
the office of Borough Treasurer for all license fees received.
A. The Borough Clerk shall be accountable to and be responsible for the
proper expenditure of the funds allotted to him in the municipal budget
and shall comply with all procedures established or to be established by
the governing body for the expenditure of municipal funds.
B. The Deputy Borough Clerk shall report and be accountable to the
Borough Clerk, who, in turn, shall report to the Borough Council.
§ 9-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 9-7
1:14
Chapter 13
ADMINISTRATOR, OFFICE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 9. Personnel regulations — See Ch. 68.
§ 9-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-7
1:15

ARTICLE I
Administrator
[Adopted 2-26-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-8 (Ch. 5, Art. I, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 13-1. Creation of position; authorization of employment; position
to be full-time or part-time. [Amended 10-17-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-54; 5-30-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-23]
The position of Borough Administrator of the Borough of South River is
hereby created, and the employment of a person professionally trained and
educated who shall qualify by such requirements generally recognized by
the Professional Organization of Municipal Administrators in order to fill
such position is hereby authorized. The position of Administrator shall be
full-time or part-time as determined by the Borough Council, and in the
event that said Administrator's position is full-time the Administrator shall
devote full-time to the interest of the Borough. The Administrator shall be
allowed to conduct consulting services for other private or public entities so
long as such consultations do not cause a conflict with the Borough of South
River and does not in any way interfere with the Administrator conducting
his duties and responsibilities for the Borough of South River which shall be
considered his primary employer.
§ 13-2. Duties.
A. The Borough Administrator shall perform the following duties. He shall:
(1) Serve as the chief administrative officer of the Borough.
(2) Attend all meetings of the Mayor and Council and such other
meetings, whether within or without the Borough of South River, as
he may be assigned, from time to time, by the Mayor and Council.
(3) Provide a liaison between the Mayor and Council and the various
municipal boards, agencies and departments of the Borough of
South River and its professional advisors.
(4) Execute all laws and ordinances of the Borough, subject to the
direction of the Mayor and Council.
(5) Keep the Mayor and Council currently informed on all matters
assigned to him or otherwise within his jurisdiction.
(6) Be responsible for the coordination of interdepartmental
operations.
(7) Negotiate contracts, subject to the approval of the Council.
(8) Make recommendations concerning the nature and location of
Borough improvements as determined by the Council.
§ 13-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-2
1:17
(9) Recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may
deem necessary or expedient.
(10) Make studies and surveys of such municipal problems of the
Borough of South River as shall be assigned to him, from time to
time, by the Mayor and Council and prepare and submit written
reports of his findings and determinations to the Mayor and Council
for its consideration and action.
(11) Study continually present and future budgets, purchasing
procedures, administrative procedures and personnel organization
and policies and make such recommendations to the Mayor and
Council relating thereto as he shall deem necessary from time to
time.
(12) Be responsible for continually improving communications between
the various Borough personnel, departments, agencies and boards
and between such personnel, departments, agencies, boards and
the Mayor and Council.
(13) Make such inspections and reviews as may be necessary to ensure
all compliance by all persons and corporations having contractual
obligations to perform services for or sell goods to the Borough of
South River.
(14) Be responsible for the compiling, editing and prompt dissemination
and release of public information, upon the authorization of the
Mayor and Council.
(15) Act as the Borough's representative to the Middlesex County Joint
Insurance Fund, attend all meetings with respect thereto and
assume any other duties with respect to said position. [Amended
5-30-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-23]
(16) Be responsible for the overall supervision and maintenance of real
property owned by the Borough of South River.
(17) Act as liaison between the Borough of South River and the various
county, state and federal agencies, with respect to all applications
for funds and/or services needed or required by the Borough of
South River.
(18) Be responsible to see that any complaints concerning the functions
and obligations of the Borough of South River made by any of its
residents, are promptly attended to and a written record kept of
such complaints, when made and when and what action was taken
in response thereto, as well as provide information and assistance
in respect to such complaints.
(19) Perform such other administrative and ministerial duties and
functions as may be assigned to him by the Mayor and Council.
§ 13-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 13-2
1:18
§ 13-3. Salary.
The Borough Administrator shall receive as compensation for his services
an annual salary which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of
the ordinance governing salaries.
§ 13-4. Appointment. [Amended 8-3-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-36;
9-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-40]
Said Borough Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Borough Council for an indefinite term and may
not be removed except in accordance with the statute in such case made
and provided.
§ 13-5. Administrative report to Council.
The Borough Administrator shall report to the Mayor and the Borough
Council administratively.
§ 13-6. Removal.
The Administrator may be removed by a majority vote of the authorized
membership. The resolution of removal shall become effective three months
after its adoption by the Council. The Council may provide that the
resolution shall have immediate effect; provided, however, that the Council
shall cause to be paid to the Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance
of his salary for the next three calendar months following adoption of the
resolution.
§ 13-7. Political activity.3
Political activity shall be controlled by Article X of Chapter 68, Personnel
Regulations.
(20) Make any recommendations which he may believe will increase the
efficiency of the administrative operation of the Borough of South
River.
(21) Make any and all reports necessary to the Mayor and Council,
including monthly reports, and at the close of the year, make an
annual report of Borough government activities and cause the
Chief Financial Officer to make monthly financial reports to the
governing body. [Amended 5-30-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-23]
B. No duty set forth herein shall be deemed to authorize the performance
or interference, in any way, with the duties and functions of any other
municipal official or employee, nor shall such any other municipal
official or employee be relieved of any of his responsibilities or duties
heretofore assigned or prescribed by law.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 13-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-8
1:19
§ 13-8. Qualifications.
The Borough Administrator shall be chosen on the basis of his executive and
administrative abilities and qualifications, with special regard to education,
training and experience in governmental affairs.
§ 13-9. Additional duties. [Amended 7-27-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-27;
5-30-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-23]
In addition to the foregoing, the Borough Administrator shall be responsible
for the following:
§ 13-10. Vacation, personal leave and sick leave. [Added 5-30-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-23]
The Administrator is hereby entitled to vacation, personal leave and sick
leave as set forth in the Borough Administrator's contract in effect during
his term of employment.
§ 13-11. Acting Borough Administrator. [Added 11-28-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-39; amended 12-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-34; 9-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-17]
A. Investigating the affairs of any officer or department.
B. Establishing and maintaining sound personnel policies and practices
and maintaining appropriate personnel records of all employees.
C. Assist the Chief Financial Officer and Auditor in preparing the annual
operating capital budgets and directing them to be submitted to the
Council at a date in accordance with the procedures established by the
governing body.
D. Acting as the authorizing officer with respect to all vouchers and bills
submitted to the Mayor and Council for final approval.
A. In the event the Borough Administrator is unable to perform his/her
duties due to vacation, ill health, leave of absence, suspension or any
other reason, then and in that event, the Chief Financial Officer shall
assume the duties and responsibilities of the Borough Administrator
until such time as the Borough Administrator shall resume the duties of
the office or for a period of no longer than 30 consecutive days. The
Chief Financial Officer shall be paid a stipend in the amount of $200 per
day during the absence.
B. In the event the Chief Financial Officer is also unavailable and is unable
to perform the duties as Acting Borough Administrator due to vacation,
ill health, leave of absence, suspension or any other reason, the Mayor
is hereby authorized to immediately make an interim acting
appointment from the employees of the Borough as is necessary to
ensure that the functions of the office of Borough Administrator will
continue uninterrupted until either the Borough Administrator or the
§ 13-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 13-11
1:20
Chief Financial Officer shall again be available for performance of his
duties. Such appointment shall only be effective for no longer than
30 consecutive days. The Interim Acting Administrator shall be paid a
stipend in the amount of $200 per day during the absence.
C. In the event the position of Borough Administrator is vacant or there is
an anticipated absence of the Borough Administrator for more than 30
consecutive days, the Mayor is hereby authorized to immediately make
an Acting Administrator Appointment as is necessary to ensure that the
functions of the office of Borough Administrator will continue
uninterrupted. The Acting Business Administrator shall be
compensated pursuant to an employment agreement with the Borough.
§ 13-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-11
1:21

ARTICLE II
Executive Assistant
[Adopted 4-5-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-8; amended in its entirety
9-10-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-35 (Ch. 5, Art. II, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 13-12. Position created.
The position of Executive Assistant within the Borough Administrator's
Office is hereby created and shall be a full-time position. There shall be a
minimum of one Executive Assistant.
§ 13-13. Duties.
The Executive Assistant within the Borough Administrator's Office shall
perform the following duties:
A. Performs secretarial assignments of complex natures that involve
independent judgment for department heads.
B. Gathers, collates and classifies information to compile and maintain
various reports and complaints.
C. Composes correspondence for department heads along with memos
and notices.
D. Opens, screens and routes incoming mail to designated departments.
E. Maintenance of financial/budget records for all departments.
F. Answers incoming telephone calls, directs phone calls to appropriate
persons, records messages and provides information as required.
G. Answers phone and questions from the public, residents, employees,
businesses and department heads, which pertain to departmental
functions.
H. Types reports, forms, memos and all correspondence of a confidential
nature for the Borough Administrator or other administrative officials
as assigned by the Borough Administrator.
I. Maintains and initiates all requisitions for the department and other
departments when necessary.
J. Maintains general files and payroll records for the department.
K. Maintains vacation, personnel and compensatory time off records for
the department.
L. Performs secretarial duties as required by the Borough Administrator
or other administrative officials as assigned by the Borough
Administrator.
M. May be assigned to work in any office or department of the Borough as
necessary by the Borough Administrator.
§ 13-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-13
1:23
§ 13-14. Salary.
The Executive Assistant within the Borough Administrator's Office shall
receive as compensation for services an annual salary, which shall be fixed
in accordance with the provisions of the ordinances governing the salaries.
§ 13-15. Appointment.
Said Executive Assistant within the Borough Administrator's Office shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council
for an indefinite term and may not be removed except for cause as required
by law.
N. Attends department head meetings as directed by the Borough
Administrator.
O. Schedules all appointments with the Borough Administrator or other
administrative officials as assigned by the Borough Administrator and
schedules all functions and receptions as per the directions of the
Borough Administrator.
P. Confirms compliance with the purchasing policy.
Q. Assists administrative officials of a department or autonomous
government agency by completing administrative transcription and
clerical work.
R. Drafts resolutions of a simple nature as directed by the Borough
Administrator or other administrative officials as assigned by the
Borough Administrator.
S. Troubleshoots under the immediate direction of an administrative
official as directed by the Borough Administrator.
T. Collects and analyzes data needed as a basis for administrative
decisions.
U. Supervises directly or indirectly the establishment and maintenance of
records and files in the Borough Administrator's Office or other
administrative officials as assigned by the Borough Administrator.
V. Directly supervises clerical and related work involving maintaining
financial and/or personal records or other supervision as directed by
the Borough Administrator or other administrative officials as assigned
by the Borough Administrator.
W. Any and all other duties as directed by the Borough Administrator or
other administrative officials as assigned by the Borough Administrator
and/or Mayor and Council.
§ 13-13 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 13-15
1:24
ARTICLE III
Code Enforcement Officer
[Adopted 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-27 (Ch. 5, Art. III, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 13-16. Creation of position; responsibilities.
§ 13-17. Appointment; removal.
The Code Enforcement Officers shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Borough Council for an indefinite term and may
not be removed except in accordance with the statute and such case made
and provided or by majority vote of the authorizing membership of the
Council.
§ 13-18. Powers and duties. [Amended 6-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-22]
The powers and duties of the Code Enforcement Officer shall include but
are not limited to:
A. The position of Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of South River
is hereby created and the employment of a person or persons, either
part-time or full-time, under direction, to perform various types of field
and office work involved in seeing that residents, business places, and
citizens comply with various municipal ordinances other than the State
Sanitary Code, State Uniform Construction Code, or any of the
subcodes is authorized. Said individual or individuals may be required
to enforce the State Uniform Fire Code as a Borough Fire Inspector (if
so appointed) and do other related duties as required.
B. This position is responsible for the enforcement of all Borough codes
and resolutions with a particular emphasis on property maintenance
regulations. The incumbent may also be required to obtain and
maintain a valid New Jersey State certified fire inspector license as
provided by the New Jersey State Department of Community Affairs.
C. This individual may be required to do other related duties as requested
from the Mayor and Borough Council. [Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-22]
A. Conducting field inspections and special investigations to ensure
compliance with various municipal ordinances.
B. Initiate and enforce rules and regulations in relation to enforcement of
various municipal ordinances.
C. Initiate necessary legal action against violators of various municipal
ordinances.
D. Prepare needed reports.
§ 13-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-18
1:25
E. Establish and maintain needed records and files.
F. May assist in promulgation of municipal ordinances.
G. Attend meetings at municipal agencies as requested.
H. Appear and testify in a Municipal Court or other appropriate board or
agencies to obtain compliance with all laws and ordinances.
I. Submit monthly reports of inspections made including names and
addresses of owners, occupants, or lessees of premises, dates of
inspections, code violations found, if any, notice of violations served,
complaints filed with courts or agencies and dates if compliance or
disposition of cases.
J. Coordinate inspections of occupancies requiring joint inspection with
other public agencies such as the Health Department, Building
Department, Police department and other appropriate bodies and
agencies.
K. Prepare periodic reports of inspections and investigations.
L. Establish and maintain a complete and comprehensive record system of
inspections.
M. Inspect the interior and exterior of premises for safety hazards or
unsightly or unsanitary conditions such as loose and overhanging
objects, accumulation of ice, excavations, projections, obstructions and
so forth.
N. Inspect exterior porches, elevated patios, landings, balconies, stairs
and fire escapes to see that they are in good condition.
O. Inspect the exterior of structures to see that they are maintained in
good repair and that they are free of broken glass, loose shingles,
peeling paint or crumbling stone, brick or cement.
P. Inspect signs in response of complaints of alleged violation of local
Zoning Code (Chapter 350).
Q. Conduct inspections of such sites and write initial complaint and may
refer matters to the Zoning Officer.
R. Advises owner or other person of violations to the Zoning Code
(Chapter 350).
S. Receive complaints and inspect business premises for display of proper
license, check license to see if it is valid and if no license is displayed or
license validation has expired, issue a written notice of violations.
T. In response to complaints, inspect sites for garbage, refuse, and/or
debris having accumulated and order that matter be abated or issue
notice of violation of local code pertaining to same.
§ 13-18 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 13-18
1:26
§ 13-19. Required knowledge, abilities and skills. [Amended
6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-22]
The Code enforcement Officer shall have the following knowledge, abilities
and skills including but not limited to:
U. Will be required to learn and utilize various types of electronic and/or
manual recording or computerized information systems used by the
agency, office or related units.
A. Knowledge of provisions of the municipal rules, regulations, policies,
procedures and ordinances.
B. Knowledge of problems involved in organizing work and developing
effective work methods both in the field and in the office.
C. Knowledge of procedures to be followed and precautions to be taken on
observing and collecting facts which are significant in determining
whether laws are being observed.
D. Knowledge of inspection techniques and the writing of reports that
substantiate findings and serve as a basis for legal proceedings.
E. Ability to analyze, comprehend and interpret municipal rules,
regulations, policies, procedures and ordinances and apply them to
specific cases.
F. Ability to note significant conditions and to take proper action when
action is called for in accordance with prescribed procedures.
G. Ability to make accurate observations and record conditions and
abstract and note those things, which are significant.
H. Ability to make necessary inspections and investigations without giving
unnecessary violations.
I. Ability to take and maintain a firm, correct stand when controversial
matters are considered.
J. Ability to prepare clear, sound, accurate and informative reports
containing findings, conclusions and recommendations.
K. Ability to establish and maintain needed records and files.
L. Ability to make evaluative judgments based upon the application of
statutory regulatory provisions.
M. Ability to learn to utilize various types of electronic and/or manual
recordings and information systems used by the agency, office or
related units.
N. Ability to read, write, speak, understand or communicate in English
sufficiently to perform the duties of this position. American Sign
§ 13-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-19
1:27
§ 13-20. Education, experience and training. [Added 6-13-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-22]
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the following education,
experience and training:
§ 13-21. Dress code. [Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-22]
Attire shall be business professional. Attire must be suitable for the position
in order to maintain the professional image of the Code Enforcement
Department (no jeans, shorts, T-shirts).
§ 13-22. Compensation; salary. [Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-22]
The Code Enforcement Officer shall receive as compensation for services an
annual salary, which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the
ordinances governing the salaries.
Language or Braille may also be considered as acceptable forms of
communication.
A. One year of experience in conducting inspections or investigations to
detect violations of and assure compliance with laws, rules and
regulations.
B. Possess a driver's license valid in New Jersey only if the operation of the
vehicle rather than employee mobility is necessary to perform essential
duties of the position.
C. Knowledge of personal computer and peripheral equipment, typewriter,
calculator, Word, Excel, Access, Power Point and Web-based
applications.
§ 13-19 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 13-22
1:28
ARTICLE IV
Office Manager
[Adopted 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-22]
§ 13-23. Position created.
The position of Office Manager within the Borough Administrator's Office is
hereby created and shall be either a full-time or part-time position.
§ 13-24. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Office Manager shall include but not be limited
to:
A. Prepare administrative correspondence, memoranda and statements.
B. May draft proposed ordinances and/or resolutions.
C. Collect and analyze data needed as a basis for administrative decisions.
D. May directly supervise some designated phase or phases of the clerical
and related work involved in maintaining financial and/or personnel
records, preparing payrolls, making purchases, compiling needed
statistical and other data, checking and approving invoices/vouchers
and collecting/depositing money.
E. Conduct special investigations for administrative officials.
F. Make decisions requiring knowledge of the organization.
G. Supervise, directly or indirectly, the establishment and maintenance of
records and files.
H. Maintaining all personnel files on existing, retired personnel as well as
Fire Department and Rescue Squad personnel.
I. Post and advertise for all jobs in house, newspaper and Web-site
advertisements.
J. Prepare, update and circulate all job descriptions.
K. Accept all employment applications and forward them to the correct
department.
L. Central purchasing of supplies for all departments within the Borough.
M. Handle postage including monthly report to finance and purchasing
postage when authorized for purchase through the finance office.
N. Handle the updating and distribution of the Borough Code Book,
through General Code Publishers.
§ 13-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-25
1:29
§ 13-25. Required knowledge, abilities and skills.
The Officer Manager shall have the following knowledge, abilities and skills
including but not limited to:
§ 13-26. Education, experience and training.
The Office Manager shall have the following education, experience and
training:
A. Considerable knowledge of department services, programs, policies
and procedures.
B. Knowledge of effective principles and practices of office management
and work organization.
C. Knowledge of effective supervisory methods, practices and techniques.
D. Knowledge of business English, composition, spelling, grammar and
punctuation.
E. Knowledge of bookkeeping principles and practices.
F. Knowledge of methods used in preparing and supervising preparation
of statistical and other reports containing findings, conclusions and
recommendations.
G. Ability to plan, organize, coordinate, assign and evaluate the work of
assigned staff.
H. Ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing.
I. Ability to prioritize tasks, mesh numerous tasks assignments from
various sources, cope with interruptions and meet rigid deadlines.
J. Ability to analyze complex office problems and develop and implement
sound solutions.
K. Ability to provide assignments and instructions to individuals and
groups.
L. Ability to establish effective working relationships with other
employees, elected officials and the general public. Respond
courteously to inquiries, provide information within scope of
responsibility and refer calls as appropriate to other parties.
M. Ability to maintain confidentiality and to work in a sometimes stressful
environment.
N. Ability to operate a personal computer and various application software
as well as other standard office equipment.
O. Ability to communicate effectively with diverse and sometime irate
individuals and to handle calmly and efficiently situations ranging from
routine to emergency.
§ 13-25 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 13-26
1:30
§ 13-27. Dress code.
Attire shall be business professional. Attire must be suitable for the position
in order to maintain the professional image of the Administration
Department (no jeans, shorts, T-shirts).
§ 13-28. Compensation; salary.
The Office Manager shall receive as compensation for services an annual
salary, which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the
ordinances governing the salaries.
A. An associate's degree in office management or related field (or
equivalent experience) and five year's office experience, including
supervisory experience; or any combination of education and
experience which would provide the applicant with the desired skills,
knowledge and ability required to perform the job.
B. Must possess a valid New Jersey driver's license.
§ 13-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-28
1:31

ARTICLE V
Receptionist
[Adopted 10-24-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-56]
§ 13-29. Position created. [Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-6]
The position of receptionist within the Administration Department is hereby
created, and there shall be one full-time receptionist. Hours of work for said
full-time receptionist shall be set by the Business Administrator.
§ 13-30. Duties. [Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-6]
The full-time receptionist within the Administration Department shall
perform the following duties:
A. Receives callers, determines their reasons for visiting the office,
provides them with the required information according to Department
procedure and, if possible, sees that the desired objectives are
achieved.
B. Notifies department personnel of caller's names and other relevant
information and, when so instructed, schedules appointments.
C. Answers the telephone and gives information.
D. Assures that callers who have appointments with department staff
members are seated and that all persons concerned are notified of the
caller's arrival.
E. Receives, sorts and distributes incoming letters and packages.
F. Weighs, seals and stamps outgoing mail and packages.
G. Refers complicated inquiries and/or callers who have come to the
wrong place to the proper individual or unit.
H. Performs varies clerical duties, including typing, filing and checking.
I. Prepares entry level reports.
J. Maintains essential files and records.
K. Places and receives local, regular, toll and long-distance calls and relays
intra-system calls.
L. Provides directory assistance and assists in placing calls including
conference calls, advises callers of telephone numbers, if extensions
are busy.
M. Provides general information regarding agency organization, location
and staff, direct requests for other information to the correct staff
member or department.
N. Assists callers using the automated telephone system.
§ 13-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-30
1:33
§ 13-31. Education, experience and training.
The appointees will be required to possess a driver's license valid in the
State of New Jersey only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee
mobility, is necessary to perform the essential duties of the position. The
appointee must possess a high school diploma or it's equivalent and have
the following knowledge, abilities and skills:
O. May monitor calls received by the automated system to ensure that the
system is functioning.
P. Types documents from various forms of copy.
Q. Receives and signs for mail, letters and packages.
R. Directs visitors.
S. Place emergency calls if needed.
A. Knowledge of department rules, regulations, policies, programs,
functions, layout and personnel.
B. Knowledge of the functions and responsibilities of the unit and of the
approved methods of providing information to the public.
C. Knowledge of the names and professional status of persons calling
frequently at the office.
D. Knowledge of office deadlines, routines, scheduled and procedures.
E. Ability to meet and deal courteously and effectively with varied types of
persons.
F. Ability to give information in person or over the telephone clearly,
accurately and in accord with department regulations and procedures.
G. Ability to ascertain caller's reasons for coming to the office and refer
them to the proper individuals or departments.
H. Ability to schedule appointments accurately and to make certain that
misunderstandings do not occur.
I. Ability to learn to recognize faces and remember names quickly and
accurately.
J. Ability to performed varied types of clerical tasks including the receipt,
sorting, distributing, weighing, sealing and stamping of mail, typing
and filing.
K. Ability to maintain a central records and files.
L. Ability to read, write, speak, understand and communicate in English
sufficiently to perform the duties of this position.
M. Familiarity and able to use copiers, adding machines and fax machines.
§ 13-30 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 13-31
1:34
§ 13-32. Dress code.
The appointee shall dress in business professional attire. The attire must be
suitable for the position in order to maintain the professional image of the
position of receptionist. No jeans, shorts or T-shirts are allowed.
§ 13-33. Salary. [Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-6]
The full-time receptionist within the Administration Department shall
receive as compensation for services an annual salary, which shall be fixed
in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance governing the salaries.
§ 13-34. Appointment. [Amended 2-12-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-6]
The full-time receptionist shall be within the Borough Administrator's office
and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Borough Council for an indefinite term and may not be removed except for
cause as required by law.
N. Knowledge of computer programs including Excel, Assess, Print Shop,
Word and Internet. Successful candidates must also have the ability to
type a minimum of 45 words per minute.
§ 13-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-34
1:35
Chapter 17
AGING, OFFICE ON
§ 17-1. Creation.
There is hereby created in the Borough of South River an office to be known
as the "Office on Aging."
§ 17-2. List of employees.
The Office on Aging shall consist of the following employees, which shall be
hired as set forth in this chapter:
§ 17-3. Duties and responsibilities of Director.
The Director of the Office of Aging shall have the following duties and
responsibilities with respect to said position:
A. Director. The Director of the Office on Aging shall be either a full-time
or part-time position as determined by the governing body and shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
Said appointee shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body and
shall be removed for good cause. [Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-46]
B. Part-time assistant. The Office on Aging shall have a maximum of two
part-time assistant positions which shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Borough Council of the Borough of South River upon the
recommendation of the Business Administrator.
C. Bus driver. There shall be within the Office of Aging a minimum of one
part-time and one full-time bus driver who shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of South River. [Amended
12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-48]
A. Be responsible for all aspects and administration of the South River
Office on Aging.
B. Supervise, evaluate, and schedule all employees assigned the Office on
Aging.
C. Be responsible for scheduling and supervising the bus/transportation
services.
D. Serve as liaison for senior benefits and insurance services.
E. Pursue, investigate, prepare and monitor grant opportunities for the
Office on Aging.
F. Maintain and distribute a comprehensive monthly calendar of programs
and events.
§ 13-34 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 17-3
17:36
§ 17-4. Duties and responsibilities of part-time assistant.
The part-time assistant in the Office on Aging shall have the following duties
and responsibilities with respect to said position:
G. Maintain a comprehensive database and records programs for the
Office on Aging and all of its programs.
H. Administer the Triad program, ID program and all other programs
approved by the governing body.
I. Pursue, investigate, develop, prepare and monitor new programs for
the Office on Aging; coordinate programs and service with local and
county officials.
J. Prepare and present the annual Office on Aging budget to the Borough
Administrator, Finance Committee and Mayor and Council, as directed.
K. Accept and follow up on requests, proposals, and complaints from
citizens and accommodate reasonable requests.
L. Coordinate programs and projects with other department heads.
M. Coordinate and keep the Borough Administrator informed.
N. Assure that the Office on Aging is at all times in compliance with all
Borough, state and federal reporting requirements, rules, regulations
and statues.
O. Maintain, collect and report all monies received by the Office on Aging
in the appropriate format as designated by the Chief Financial Officer
and the Borough Auditor.
P. Other duties as assigned.
A. Shall report to the Director of the Office on Aging.
B. Answer telephone calls in a timely, professional and courteous manner;
take appropriate action on each call in accordance with established
Office on Aging procedures.
C. Answer routine inquiries and refer clients to an appropriate source for
assistance in accordance with established procedures.
D. Provide information on SR Office on Aging, county and federal
programs and services.
E. Assist clients to complete forms, make phone calls and schedule
appointments.
F. Assist in the preparation of calendars, newsletters, forms, etc.
G. Perform clerical duties such as filing, typing, word processing,
photocopying and mailing out material and mail sorting.
§ 17-3 AGING, OFFICE ON § 17-4
17:37
§ 17-5. Part-time bus driver.
The Office on Aging shall have a minimum of one part-time bus driver who
shall report directly to the Director of the Office on Aging and have the
following duties and responsibilities:
§ 17-6. Full-time bus driver. [Added 12-19-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-48]
The Office on Aging shall have a minimum of one full-time bus driver who
shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
H. Maintain, process, and OOA client records.
I. Coordinate, arrange and represent OOA on trips and events as
required. Part-time assistant may be assigned as a department
representative for trips and events.
J. Assist Director and other staff members with duties as assigned.
A. To obtain all directions and travel information needed to ensure the
most expedited, cost effective and safe route.
B. To obtain all bus passenger logs at close of each business day; annotate
list to ensure all passengers are picked up and returned to their desired
location; write all additional walk-on unscheduled passengers on logs;
keep copies of all log information in monthly folders at the Office on
Aging for monthly measurements review.
C. Review events and schedule on a day-to-day and ongoing basis with
Office on Aging Director to ensure total time allowed for each event
scheduled enables driver to maintain total hours less than 28 hours a
week.
D. Maintain bus by sweeping aisles, keeping traffic areas free of debris,
clean seats and report maintenance concerns to Director and Borough
garage; ensure all appropriate and legal signage is posted as required.
All posted items (i.e., bumper stickers, posters, advertisements, etc.)
must have approval of the Director prior to posting.
A. The full-time bus driver shall have the same duties and responsibilities
as the part-time bus driver and set forth in § 17-5 herein.
B. In addition to the above, the full-time bus driver shall review events and
schedules on an ongoing basis with the Office on Aging Director to
ensure that the time allowed for each event scheduled enables the
driver to maintain total hours worked a week of 40 hours or under. Any
hours above 40 hours a week must have approval in writing/verbal at
least two days in advanced by the Director of the Office on Aging. In the
event that the Director cannot be reached for authorization, the
Business Administrator or Borough Council liaison may be contacted
for authorization.
§ 17-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 17-6
17:38
§ 17-7. Salaries.
The Director of the Office on Aging and all employees of the Office on Aging
shall be paid a salary as set forth in the Salary Ordinance in the Borough of
South River
§ 17-8. Dress code.
All employees including the Director of the Office on Aging shall adhere to
any dress code instituted and adopted by the governing body of the Borough
of South River. In the event that a dress code is adopted with Borough
uniforms, the Borough shall supply the individual with the necessary
uniforms. In the event any uniforms become destroyed or beyond repair as
result of the duties of said individual or normal wear and tear, the Borough
shall be responsible to replace said uniforms at the Borough's sole cost and
expense.
§ 17-9. Office space; hours.
The governing body shall designate office space to be utilized by the Office
on Aging. Said space shall be maintained by the Borough of South River.
Hours of said office shall be determined by the Mayor and Borough Council
and/or its designees.
§ 17-10. Council liaison.
The Borough Council shall appoint one of its members to serve as Council
liaison to the Office on Aging.
C. In the case of a scheduled absence from the office the full-time bus
driver will give as much advance notice as possible, not to be less than
three weeks. Emergency call-outs need to be made to the Office on
Aging Director the night before or, at a minimum, four hours prior to
pickup/start time. The Office on Aging Director will either cancel
transportation for that day or call the part-time bus driver to cover.
D. When on an extended or long-distance trip, the driver will be paid an
hourly rate from the time the vehicle is picked up to the time of dropoff
of the bus at the Borough garage. For local shopping trips (less than
three miles), if there is more than 30 minutes of wait time, the driver
will report back to the office and perform other duties assigned by the
Director. The driver will work until it is time to return for client pickup.
The driver is to perform all tasks in a timely, efficient and professional
manner. Total daily work hours including pickup and dropoff are
calculated on each month event scheduled.
E. The full-time bus driver shall also complete all of the duties that are
assigned by the Director of the Office on Aging and/or Business
Administrator.
§ 17-6 AGING, OFFICE ON § 17-11
17:39
§ 17-11. Fee schedule. [Added 4-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-9]
The fee schedule in Chapter 155, Fees, shall be in effect with respect to
all of the listed activities and shall be due and payable at the time said
individual registered to attend the activity.
Chapter 22
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 59. Personnel regulations — See Ch. 68.
§ 17-11 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 17-11
17:40
ARTICLE I
Board of Health4
[Adopted 5-15-1902 (Ch. 8, Art. III, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 22-1. Establishment.
There shall be in and for the Borough of South River a Board of Health
in accordance with the provisions of the Act of the Legislature of New
Jersey entitled "An Act to Establish in This State Boards of Health and
a Bureau of Vital Statistics, and to Define Their Respective Powers and
Duties," approved March 31, 1887, and the several supplements thereto.
§ 22-2. Membership; terms of office. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord.
No. 1977-6; 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-45]
§ 22-3. Organization.
Said Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its own
government and shall elect a President and Treasurer from among its own
members.
A. Said Board of Health shall consist of seven members and two alternate
members. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Borough Council. Of the members first
appointed, two shall hold office for a term of one year, two shall hold
office for terms of two years and three shall hold office for terms of
three years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for terms of three
years. The alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2, and their terms
shall be for two years, except that the terms of the alternate members
first appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for
Alternate No. 2. Thereafter, all members appointed shall hold office for
terms of three years, except that appointments to fill vacancies shall be
for the expired term only.
B. An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he requests
one, be removed by the governing body for cause. An alternate member
may participate in discussions of Board proceedings but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
4. Editor's Note: See Part III, Board of Health Legislation, of this Code.
§ 22-1 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-4
17:41
§ 22-4. Appointees and other officers. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord.
No. 1977-6]
Said Board of Health shall appoint a Registrar of Vital Statistics, Clerk
and Sanitary Inspector and may appoint such officers from among its own
members, and one person may hold more than one of said offices; and said
Board may also appoint such other officers or assistants as said Board of
Health may deem necessary. All appointees of said Board of Health shall be
governed by the rules of said Board and they may be removed for cause
by said Board. The police officers of said Borough shall be special Sanitary
Inspectors, and they shall promptly report to the Board of Health every
violation of the health ordinances of the Borough which may come within
their observation or knowledge.
§ 22-5. Limitation on debts.
The said Board of Health shall not contract any debt or debts of any
kind beyond the amount of the appropriation first made for its use by the
Council.
§ 22-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-5
17:42
ARTICLE II
(Reserved)5
§ 22-6. through § 22-9. (Reserved)
5. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Parking Authority, adopted 3-27-1950 (Ch. 8, Art. V, of the
1977 Code), as amended 4-10-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-6, was repealed 3-9-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-07.
§ 22-6 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-6
17:43

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)6
§ 22-10. through § 22-11. (Reserved)
6. Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Housing Authority, adopted 8-14-1950 (Ch. 8, Art. VIII, of
the 1977 Code), was repealed 3-9-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-07.
§ 22-10 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-10
17:45

ARTICLE IV
Environmental Commission/Shade Tree Advisory Board
[Adopted 9-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-207]
§ 22-12. Creation; membership.
There shall be a commission known as the "Environmental Commission/
Shade Tree Advisory Board of the Borough of South River" composed of
seven members who shall be residents of the Borough. Each member shall
be appointed upon nomination of the Mayor, one of whom shall also be a
member of the South River Borough Planning Board. The membership of
the Environmental Commission/Shade Tree Advisory Board of the Borough
of South River shall upon its first meeting of each calendar year elect from
its own members by majority vote the Chairperson and presiding officer of
the Commission.
§ 22-13. Alternate members.
In addition to the regular members of the Environmental Commission/Shade
Tree Advisory Board, the Mayor shall appoint two alternate members who
shall be residents of the Borough.
A. Alternate members shall be designated, at the time of appointment, as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate
members shall be two years, except that the terms of the alternate
members first appointed shall be, commencing January 1 of the year of
appointment, two years for Alternate No. 1, and one year for Alternate
No. 2. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by the expiration of a term
shall be filled by the appointment of the Mayor for the unexpired term
only.
B. An alternate member shall not be permitted to act in any matter in
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he requests
one, be removed by the governing body for cause, in the same manner
as provided for the removal of regular members.
C. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. No vote shall be delayed in order that a regular member may
vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote
first.
7. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IV, Environmental/Shade Tree
Commission, adopted 8-11-1976 by Ord. No. 1976-23, amended in its entirety 12-27-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-42 (Ch. 8, Art. X, of the 1977 Code), as subsequently amended.
§ 22-12 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-13.1
17:47
§ 22-13.1. Advisory consultants. [Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-2]
In addition to the regular members and alternate members of the
Environmental Commission/Shade Tree Advisory Board, the Mayor shall
appoint two advisory consultants. Advisory consultants may participate in
discussions of the proceedings but may not vote. Advisory consultants shall
serve without compensation. There is no residency requirement for the
advisory consultants.
§ 22-14. Terms of office.
§ 22-15. Removal from office.
The governing body may remove any member of the Commission for cause,
after written charges have been served upon the member and after a
hearing on the charges, at which time the member shall be entitled to
be heard in person or by counsel, which expense shall be borne by the
Commissioner.
§ 22-16. Powers.
A. terms of office of the first commissioners shall be for one, two or three
years, to be designated by the Mayor in making his appointments so
that the terms of approximately 1/3 of the members will expire each
year, and their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years
and until the appointment and qualification of their successors.
B. A vacancy occurring on the Commission other than by expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
A. The Commission shall have the following powers:
(1) To conduct research into the use and possible use of open land
areas of the Borough.
(2) To coordinate the activities of all unofficial bodies which are
organized for purposes similar to that of the Commission.
(3) To advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts,
plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for
its purpose.
(4) To keep and maintain an index of all open areas, publicly or
privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps or other
wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of such
areas.
(5) To recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs for
inclusion in a municipal Master Plan and the development and use
of such open land areas.
§ 22-13.1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-16
17:48
§ 22-17. Tree removal/application. [Amended 3-25-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-04]
§ 22-18. Records of meetings.
(6) To study and make recommendations concerning open space
preservation, water resources management, air pollution control,
solid waste management, noise control, soil and landscape
protection, environmental appearance and marine resources
protection.
(7) Subject to the approval of the governing body, to acquire property,
both real and personal, in the name of South River, by gift,
purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease, for any of its purposes,
and to administer the same for such purposes, subject to the terms
of the conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire the
fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement, including
conservation easement, covenant or other contractual right
(including a conveyance on conditions or with limitations or
reversions), as may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve,
protect, limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and properly
utilize open spaces and other land and water areas in the Borough.
(8) Said Commission shall have advisory power concerning the
regulation and control over the planting, care and control of shade
and ornamental trees and shrubberies upon or in highways, parks
or parkways (except county parks and parkways) in the Borough of
South River.
B. This Commission shall not have the power of condemnation or eminent
domain. It shall not have power to pledge the credit of the Borough or
to create any debt against it or in any manner act as the agent of the
Borough.
A. No shade tree on Borough property shall be removed without an
application submitted to the Borough. The Borough shall provide for the
necessary application to be issued to any property owner of the
Borough of South River who wishes to remove any shade tree within the
right-of-way of Borough streets. The Commission shall make
recommendation on the type of shade tree planting which would be
allowed within the rights-of-way of the Borough street if the property
owner requests a replacement.
B. An application fee of $25 shall be paid by the applicant at the time of
application to defray costs in the processing of the application.
A. The Commission shall keep records of meetings and activities and shall
make an annual report to the governing body.
B. The Commission shall establish rules and regulations to govern its
meetings and activities, not inconsistent with this article.
§ 22-16 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-19
17:49
§ 22-19. Expenses; employees.
The governing body may appropriate such funds as it deems necessary for
the expenses incurred by the Commission and may appoint such clerks and
other employees as it may from time to time require. Such appointments
shall be within the limits of funds appropriated to the Commission by the
governing body.
§ 22-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, as
the court deems necessary and just.
§ 22-19 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-20
17:50
ARTICLE V
Municipal Cultural Arts and Heritage Commission
[Adopted 9-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-39 (Ch. 8, Art. XI, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 22-21. Creation; regular membership. [Amended 9-24-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-32; 9-29-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-30; 8-23-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-26; 1-25-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-1]
There is hereby created a Municipal Cultural Arts and Heritage Commission
consisting of nine regular members. At least two regular members shall be
from among the following arts and professions: painting, sculpture, music,
literature, landscape and landscape architecture. At least one regular
member shall be learned in the historic or architectural traditions of the
Borough of South River. All members shall serve without compensation. The
members of the Commission who are first appointed shall be designated to
serve for terms of one, two, three, four and five years, respectively, from the
date of their appointments, but thereafter, members shall be appointed for a
term of five years, except that all vacancies shall be filled for the duration of
the unexpired term only. The term of office of members of the Commission
shall commence on January 1 of each year. Appointments shall be made by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council. All members
shall be citizens and residents of the Borough of South River.
§ 22-21.1. Alternate members. [Added 1-25-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-1]
§ 22-22. Election of Officers; meetings; by-laws. [Amended
7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-19]
A. Alternate members shall be designated, at the time of appointment, as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate
members shall be five years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by the
expiration of a term shall be filled by the appointment of the Mayor for
the unexpired term only.
B. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. No vote shall be delayed in order that a regular member may
vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote
first.
A. One of the members shall be elected by the members of the Commission
as Chairman; the Commission shall also elect a Vice Chairman and
Secretary.
B. The Commission shall conduct 10 monthly meetings annually at a date
and time to be determined, for which minutes shall be recorded by the
Secretary as set forth in the by-laws of said Commission.
§ 22-21 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-23
17:51
§ 22-23. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the power and duty to:
§ 22-24. Construal.
This article shall in no way be construed to deprive any other board or body
of the Borough of South River, including the Mayor and Borough Council, of
any jurisdiction to act upon any matter set forth in this article by virtue of
any of the provisions of this article, which provisions shall be deemed to be
directory only.
A. Review and report to the Mayor and Borough Council upon any
acquisition or disposition by the Borough and any placement on or
removal from any property of the Borough of works of art, prior to any
such acquisition, disposition, placement or removal. The term "works of
art" shall include but shall not be limited to paintings, mural
decorations, stained glass, statues, bas-reliefs or other sculpture,
monuments, fountains, arches or other structures of a permanent or
temporary character intended for ornament or commemoration.
B. Review and report to the Mayor and Borough Council upon the design
of buildings, bridges, viaducts, elevated ways, gates, fences, lamp
standards or other structures erected on or to be erected on any
property of the Borough of South River and upon the design of arches,
bridges, structures and approaches which are the property of any
corporation or private individual and which are to be erected so as to
extend over or upon any street, avenue, highway, park or other public
place of the Borough of South River prior to the approval of such design
or erection.
C. Prepare and maintain a roster of sites and structures in the Borough of
South River of historic significance and recommend to the Mayor and
Borough Council measures for the preservation of any structure on said
roster, including the acquisition and maintenance of a historical site,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:60-25.53.
D. Consult with owners of private property in relation to the beautification
of such property and with respect to the plans and designs or sketches
of proposed improvements thereto.
E. Act in an advisory capacity to the Mayor and Borough Council in
connection with the artistic and cultural development of the Borough of
South River.
F. Promote and help plan activities such as parades, exhibits, or similar
type events to commemorate the heritage of the Borough as well as
contributions made by its residents. [Added 8-23-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-26]
§ 22-23 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-24
17:52
ARTICLE VI
Advisory Committee for Persons with Disabilities
[Adopted 9-6-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-43 (Ch. 31 of the 1977 Code);
amended in its entirety 1-23-2012]
§ 22-25. Creation. [Amended 6-11-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-118]
There is created a Committee known as the "Mayor's Advisory Committee
for Person with Disabilities."
§ 22-26. Membership.
Said Committee shall consist of 11 members who have demonstrated
leadership, interest and involvement in the handicapped and disabled
issues.
§ 22-27. Term.
The terms of said 11 members shall be for periods of three years, with the
initial Committee being comprised of four members for periods of one year,
four members for periods of two years and three members for periods of
three years.
§ 22-28. Appointment; vacancy.
§ 22-29. Council liaison; officers. [Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-10]
§ 22-30. Duties. [Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-10]
The Committee shall review various forms of assistance, guidance and
programs to the handicapped and disabled residents of the Borough of
South River and make available information concerning same to such
residents and provide an advisory report of its activities to the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of South River for further review and determination.
A. Said members shall be appointed to the Committee by the Mayor of the
Borough of South River.
B. In the event of a vacancy, the Mayor shall appoint an individual who
shall serve for the balance of the unexpired term.
A. In addition to the 11 members above, the Borough Council shall appoint
the member of the governing body who serves as Human Services
liaison as Council liaison to the Committee; the Mayor shall also serve
as an ex officio member and may designate a Mayor’s alternate to the
Committee, whose term shall run concurrent with that of the Mayor.
B. The Committee shall elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary.
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renamed Art. VI from "Advisory Committee on Persons
with Special Needs" to "Advisory Committee for Persons with Disabilities."
§ 22-25 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-31
17:53
§ 22-31. Meetings. [Amended 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-10]
The Committee shall conduct one meeting at least quarterly at a date and
time to be determined and as set forth in the bylaws of said Committee and
shall also hold such special meetings as may be required by the Committee
and as set forth in the bylaws.
§ 22-31 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-31
17:54
ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)9
§ 22-32. through § 22-40. (Reserved)
9. Editor's Note: Former Art. VII, Advisory Committee on Illegal Housing, adopted 6-5-1991
by Ord. No. 1991-18 (Ch. 8, Art. XIII, of the 1977 Code), was repealed 3-9-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-07.
§ 22-32 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-32
17:55

ARTICLE VIII
Human Relations Commission
[Adopted 8-19-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-8 (Ch. 8, Art. XIV, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 22-41. Creation.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 10:5-10, a commission to be known as
the "Human Relations Commission of the Borough of South River" is hereby
established.
§ 22-42. Membership; appointment; term; vacancies; compensation.
The Commission shall consist of seven members, all of whom shall be
residents of the Borough of South River, to be appointed by the Mayor. Each
member shall serve for a term of three years, commencing January 1 of
the year of appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified,
except that of the members first appointed two shall serve for a term of one
year, two shall serve for a term of two years and three shall serve for a term
of three years. Vacancies caused other than by expiration of term shall be
filled in the same manner but for the unexpired term only. Members shall
serve without compensation. The first Chairman of the Commission shall be
designated by the Mayor, and thereafter the Chairman shall be elected by
the members, annually. The Commission may also elect, annually, a member
to serve as Secretary.
§ 22-43. Powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
§ 22-44. Council liaison; Mayor as ex officio member.
Upon creation of the Commission and at the Council's annual reorganization
meeting each year thereafter, the Borough Council shall appoint one of its
members as Council liaison to the Commission. The Mayor of the Borough
of South River shall serve as an ex officio member of the Commission.
A. To attempt to foster, through community effort or otherwise, good will,
cooperation and conciliation among the groups and elements of the
inhabitants of the community.
B. To make recommendations to the governing body for the development
of policies and procedures in general and for programs of formal and
informal education that will aid in eliminating all types of
discrimination based on race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
age, marital status, affectional or sexual orientation, familial status,
disability, nationality, sex or religion. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-31; 5-29-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-18]
§ 22-41 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-44
17:57

ARTICLE IX
Free Public Library Board of Trustees
[Adopted 5-10-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-14 (Ch. 8, Art. XV, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 22-45. Creation.
There is hereby created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq. of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey a body corporate which shall be known
as the "Trustees of the Free Public Library of the Borough of South River."
§ 22-46. Membership; terms of office; vacancies.
The Board of Trustees shall consist of nine members to be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the governing body pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:54-9 et seq.
§ 22-47. Powers and duties.
The Board of Trustees shall hold in trust and manage all property of the
library. Notwithstanding the above, the Trustees shall have all the duties
and powers set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq.
§ 22-45 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-47
17:59

ARTICLE X
Cable Television Advisory Board10
[Adopted 12-26-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-29 (Ch. 8, Art. XVI, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 22-48. Purpose.
The purpose of the Board shall be to assist the governing body in making
its determination in the award of cable television franchise and to monitor
the performance during the term of the franchise of the cable television
company that is awarded said franchise and to receive, investigate, report
and follow any complaints with respect to the service provided by the cable
franchise serving the Borough of South River.
§ 22-49. Creation; membership; terms. [Amended 3-9-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-4]
§ 22-50. Goals.
The Cable Television Advisory Board shall be established for the following:
A. There is hereby created in and for the Borough of South River a Cable
Television Advisory Board, which shall consist of three members, who
shall reside within the Borough of South River. The members of the
Board shall serve without compensation. The Board shall annually, upon
reorganization, elect a Chairman from its members. No resident shall
be permitted to serve on that Board if that member owns, controls or
acquires any direct or indirect interest in a CATV company, which has
applied for or received a municipal consent from the Borough pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
B. The Cable Television Advisory Board shall consist of three members
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council. Each member of the Board shall serve for a three-year term,
except that, in its initial term, the Mayor shall appoint one member to
serve a one-year term, one member to serve a two-year term, and one
member to serve a three-year term.
A. The Cable Television Advisory Board shall act as a cable television
complaint board (complaint officer) with respect to the Borough's cable
television franchise.
B. The Cable Television Advisory Board shall act as a government liaison
between the cable television franchisee and the citizens of the Borough
of South River.
C. The Cable Television Advisory Board shall make suggestions to and aid
TV 35 personnel in developing and coordinating a local access program
10.Editor's Note: See also Ch. A401, Cable Television Franchise.
§ 22-48 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-50
17:61
§ 22-51. Local access programming. [Amended 2-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-2]
The Cable Television Advisory Board shall also be responsible for aiding
and making suggestions to TV 35 personnel with respect to local access
programming within the Borough of South River. The Cable Television
Advisory Board shall be authorized to work with the citizens and Board of
Education, as well as other areas of local government and citizen groups, to
help aid in the development and maintenance of such a system. The Board
shall be authorized to hear from interested persons wishing to utilize the
local access channel for education, culture or entertainment programming.
The Board shall exercise no editorial discretion, except to ensure that all
state and federal regulations are complied with.
§ 22-52. Refranchising; evaluation of franchisee; report.
system for the Borough of South River. [Amended 2-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-2]
D. The Cable Television Advisory Board shall act as an advisory committee
for the franchising or refranchising of the CATV system within the
Borough of South River.
E. The Cable Television Advisory Board shall act as a liaison between the
cable television franchisee, the governing body and the citizens of the
Borough of South River. In this capacity, the Cable Television Advisory
Board may make recommendations to the governing body or the
franchisee for the improvement of service by the CATV system.
A. Pursuant to the Federal Communications Commission (47 CFR 76.5 et
seq.), the Cable Communication's Policy Act (47 U.S.C. § 546 et seq.), as
well as the Cable Television Act (N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.), and their
amendments and/or supplements, the Mayor and Borough Council
authorized the Cable Television Advisory Board to ascertain past,
present and future needs of the Borough with regard to the CATV
system. The Board shall be authorized to evaluate past and present
performance of the present franchisee and shall further be authorized
to evaluate the franchisee's proposal for addressing future needs of the
Borough. The Board is authorized to hold one or more public hearings
as it deems necessary commencing at least three years prior to the
expiration of any franchise term, for the purpose of determining the
past, present and future needs of the Borough, as well as determining
the past and present performance of the franchisee.
B. Upon determining the past, present and future needs of the Borough of
South River, as well as determining the past and present performance
of the franchisee, the Board shall issue a report to the governing body
and the franchisee with regard to its findings The franchisee shall then
be given the opportunity to come before the Cable Television Advisory
Board with a proposal for addressing the present and future needs
within the Borough.
§ 22-50 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-52
17:62
§ 22-53. Municipal complaint officer.
The South River Borough Cable Television Advisory Board is hereby
designated as the complaint officer for the Borough of South River pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq. All complaints shall be received and processed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-7.1.
C. During the refranchising or refranchising process before the Board of
Public Utilities, Office of Cable Television or any such successor as
authorized by the State of New Jersey, the Cable Television Advisory
Board shall be expressly authorized to appear and provide testimony
with regard to its findings. In addition to any hearing before the Office
of Cable Television with regard to matters regarding cable television,
franchising or refranchising, the Cable Television Advisory Board shall
expressly be authorized to make reports and offer testimony to the
governing body at any public hearing held concerning an application
for franchising or refranchising of a CATV system in the Borough of
South River.
§ 22-52 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-53
17:63

ARTICLE XI
Economic Development Commission
[Adopted 4-16-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-10 (Ch. 8, Art. XVII, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 22-54. Purpose.
There is hereby created the South River Economic Development
Commission which will have as its purposes and objectives the following:
A. To study the future growth of South River in regard to its economic
expansion and development.
B. To develop and recommend plans for the redevelopment of the
Borough's industrial and business districts.
C. To advise and recommend to the business and industrial communities
on improvements requiring private sector action.
D. To advise the Mayor and Council on improvements requiring local
government action.
E. To coordinate redevelopment in the business and industrial districts
and foster a closer working relationship between all interested
segments of the Borough of South River community.
F. To analyze and plan for the impact of the industrial and business district
of development in other areas of the Borough of South River.
G. To inquire into and publicize the advantages and utility of the vacant
lands of the municipality, whether municipally owned or privately
owned.
H. To study and analyze the various industries of the world to the extent it
deems necessary for its purposes, with a view to ascertain the
opportunities for the business and industrial expansion of the
municipality.
I. To advertise the business and industrial advantages and opportunities
of the Borough of South River and the availability of real estate within
the municipality for industrial and business purposes and to encourage
and accomplish such industrial and business settlement within the
municipality.
J. To solicit industries and business to purchase or lease the vacant lands
and properties of or in the municipality.
K. To recommend the sale or lease of the municipality's vacant lands to
industries and businesses whose settlement thereon is in the judgment
of the Commission, to advance the interests of the municipality and of
its citizens and inhabitants.
§ 22-54 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-54
17:65
§ 22-55. Membership.
L. To market title to vacant land owned by the municipality for the purpose
of resale or lease to industry or business whose presence within the
municipality will benefit, in the judgment of the Commission, its citizens
and inhabitants.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven regular members and four
alternates to be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council. [Amended 11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-208]
B. The Council shall also appoint a Council liaison for the South River
Economic Development Commission.
C. Regular members and alternates shall serve for terms of four years to
commence on January 1 of the year of appointment and until the
appointment and qualification of their successors; except that the terms
of the first two regular members and one alternate member shall be for
one year, the terms of the next two regular members and one alternate
member for a term of two years, the terms of the next two regular
members and one alternate member shall be three years and the terms
of the next one regular member and one alternate member shall be four
years, to be designated by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council, such as the terms of office of no more than two regular
members and no more than one alternate member shall expire in any
one year. [Amended 11-18-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-28]
D. All regular numbers shall exercise voting power. All alternate members
may participate in all discussions, but may not vote; except that
alternate members may vote in the absence of or disqualification of a
regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. The Mayor shall
designate alternates by number at the time of their initial appointment.
In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member
is to vote, lower-numbered alternates shall have preference over
higher-numbered alternates.
E. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be
filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
F. The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
G. No member of the Commission shall be directly or indirectly involved
with any contracts of sale, leases or agreements with connection to the
lands, buildings or other properties owned by the Borough of South
River.
H. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the purposes of
conducting a meeting. The members of the Commission shall choose
annually from among its members a Chairman, Vice Chairman,
Secretary and such other officers as it may deem necessary.
§ 22-54 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-56
17:66
§ 22-56. Meetings.
The Commission shall meet at least six times a year at such time and place
as said Commission shall fix by resolution at the annual reorganization
meeting of the Commission. The meeting of the Commission shall be open
to the public, unless determined by the Chairman of the Commission and
the majority of its members that a closed session is required to discuss any
of the following categories:
§ 22-57. Powers.
The South River Economic Development Commission shall have the powers
necessary to effectuate the purposes herein described, said powers
including, but not limited to the following:
§ 22-58. Limitation of powers.
A. Pending/anticipated litigation.
B. Contract negotiations.
C. Any matter falling within the attorney/client privilege.
D. Any other matter as allowed by state statute.
A. To adopt bylaws.
B. To propose and/or enter into agreements and contracts with persons,
firms, corporations or government entities, which agreements and
contracts may be necessary or convenient to the exercise of the
purposes and objectives of the Commission.
C. To coordinate the various public and business activities in the
downtown district and to establish an annual calendar of major
downtown events and to recommend to the governing body such
ordinance changes as may be necessary to carry out the various
purposes of the Commission.
D. To advise the governing body and the interested private segments of
the community regarding policies for the business and industrial
districts relative to its development and/or redevelopment.
E. To recommend and/or enter into contracts for professional services
which may be required to carry out the planning and coordination
functions of this Commission.
F. To search, find and recommend grants to the Borough of South River.
A. No Commission created under this chapter shall have any power of
condemnation or eminent domain.
B. No Commission created under this chapter shall have power to pledge
the credit of the municipality by which it is created, or of any other
municipality or of the State of New Jersey, or to create any debt against
§ 22-56 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-58
17:67
§ 22-59. Departmental assistance.
Subject to limitations as may hereinafter be determined by the governing
body, and so far as may be practicable, the employees and professional staff
of the Borough of South River shall be available to assist the Commission
in the performance of its duties. In all such cases, requests for employee
or professional staff assistance must be coordinated through the Business
Administrator.
or in any manner act as the agent of such municipality or of the State
of New Jersey.
C. The creation of a Commission by a municipality shall not be deemed to
limit in any manner the municipality's right to deal with its vacant lands
or to sell or lease the same, independently of such Commission, as
heretofore, but the powers conferred upon such municipality and
Commission by this chapter shall be in addition to any rights or powers
now possessed by such municipality with reference to its vacant lands
or other properties.
D. The governing body of the municipality creating the Commission under
this chapter may appropriate annually, during the life of this
Commission, such sums as may be reasonably necessary to conduct the
normal operations of the Commission, but no money so appropriated
shall be used by the Commission for the construction of any building or
to finance such construction. The South River Economic Development
Commission shall annually present to the Chief Financial Officer and
Business Administrator of the municipality its budget for operations for
the ensuing year, reflecting therein all unexpended balances on hand
from previous appropriations received from the municipality at the
same time, in the same manner and form as is required by other
departments of the municipality's government and the budget so
submitted shall be acted upon as is in the case of the budgets of other
municipal departments, and being so acted upon, shall be made a part
of the municipality's budget. The South River Economic Development
Commission shall keep complete and accurate records of all its
accounts and separate accounts shall be kept for its normal functions.
The South River Economic Development Commission shall not exceed
its budget, and moneys received from the municipality by which it has
been created shall be expended only for the purposes for which they
have been appropriated.
E. The Commission shall make an annual report to the governing body
setting forth in detail its operations and transactions for the preceding
12 months. In addition, the Commission shall regularly circulate to the
governing body copies of its meeting minutes. All records, reports and
data shall be available to the governing body for inspection at any time.
§ 22-58 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-59
17:68
ARTICLE XII
(Reserved)11
§ 22-60. through § 22-61. (Reserved)
11.Editor's Note: Former Art. XII, Grant Search Committee, adopted 7-16-1997 by Ord. No.
1997-20 (Ch. 8, Art. XVIII, of the 1977 Code), was repealed 3-9-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-07.
§ 22-60 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-60
17:69

ARTICLE XIII
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
[Adopted 12-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-65; amended in its entirety
3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-15]
§ 22-62. Purpose.
The purpose of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall be to assist
the governing body in making determinations with respect to the control of
the recreation and recreational places for the residents of the Borough. In
addition, the Advisory Board shall investigate, research and report to the
governing body with respect to any programs and/or events said Board feels
should be added or deleted with respect to the parks and recreation of the
Borough of South River. The Board shall also recommend to the governing
body the appropriate fees to be charged for use of Borough parks and
registration with Borough recreation programs. The governing body shall
from time to time by resolution authorize any change in such fees.
§ 22-63. Creation; membership; terms; background checks.
[Amended 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-07]
A. There is hereby created in and for the Borough of South River a Parks
and Recreation Advisory Board, which shall consist of nine members,
who shall reside within the Borough of South River. The members of the
Board shall serve without compensation. The Board shall annually, upon
reorganization, elect a Chairman from its voting members.
B. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of nine members
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, the Recreation Director and a member of the Borough Council
as liaison to the Board. The Borough of South River Council shall
appoint seven Borough residents as voting members and two nonvoting
junior members chosen from South River High School. Each voting
member of the Board appointed by the Mayor shall serve for a threeyear
term. The two nonvoting junior members chosen from South River
High School shall serve one-year terms.
C. Mandatory background checks for all volunteers, staff and independent
contractors of Borough that participate in youth programs. In order to
ensure the safety and well-being of the Borough's youth, an annual
mandatory background check will be required for all volunteers, staff
and any independent contractors of the Borough that participate in
Parks and Recreation youth programs.
(1) All background checks will be carried out in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq.
(2) Any person shall be excluded from volunteer and/or staff
participation in the Parks and Recreation youth programs if the
background check reveals a record of conviction of any of the
crimes and offenses listed in N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-3.
§ 22-62 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-63
17:71
§ 22-64. Reports to Mayor and governing body.
(3) All background checks shall be sent to the Recreation Director for
inspection and review. The Director shall submit his/her review to
the Borough Administrator.
(4) The prospective volunteer, staff member or independent contractor
shall be notified of a disqualification, in writing, by the Borough
Administrator.
A. The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall provide, at the very
minimum, an annual report with recommendations to the Recreation
Director and Borough Council liaison. Said report shall be provided in
November of each calendar year with the recommendations the
Advisory Board deems appropriate and necessary. The mandatory
report shall be filed in November to allow the Recreation Director and
Borough Council liaison to review the same and make the appropriate
determinations and take appropriate action with respect to the
programs for the new calendar year. Nothing herein shall restrict the
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board from issuing recommendations
and reports on a more frequent basis as deemed necessary by the Parks
and Recreation Advisory Board. A copy of the agenda and minutes from
each meeting of the Board shall be provided to the Recreation Director
and Borough Council liaison.
§ 22-63 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-64
17:72
ARTICLE XIV
Flood Control Commission
[Adopted 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-36 (Ch. 8, Art. XIX, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 22-65. Borough participation in Commission.
The Borough of South River agrees to participate in the creation and
operation of the South Central Middlesex County Flood Control Commission
(the "Commission") pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq. as follows:
A. The Boroughs of Helmetta, Jamesburg, Spotswood and South River and
the Townships of East Brunswick, Monroe and Old Bridge have been
invited to participate in the Commission; each municipality shall be
entitled to two regular representatives on the Commission.
B. The Commission shall be established in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:14-16 et seq. (the "statute").
C. The Commission shall:
(1) Collect, study and analyze data on flooding, past floods and the
causes of floods in the area;
(2) Make such data and studies available to the participating members,
to the Division of Water Policy and Supply, the Army Corps of
Engineers, local and county Planning Boards and officials
concerned with subdivision and development of properties within
the floodway and drainage areas;
(3) Keep itself informed as to the availability of state and federal funds
and grants, and the procedures for applying therefor, and shall
make such information available to participating members;
(4) Coordinate the activities of the participating members relating to
flooding, flood prevention, brook cleaning and the like;
(5) Encourage the acquisition of lands within the floodway and lowlying
areas, by appropriate County Park Commissions, counties or
participating municipalities;
(6) Publicize methods of flood control and flood prevention;
(7) Encourage its participating members, and others, to adopt
appropriate ordinances and regulations relating to flood control;
(8) Encourage its participating members to support other programs
designed or intended to alleviate flooding; and
(9) Perform such other acts and fulfill such other functions as may be
permitted by law and as determined by its members, subject to the
limitations in the authorizing resolution of the Middlesex County
§ 22-65 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-65
17:73
§ 22-66. Adoption of annual budget.
The tentative annual budget for the Commission shall be adopted by the
Commission no later than 120 days after the appointment of all
representatives by the participating municipalities.
§ 22-67. Operating procedures.
The operating procedures of the Commission shall be adopted at a regular
or special meeting of the Commission, but not later than 120 days after the
appointment of all representatives by the participating municipalities.
§ 22-68. Withdrawal from Commission.
The Borough of South River reserves the right, pursuant to the statute
to withdraw from the Commission; provided, however, that the Borough
of South River shall provide the Commission with at least 90 days' notice
of such intention and, if such withdrawal is after the adoption of the
Commission budget for a given year, the Borough of South River shall not
be absolved from its responsibility to meet its obligations under the budget
for such year.
§ 22-69. Borough representatives to Commission; alternative
representatives; terms. [Amended 11-10-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-35]
Board of Chosen Freeholders and subject to the limitations as set
forth in the statute.
D. The Commission's appropriations shall be apportioned as follows:
(1) The general, administrative and other expenses of the Commission,
affecting the Commission as a whole, shall be apportioned among
the members in a manner to be determined by the members, not
later than 120 days after the appointment of all representatives by
the participating municipalities;
(2) Whenever a specific project is to be undertaken, involving less than
the interests of all of the participating members or of special
benefit to less than all of the participating members, the
apportionment of the costs thereof shall be agreed upon by the
participating members specifically benefited thereby in advance of
authorization of such project; and
(3) The apportionment may be changed by agreement among the
participating municipalities and counties; provided, however, that
there shall be no increase in the percentage to be contributed by
any participant without the consent of the governing body of such
participating member.
A. The Borough Council shall appoint two representatives to the
Commission, one of whom shall be the Mayor and one of whom shall be
a member of the Borough Council.
§ 22-65 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-69
17:74
B. In addition to the foregoing two members, the governing body shall
appoint two alternate representatives to the Commission, one of whom
shall be the Business Administrator and the other of whom shall be
either (a) a resident of the Borough who shall not hold an elective or
appointed position or (b) another member of the Borough Council. Each
alternate representative shall serve for a term of two years or until the
appointment and qualification of his/her successor. Such alternates
shall have the right to attend all meetings of the Commission and take
part in all discussions. The Business Administrator shall be designated
as first alternate and the resident or council member shall be
designated as second alternate and in such order may represent the
Borough and vote in the event of the absence or disability of one or both
of the regular representatives.
C. Any representative who holds another elected or appointed public office
shall serve as such representative for the term of his elected or
appointed office and only so long as he shall hold such elected or
appointed public office, notwithstanding his term of appointment as
such representative. Any representative who does not hold another
elected or appointed public office shall serve as such representative for
a term commencing on January 1 of the tear of appointment.
Appointments to vacancies caused by the death, resignation or other
inability to serve of a representative shall be filled for the balance of the
term only. No alternate representative shall automatically succeed to a
regular representative position upon a vacancy occurring in a regular
position.
§ 22-69 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-69
17:75

ARTICLE XV
Advisory Council on Aging
[Adopted 2-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-3]
§ 22-70. Membership; appointment; qualifications. [Amended
4-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-8]
The Mayor’s Advisory Council on Aging shall consist of 11 members and
1 alternate in addition to the Mayor’s alternate, all of whom shall be
appointed by the Mayor. No person shall be appointed to the Mayor’s
Advisory Council on Aging unless he/she is a resident of the Borough of
South River. One member shall be the Director of the Office on Aging, who
shall be exempt from the Borough residency requirement. One member
shall be the Borough Council liaison to the Human Resources Department.
One member shall be the Mayor’s alternate. The remaining eight members
shall be appointed by the Mayor.
§ 22-71. Terms.
The terms of the various members of the Mayor’s Advisory Council on Aging
shall be as follows:
§ 22-72. Meetings; organization. [Amended 4-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-8]
The Mayor’s Advisory Council on Aging shall meet regularly, at least
quarterly, and shall, at its first meeting of each year, elect from among its
members a Chairperson, who shall preside over all meetings during that
calendar year.
§ 22-73. Mayor as ex-officio member.
The Mayor of the Borough of South River shall serve as an ex-officio
member of the Advisory Council.
§ 22-74. Rules and bylaws.
The conduct of the Mayor’s Advisory Council on Aging at its meetings
and its activities shall be governed by rules and bylaws which shall be
A. Director of the Office on Aging: concurrent with active appointment.
B. Borough Council liaison to Human Resources Department: concurrent
with appointment to said position.
C. Mayor’s alternate: concurrent with the term of the appointing Mayor.
D. The remaining eight members shall be appointed for three-year terms.
However, at the inception of this article, three such members shall be
appointed for three-year terms, three such members shall be appointed
for two-year terms and two such members shall be appointed for a oneyear
term to allow staggered term limits.
§ 22-70 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-74
17:77
established within three months from the creation of such Mayor’s Advisory
Council on Aging. In the interim, or if said situation is not contemplated by
the adopted rules and/or bylaws, Robert’s Rules of Order, the latest edition,
shall take precedence.
§ 22-75. Duties.
The Mayor’s Advisory Council on Aging shall be responsible for providing
consultation, aid, advice and assistance to the senior citizen population of
the Borough of South River with respect to situations that are unique to said
population and shall advise and make recommendations to the governing
body with respect to any ideas and/or programs which will be beneficial to
said senior population. In addition, the Mayor’s Advisory Council on Aging
shall submit a written report to the governing body at least once per year
summarizing the Council’s activities, discussions and/or proposals.
§ 22-74 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-75
17:78
ARTICLE XVI
Advisory Committee on Housing and Community Development
Block Grant Programs
[Adopted 2-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-6]
§ 22-76. Creation.
There is created a committee known as the "Mayor's Advisory Committee
on Housing and Community Block Grant Programs."
§ 22-77. Membership.
Said Committee shall consist of five members, who shall include a crosssection
of low-/moderate-income residents, minorities, target area
residents, the elderly, and the disabled.
§ 22-78. Term.
The terms of said five members shall be for periods of one year.
§ 22-79. Appointment; vacancy.
§ 22-80. Council liaison.
In addition to the five members above, the Borough Council shall appoint
one of its members to the Committee to serve as Council liaison, and the
Mayor shall also serve as an ex-officio member.
§ 22-81. Duties.
The Committee shall:
A. Said members shall be appointed to the Committee by the Mayor.
B. In the event of a vacancy, the Mayor shall appoint an individual who
shall serve for the balance of the unexpired term.
A. Review information about the Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG) Program and the scope of eligible activities;
B. Advise the governing body of anticipated funding the Borough may
receive under the CDBG Program;
C. Solicit comments, ideas and recommendations verbally or in writing;
D. Identify proposed municipal projects and generally assist Borough
officials in complying with the CDBG Program.
§ 22-76 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-82
17:79
§ 22-82. Meetings.
The Committee shall meet no less than three times a year and shall conduct
such other meetings as may be necessary in order to comply with
Community Development Block Grant Program requirements.
§ 22-82 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-82
17:80
ARTICLE XVII
Municipal Alliance Committee for Prevention of Alcoholism and
Drug Abuse
[Adopted 2-22-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-2; amended in its entirety
8-11-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-24]
§ 22-83. Establishment; purpose.
The Borough of South River hereby establishes a Municipal Alliance
Committee for the Prevention of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse. The purposes
of this Committee shall be to:
§ 22-84. Membership; terms of office.
A. Organize and coordinate efforts involving schools, law enforcement,
business groups and other community organizations for the purpose of
reducing alcoholism and drug abuse.
B. In cooperation with local school districts, develop comprehensive and
effective alcoholism and drug abuse programs in grades kindergarten
through 12.
C. In cooperation with local school districts, develop procedures for the
intervention, treatment and discipline of students abusing alcohol or
drugs.
D. Develop comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse education, support
and outreach efforts for parents in the community.
E. Develop comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse community
awareness programs.
A. Said Municipal Alliance shall consist of seven members and two
alternate members. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Borough Council. Of the members first
appointed, two shall hold office for a term of one year, two shall hold
office for terms of two years and three shall hold office for terms of
three years. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for terms of three
years. The alternate members shall be designated at the time of
appointment as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2, and their terms
shall be for two years, except that the terms of the alternate members
first appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for
Alternate No. 2. Thereafter, all members appointed shall hold office for
terms of three years, except that appointments to fill vacancies shall be
for the expired term only.
B. An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he requests
one, be removed by the governing body for cause. An alternate member
may participate in discussions of Board proceedings but may not vote
§ 22-83 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-84
17:81
§ 22-85. Removal; absenteeism; vacancies.
§ 22-86. Officers; elections.
§ 22-87. Meetings; rules; quorum.
§ 22-88. Responsibilities, functions and duties; records.
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead
of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
A. The Borough Council may remove any members of the Alliance for
cause after written notice has been served upon the member and after a
hearing on the issues raised, at which time the members shall be
entitled to be heard in person or by counsel. At the discretion of the
member, the hearing may be in private.
B. Members are required to attend all meetings unless being excused for
sickness or other valid reason. Eight consecutive weeks or four
consecutive regular meetings, whichever shall be of longer duration in
a calendar year, shall constitute automatic resignation. Unexcused
absences shall be at the pleasure of the Board and duly noted.
C. In the event of a vacancy occurring in the Alliance other than by
expiration of term, such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in
the same manner as the original appointment.
A. The Alliance shall elect from among its voting members a president, a
vice president, a recording secretary, each for a one-year term. The
Municipal Alliance Coordinator will perform the Treasurer duties for a
one-year term.
B. Election of all officers shall be held annually at the January meeting.
A. The Alliance shall meet once a month within a calendar of meetings
established in advance.
B. The Alliance shall have the power to establish bylaws and rules for the
conduct of its meetings.
C. A quorum shall be a simple majority of the total voting members of the
Alliance.
A. The functions of the Alliance Committee shall include, but not be
limited to:
(1) Creating a network of community leaders, private citizens and
representatives from public and private human service agencies
who are dedicated to a comprehensive and coordinated effort to
§ 22-84 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-88
17:82
§ 22-89. Conflicts of interest; recusal.
promote and support drug and alcohol prevention and education
programs and related activities with an emphasis on youth.
(2) Conducting an assessment of the community to determine the
needs of the community in relation to alcoholism and drug abuse
issues.
(3) Identifying existing efforts and services acting to reduce alcoholism
and drug abuse.
(4) Coordinating projects within the Borough to avoid fragmentation
and duplication.
(5) Developing programs to be implemented at the Borough level or
participating in regionally developed programs that accomplish the
purpose of the Alliance's effort and the purposes of the Committee.
(6) Assisting the Borough in acquiring funds for Alliance programs.
B. The alliance shall keep records of its meetings and activities.
A. A conflict of interest may exist if a MAC member can reasonably expect
that his or her conduct will directly result in a financial benefit to him or
herself, his or her family members, his or her business associates, his or
her employers, or to businesses that the member represents. In
situations where a conflict of interest may exist, the MAC member must
recuse him or herself.
B. "Recusal" means that the individual is not participating in deliberations
or debates, making recommendations, giving advice, considering
findings, voting or in any other way assuming responsibility for or
participating in any aspect of the decisionmaking regarding the matter,
where there are potential conflicts of interest.
§ 22-88 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-89
17:83

ARTICLE XVIII
Green Team
[Adopted 3-27-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-5]
§ 22-90. Establishment.
The Borough of South River Green Team be and is hereby established as an
advisory committee to the South River Borough Council.
§ 22-91. Purpose.
The general purpose for the Green Team shall include but not be limited to:
§ 22-92. Membership; term of office.
A. Managing South River's participation in the Sustainable Jersey
program;
B. Encouraging the Borough staff to pursue sustainable practices where
possible and implement the Borough Council's environmental goals;
C. At the recommendation of the Borough Council, work with the existing
groups within the Borough whose actions effect environmental issues
so as to eliminate duplication and assure that important tasks are
covered;
D. Provide suggestions for further research and action by the Borough
Council;
E. At the direction of the Borough Council, provide advice and suggestions
to the Borough Board of Adjustment and the Borough Historic
Preservation Commission to assure that environmental issues are
considered in their deliberations and action;
F. Manage and organize various ad hoc environmental groups within the
Borough.
G. Solicit and evaluate environmental ideas and suggestions from the
community; and
H. Promote the causes of sustainability within the Borough.
A. The Borough of South River Council shall appoint seven Borough
residents and two nonvoting junior members chosen from South River
High School to serve as the Green Team. The Green Team shall elect
from among its members a Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary/Treasurer.
Initially, two members shall be appointed to a three-year term, two
members to a two-year term and three members to a one-year term.
Thereafter, all terms shall be for three years. The junior members shall
serve one-year terms. Additionally, a member of the Borough Council
shall serve as an ex officio member of the Green Team. Ex officio
members shall not vote. [Amended 2-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-9]
§ 22-90 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-92
17:85
§ 22-93. Meetings.
The Green Team shall meet monthly.12
B. The Green Team shall select Township volunteers to work on Green
Team projects. The names of the Green Team volunteers shall
periodically be submitted to the Borough and the Green Team
Committee reports, minutes, etc., shall also be submitted to the
Borough Committee.
12.Editor's Note: Former Art. XIX, Task Force for Safe Streets, adopted 10-23-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-27, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 3-9-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-07.
§ 22-92 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 22-93
17:86
Chapter 23
BOROUGH APPOINTED POSITIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 9.
Boards, commissions and authorities — See
Ch. 22.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 59.
§ 22-93 AGING, OFFICE ON § 22-93
17:87

ARTICLE I
Open Application and Public Directory
[Adopted 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-11]
§ 23-1. Intent and purpose.
The purpose of this article is to foster the openness of government and
provide citizens with the information concerning the various appointed
Borough positions which exist within South River. The article further
provides for a procedure whereby a citizen can indicate his/her desire to
serve in a particular appointed position. Finally, the article provides for a
notification process so that those citizens who have indicated a desire to
hold a position will be notified when that position is under consideration for
appointment.
§ 23-2. Definitions.
The following terms as used in this article shall have the meaning set forth
below unless the context within which the term is used clearly provides for
a difference meaning:
APPOINTED BOROUGH POSITION — Any appointed position within the
Borough of South River which is created either by statutory law or by
ordinance or resolution. Examples of such positions are Municipal
Historian, member of any board, commission, agency, council or committee
of the municipality.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The official or body which by virtue of
statutory law or by ordinance or resolution is given the authority to appoint
a person to hold a particular appointed Borough position.
§ 23-3. Registry of appointed Borough positions.
The Borough Administrator/Clerk shall cause a register of appointed
Borough positions to be prepared and maintained. Such a register shall be
made available on the Borough's Web site and at the Municipal Building and
shall set forth at least the following:
A. Title of each appointed Borough position.
B. Brief description of the position's powers and duties.
C. Any special credentials or qualifications required to hold the position.
D. The length of term for the position.
E. The name of the person currently holding the position, the expiration
date of his or her term, and the number of vacant seats on the board or
commission.
F. The dates/times and frequency of any meetings which the holder of the
position must attend.
§ 23-1 AGING, OFFICE ON § 23-4
17:89
§ 23-4. Vacancies.
The Borough Administrator/Clerk shall maintain a current updated listing
of all existing vacancies for each appointed Borough position within the
municipality. Such a list shall be made available free of charge at the
Municipal Clerk's office and shall, in addition, be posted by the Borough
Clerk on a bulletin board maintained for public announcements in the
Borough Building.
§ 23-5. Filling vacancies.
Unless essential for the proper functioning and/or carrying on of business of
the local agency upon which the vacancy has occurred, a vacancy shall not
be filled for a period of 60 days from its posting in order to allow interested
persons time to submit applications as provided in § 23-6 below.
§ 23-6. Applications.
The Borough Clerk shall maintain an application form to be completed by
any person interested in serving in an appointed Borough position. Such
application shall, at a minimum, contain the following information:
§ 23-7. Filing application.
Any person interested in serving in an appointed Borough position may file
an application for such position with the Borough Clerk. Such application(s)
may be filed at any time, whether or not the appointed Borough position
sought is vacant. A person may withdraw his or her application at any time.
§ 23-8. Maintaining applications.
The Borough Clerk shall maintain all filed applications in a file or binder,
segregated for each board or commission. Applications shall be considered
void after two years unless renewed by the applicant.
§ 23-9. Filling voluntary Borough positions.
Prior to filling any appointed Borough position, the appropriate appointing
authority shall review each application filed for that position. The
appointing authority shall conduct such review, investigation, and/or
interviews as the appointing authority deems necessary or advisable, in its
discretion. After a decision is reached to fill a vacant appointed Borough
A. Name.
B. Address.
C. Appointed Borough position sought.
D. Qualifications/experience for position.
E. Signature.
§ 23-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 23-9
17:90
position, the name of the individual appointed shall be listed by the Borough
Clerk on a bulletin board maintained for public announcements in the
Municipal Building.
§ 23-9 AGING, OFFICE ON § 23-9
17:91

ARTICLE II
Professionals Appointments
[Adopted 3-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-4]
§ 23-10. Authority to make appointments.
The governing body may make such professional appointments as it deems
necessary, including but not limited to a Borough Attorney and a Borough
Engineer. These positions shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 23-11. Borough Attorney.
A. Appointment; term; qualifications; compensation.
(1) The Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Council, at the annual organizational
meeting in January of each year and shall serve for a term of one
year from the first day of January of the year of his/her appointment
and until his/her successor has been appointed and qualified.
(2) The Borough Attorney shall be an attorney at law of the State of
New Jersey but need not be a resident of the Borough.
(3) The Borough Attorney shall receive a retainer for attendance at
Council meetings and for the preparation of usual and routine
resolutions and shall receive such additional compensation as shall
be provided from time to time from additional services required.
B. Powers and duties. The Attorney shall have such powers and perform
such duties as are provided for the office of municipal attorney by
general law or ordinances of the Borough. He/she shall represent the
Borough in all judicial and administrative proceedings in which the
municipality or any of its officers or agencies may be a party or have an
interest. He/she shall give all legal counsel and advice where required
by the Council or any member thereof and shall, in general, serve as the
legal adviser to the Council on all matters of Borough business. In
furtherance of such general powers and duties, but without limitation
thereof, the Borough Attorney shall:
(1) Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the municipality.
(2) With the approval of Council, conduct such appeals from orders,
decisions or judgments affecting any interest of the Borough as he/
she may, in his/her discretion, determine to be necessary or
desirable or as directed by Council.
(3) Subject to the approval of the Council, have power to enter into any
agreement, compromise or settlement of any litigation in which the
Borough is involved.
§ 23-10 AGING, OFFICE ON § 23-11
17:93
§ 23-12. Borough Engineer.
(4) Render opinions, in writing, upon any question of law submitted to
him/her by the Mayor or Council, or any member thereof, with
respect to its or his/her official powers and duties, and perform
such duties as may be necessary to provide legal counsel to the
Council in the administration of municipal affairs.
(5) Supervise and direct the work of such additional attorney and
technical and professional assistants as the Council may authorize
for special or regular employment in or for the municipality.
C. Records and papers. All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and
all other materials relating to the administration of the legal duties of
the Borough Attorney shall be and remain the property of the Borough.
Upon the termination of his/her services with the Borough, the Borough
Attorney shall forthwith surrender to any successor all such property,
together with a written consent to substitution of any successor in all
legal actions and proceedings then pending to which the Borough is a
party.
A. Appointment; term; qualifications; compensation.
(1) The Borough Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Council, at the annual organizational
meeting in January of each year and shall serve for a term of one
year from the first day of January of the year of his/her appointment
and until his/her successor has been appointed and qualified.
(2) The Borough Engineer shall be a professional engineer duly
licensed by the State of New Jersey but need not be a resident of
the Borough.
(3) The Borough Engineer shall receive a retainer for attendance at
Council meetings and shall be compensated for such additional
engineering services required pursuant to a consulting contract.
B. Duties. The Engineer shall perform such duties as are prescribed by
general law and ordinance and in addition shall:
(1) Prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans, designs and specifications
for public works and improvements authorized and undertaken by
the Borough pursuant to a consulting contract.
(2) Provide, maintain and file with the Borough Clerk surveys, maps,
plans, specifications and control records with respect to public
works and facilities owned or operated by the Borough.
(3) Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other
Borough departments as needed in accordance with a consulting
contract.
§ 23-11 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 23-12
17:94
C. Records and papers. All papers, documents, memoranda, reports,
maps, surveys, plans and other material relating to the administration
of engineering duties of the Borough Engineer shall be and remain the
property of the Borough. Upon the termination of his/her service with
the Borough, the Engineer shall surrender all such property to his/her
successor.
§ 23-12 AGING, OFFICE ON § 23-12
17:95
Chapter 31
CLAIMS APPROVAL
§ 31-1. Available funds required.
No department, office or agency of the Borough shall expend or commit
any funds of the Borough unless the Treasurer or Chief Financial Officer
shall first certify, in writing, that there is an unencumbered balance of
appropriation and funds available for the purpose requested within that
department, office or agency's approved budget.
§ 31-2. Purchase order form required.
Prior to the purchase of any nonbid and noncontractual items, the
appropriate department head or Committee Chairman shall obtain and
prepare a requisition purchase order form for the acquisition of said items
or services.
§ 31-3. Processing of form.
§ 31-4. Certified vouchers required.
Prior to the payment of any bill, claim or demand against the Borough, the
department head, Board Chairman or other responsible officer shall certify
that the materials, supplies or equipment have been received according to
a purchase order system or that the work, labor or services shall have been
rendered according to order or contract. A voucher on a form prescribed by
the Treasurer shall be presented for each bill, claim or demand.
A. The appropriate department head or Committee Chairman shall
procure from the prospective vendor the costs or value of the proposed
purchase and shall include the same on the appropriate requisition
purchase order form.
B. After completion and execution of the appropriate requisition purchase
order form by the department head, the same shall be submitted to the
Treasurer or Chief Financial Officer, as set forth in § 31-1 above, for
certification of the necessary funds.
C. After the Treasurer or Chief Financial Officer shall certify the same, in
writing, as required in § 31-1 above, the completed requisition purchase
order form and certification shall be submitted for approval to the
Councilman in charge of the department in question.
D. Upon approval of the purchase by the Councilman in charge of the
department or a member of his/her committee, the completed
requisition purchase order form and certification shall be provided to
the Treasurer or Finance Department for processing.
§ 23-12 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 31-5
17:96
§ 31-5. Preparation of list for Council meeting. [Amended
2-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-5]
§ 31-6. Disbursement procedures.
After Council approval has been given, disbursements shall be made by a
check or draft signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Treasurer;
payroll checks shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the
Treasurer upon certification by the Clerk of the total payroll.13
Chapter 36
COURT
A. The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare for each regular meeting of
the Council a list of all bills, claims and vouchers to be paid and
"previously paid" as hereinafter defined. Such list shall be prepared in
sufficient quantity for each member of the Council and the Mayor, and
at least one copy shall be filed in the office of the Borough Clerk as a
public record open to examination. All vouchers that are presented for
payment shall be in a format which includes a list of vouchers indicating
each payee, description of claim and amount thereof. The list of
vouchers shall be approved or disapproved pursuant to a formal
resolution requiring a majority vote of the Mayor and Council at a
regular or special meeting.
B. All invoices or bills to the Borough for statutory or mandated payments
required for debt service, county and school levy apportionments,
employers' contributions to state pension systems, insurance
premiums, electric, telephone and natural gas utilities, operating lease
payments, tax title lien redemptions, postage, payroll processing
service fees, utility billing processing fees, and similar nondiscretionary
expenses such as bulk water purchases, purchased power and related
expenses, recycling services, solid waste disposal, interlocal services,
state agencies for locally generated revenue and fees, i.e., marriage
license, construction code, animal control and similar fees, interfund
advances and liquidation, gasoline or diesel fuel purchases under state
contract and execution of wire transfers for named vendors or services
as enumerated herein may be made by the Chief Financial Officer and
included on the list of vouchers presented at the next regular meeting
of the Mayor and Council as "previously paid" bills but only if such
payments are approved in advance by the Borough Administrator upon
receipt of properly executed vouchers.
13.Editor's Note: Former § 31-7, Recurring bulk water and interlocal telecommunications
payments, added 2-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-6, was repealed 2-23-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-5. See now § 31-5.
§ 31-5 COURT § 31-6
36:97

ARTICLE I
Municipal Court
[Adopted 12-27-1948 (Ch. 19, Art. I, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 36-1. Establishment.
A Municipal Court for the Borough of South River is established as of
January 1, 1949, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 36-2. Name of Court.
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of South
River."
§ 36-3. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear the impress and
name of the Court.
§ 36-4. Judge of the Municipal Court.
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council and who shall
serve for a term of three years from the date of his appointment and until his
successor is appointed and qualified; provided, however, that the present
Recorder who shall be in office upon this article's becoming effective shall
be the Judge of the Municipal Court and shall continue to be such Judge
for a term equal to the balance of the term for which he was originally
appointed.
§ 36-5. Compensation. [Amended 9-21-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-33]
The compensation of the said Judge, Municipal Court Administrator, and
such Clerks or other personnel as may be required to administer the
functions of the Municipal Court shall be such sums as may be provided for
by the annual ordinance pertaining to the salaries and compensation of all
Borough officials and employees.14
§ 36-6. Powers, duties and jurisdiction.
The said Municipal Court and the Judge thereof shall have, possess and
exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred by the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq. or by any other law.
§ 36-7. Additional personnel authorized. [Amended 8-21-1991 by
Ord. No. 1991-27; 9-21-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-33]
A. The governing body of the Borough of South River may, by appropriate
ordinance or resolution, at such time as the need may arise, provide for
14.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 36-1 COURT § 36-7
36:99
§ 36-8. Sittings of Court.
The Municipal Court shall be held in the Borough Hall. The Judge shall sit
on such days and for such periods of time as may be designated by the
Commissioner of Police and at such other times as the business of the Court
may require, subject to the rules applicable to municipal courts.
a Municipal Court Administrator and other personnel as may be
necessary for the efficient administration of the Municipal Court.
B. Qualifications for employment. Notwithstanding anything hereinafter
to the contrary, any employee and/or personnel assigned and/or
designated an employee of the Municipal Court of the Borough of South
River must submit to a records check as a condition of employment.
Said records check shall consist of a check of the Division of Motor
Vehicle records, State Police records and National Crime Information
Center records. The cost of said records check shall be at the sole
expense of the Municipal Court of the Borough of South River.
(1) Said records check shall be coordinated by the Municipal Court
Judge or the Municipal Court Administrator and/or Deputy
Municipal Court Administrator.
(2) Copies of said records check shall be available to the Municipal
Court Judge, the Municipal Court Administrator and/or Deputy
Municipal Court Administrator and the Borough Clerk.
(3) A successful completion of the records check shall be considered a
condition of employment for any and all Municipal Court employees
hired after May 14, 1991.
§ 36-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 36-8
36:100
ARTICLE II
Municipal Court Prosecutor
[Adopted 7-6-1964, amended in entirety 8-3-1964 (Ch. 19, Art. II, of
the 1977 Code)]
§ 36-9. Creation of office; qualifications.15
Pursuant to Rule 7:4-4 of the Rules Governing the Courts of the State of
New Jersey, 1976 Edition and amendments and additions thereto, there is
hereby created in the Borough of South River the position of Municipal
Court Prosecutor; said position shall be filled and held by an attorney at law
of the State of New Jersey licensed to practice law by the Supreme Court of
New Jersey.
§ 36-10. Duties.
Upon request of the Judge of the Municipal Court or of the Mayor and
Council, the Municipal Court Prosecutor shall appear in the Municipal
Court and conduct prosecution of any action on behalf of the Borough of
South River.
§ 36-11. Appointment; term of office.
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Borough Council, and he shall serve from the date
of his appointment until the expiration of the calendar year in which he is
appointed or until such time as his successor has been appointed and duly
qualifies.
§ 36-12. Compensation. [Amended 2-22-1975 by Ord. No. 1975-3]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall receive such compensation for his
services as may be determined from time to time and established in the
Salary Ordinance of the Borough of South River.16
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
16.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 36-9 COURT § 36-12
36:101

ARTICLE III
Municipal Court Administrator; Deputy Municipal Court
Administrator; Violations Clerk
[Adopted 6-13-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-13; amended in its entirety
9-21-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-33 (Ch. 19, Art. III, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 36-13. Positions created.
The positions of Municipal Court Administrator, Deputy Municipal Court
Administrator and Violations Clerk of the Borough of South River are hereby
created and the employment of the persons trained, educated and qualified
in accordance with the duties and qualifications hereafter set forth and
who shall qualify to fill such position is hereby authorized. The Municipal
Court Administrator position shall be full-time, the position of the Deputy
Municipal Court Administrator shall be full-time and the position of
Violations Clerk shall be part-time in accordance with the terms of
employment set forth herein.
§ 36-14. Municipal Court Administrator. [Amended 2-23-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-7]
A. Terms of employment. The Municipal Court Administrator shall be
employed on a full-time basis.
B. General statement of duties. The Municipal Court Administrator
performs work of a highly confidential and responsible nature, a
working position responsible for accounting/bookkeeping duties,
planning, organizing and directing all phases of the Municipal Court.
C. The Municipal Court Administrator works under the general
supervision of the Municipal Court Judge for Court matters and
administrative, clerical and budgetary matters; has additional limited
responsibility to the Administrative Office of the Courts in both
Middlesex County and the State of New Jersey.
D. Major job duties of the Municipal Court Administrator are as follows:
(1) Responsible for all aspects and administration of the South River
Municipal Court.
(2) Supervises, evaluates, and schedules all employees assigned to the
Municipal Court.
(3) Performs traffic and criminal system work involving all aspects of
case processing, scheduling, preparation and caseload
management.
(4) Prepares, certifies and delivers the Municipal Court payroll to the
Finance Department.
§ 36-13 COURT § 36-14
36:103
(5) Prepared and presents the annual Municipal Court budget to the
Borough Administrator, Finance Committee and Mayor and
Council.
(6) Accepts and follows up on complaints from citizens, coordinates
interdepartmental issues, and administers oaths of office.
(7) Reviews probable cause affidavits to determine issuance of process
of summons/complaints.
(8) Serves as the primary on-call employee for all after-hours
Municipal Court duties.
(9) Prepares, accounts for, collects and reports all matters related to
bail bonds and forfeiture of the same.
(10) Assures that the Municipal Court is at all times in compliance with
all Borough, state and federal rules, regulations and statutes.
(11) Maintains, collects, and reports all monies received by the
Municipal Court in the appropriate format as designated by the
Chief Financial Officer and the Borough Auditor.
(12) Supports and interacts with judges, prosecutors, staff, lawyers,
complainants and defendants through a thorough knowledge of
state statutes and criminal codes, including Division of Motor
Vehicles.
(13) Other duties as assigned.
E. Qualifications shall be as follows:
(1) Associate's degree in accounting or business administration.
Graduation from high school and full-time working experience in
the New Jersey Municipal Court may be substituted for the
associate's degree.
(2) Must be a New Jersey Certified Municipal Court Administrator or
able to obtain certification within six months of hire.
(3) Ability to compose, transcribe, and proofread correspondence,
format finance reports and set up and maintain various filing
systems; have knowledge of office procedures, computer and
computer software and peripheral equipment.
(4) Demonstrated skill in business, grammars, punctuation, spelling
and written and oral communications.
(5) Ability to prioritize duties and to work harmoniously with other
Borough personnel and citizens.
(6) Must be able to lift 25 pounds on intermittent occasions.
§ 36-14 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 36-15
36:104
§ 36-15. Deputy Municipal Court Administrator. [Amended
2-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
A. Terms of employment. The Deputy Municipal Court Administrator shall
be employed on a full-time basis.
B. General statement of duties. The Deputy Municipal Court Administrator
performs work of a highly confidential and responsible nature, a
working position, responsible for assisting the Court Administrator in
accounting/bookkeeping duties, planning, organizing and directly all
phases of the Municipal Court.
C. Supervision received. The Deputy Municipal Court Administrator works
under the general supervision of the Municipal Court Administrator.
D. The duties shall be as follows:
(1) Assist the Municipal Court Administrator in all aspects and
operations of the South River Municipal Court.
(2) In the absence of the Municipal Court Administrator, supervises
employees assigned to the Municipal Court.
(3) Performs traffic and criminal system work involving all aspects of
case processing, scheduling, preparation and cash flow
management, from issuance through disposition as assigned by the
Municipal Court Administrator.
(4) In the absence of the Municipal Court Administrator, prepares,
certifies and delivers the Municipal Court payroll to the Finance
Department.
(5) Issuance of criminal or motor vehicle summons/complaints from
private citizens.
(6) Serves as the secondary on-call employee for all after-hours
Municipal Court duties.
(7) May be assigned by the Municipal Court Administrator to prepare,
account for, collect and report all matters related to bail bonds and
forfeiture of same.
(8) In the absence of the Municipal Court Administrator, is responsible
to assure that the Municipal Court is at all times in compliance with
all Borough, state and federal rules, regulations and statutes.
(9) As assigned by the Municipal Court Administrator, maintains,
collects, and reports all monies received by the Municipal Court in
appropriate format as designated by the Chief Financial Officer and
the Borough Auditor.
(10) Supports and interacts with judges, prosecutors, staff, lawyers,
complainants and defendants through a thorough knowledge of
§ 36-15 COURT § 36-15
36:105
§ 36-16. Violations Clerk.
state statutes and criminal codes, including Division of Motor
Vehicles.
(11) Receives money from fines, fees and bails.
(12) Any and all other duties as assigned.
E. Qualifications shall be as follows:
(1) Associate's degree in legal studies, criminal justice, accounting or
business administration. Graduation from high school and full-time
working experience in a professional office or related field may be
substituted for the associate's degree.
(2) Must be a New Jersey Certified Municipal Court Administrator or
obtain certification within three years of hire.
(3) Ability to compose, transcribe and proofread correspondence, to
format financial records and to set up and maintain various filing
systems.
(4) Knowledge of office procedures, computer, computer software and
peripheral equipment.
(5) Demonstrated skill in business, grammars, punctuation, spelling
and written and oral communication.
(6) Ability to prioritize duties and to work harmoniously with other
Borough personnel and citizens.
(7) Must be able to lift 25 pounds on an intermittent occasion.
A. Terms of employment. The Violations Clerk shall be employed on a parttime
basis with no more than 25 hours per week.
B. General statement of duties. The Violations Clerk performs clerical
work which includes receiving and receipting payment of fines and
costs; deals with the public in answering inquiries regarding court
matters; prepares court schedules; prepares and sends out notices and
other court correspondence.
C. Supervision received. The Violations Clerk works under the general
supervision of the Municipal Court Administrator and the Deputy
Municipal Court Administrator.
D. Examples of duties. The Violations Clerk:
(1) Answers telephone and correspondence as necessary.
(2) Opens and routes incoming mail and prepares outgoing mail.
(3) Receives and records fees for traffic violations.
§ 36-15 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 36-16
36:106
§ 36-17. Compensation.
The Municipal Court Administrator, Deputy Municipal Court Administrator
and Violations Clerk shall receive as compensation for their services annual
salaries which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of an
ordinance governing salaries.17
§ 36-18. Appointment.
Said Municipal Court Administrator, Deputy Municipal Court Administrator
and Violations Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council for the terms of one year or for such time
and term as the statute in such case made and provided shall permit.
§ 36-19. Administration.
The Deputy Municipal Court Administrator and Violations Clerk shall report
to the Municipal Court Administrator administratively.
§ 36-20. Political activity.18
Political activity shall be controlled by Article X of Chapter 68, Personnel
Regulations.
(4) Types a variety of material, including letters, notices, orders and
dispositions.
(5) Maintains records and files as necessary.
(6) Occasionally acts as backup for operating the tape recorder.
(7) Issues summons books to police officers.
(8) Prepares the court schedule and forwards notices to litigants.
(9) Performs other related work as required or assigned.
E. Qualifications shall be as follows:
(1) Education: Possession of a high school diploma or equivalency
certificate.
(2) Experience: Two years' clerical experience desirable.
(3) Knowledge and abilities: Knowledge of general office procedures,
ability to deal with the public, ability to type 40 words per minute.
Successful completion of the course given by the Administrative
Office of the Courts within one year is a condition of continued
employment.
17.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 36-16 COURT § 36-20
36:107

ARTICLE IV
Municipal Public Defender
[Adopted 12-29-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-41 (Ch. 19, Art. IV, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 36-21. Creation of office; qualifications.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-28, there is hereby created in the Borough of
South River the position of Municipal Public Defender. Said position shall
be filled and held by an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey, licensed
to practice law by the Supreme Court of New Jersey.
§ 36-22. Duties.
Upon request of the Judge of the Municipal Court, the Municipal Public
Defender shall appear in a Municipal Court of South River and conduct
the defense of any indigent person charged with one or more offenses
described in N.J.S.A. 2A:158A-5.2. The Municipal Public Defender shall not
be responsible for representation in any other proceedings or any appeal of
any municipal proceeding.
§ 36-23. Application for services; waiver of fees.
Every person applying for representation by a Municipal Public Defender
shall, on approval of his application, pay an application fee as provided
in Chapter 155, Fees, but only in an amount necessary to pay the costs
of Municipal Public Defender services, to the Clerk of the South River
Municipal Court. In accordance with guidelines promulgated by the
Superior Court, the Municipal Court may waive any required application
fee, in whole or in part, only if the Court determines, in its discretion, upon
a clear and convincing showing by the applicant that the application fee
represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation.
The Municipal Court may permit a person to pay the application fee over a
specific period of time not to exceed four months.
§ 36-24. Annual review.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of South River will review the
operation of the Municipal Public Defender program on or before January
1 every year to determine whether to continue the program in the next
calendar year.
§ 36-25. Appointment; term of office.
The Municipal Public Defender shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Borough Council, and he shall serve from the
date of his appointment until the expiration of the calendar year in which
he is appointed or if a new Public Defender is not appointed at the annual
reorganization meeting, until such time as a successor has been appointed
and duly qualifies.
§ 36-21 COURT § 36-26
36:109
§ 36-26. Compensation.
The Municipal Public Defender shall receive such compensation for his
services as may be determined from time to time and established in the
Salary Ordinance19 of the Borough of South River.
19.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 36-26 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 36-26
36:110
ARTICLE V
Bail Bond Assistant
[Adopted 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-22]
§ 36-27. Creation of position; responsibilities.
The position of Bail Bond Assistant of the Borough of South River is hereby
created under the direction of the Municipal Court Judge and shall perform
multifaceted, specialized bail bond procedures working independently or
under minimum direction. This individual will perform accounting/
bookkeeping in accordance with bail bond procedure and perform other
related duties as required. This individual will work closely with insurance
companies, bail bonding agencies, bail bondsmen, the Clerk of the Superior
Court and the Court Administrator.
§ 36-28. Duties.
The powers and duties of the Bail Bond Assistant shall include but not be
limited to:
§ 36-29. Required knowledge, abilities and skills.
The Bail Bond Assistant shall have the following knowledge, abilities and
skills, including but not limited to:
A. Posting of bail bonds as received for traffic and criminal matters (ATS/
ACS).
B. Use RMDS for surety bond registry, insurance company, and bail bond
company daily updates.
C. Forfeit bail in ATS/ACS; send forfeited notices to appropriate agencies.
D. Tracking of bail bond forfeitures and reinstatements or settlement.
E. Processing judgment of default to the Clerk of the Superior Court.
F. Receive and process motions to vacate forfeiture.
G. Accept checks to satisfy judgments from insurance companies and
processing through ATS/ACS system.
H. Other correspondence to the Clerk of the Superior Court, bail bonding
companies and other agencies.
I. Follow the bail on account; monthly report for all noncash bails.
A. Accept and process any payments through the Violations Department.
B. Assist with other daily office functions as needed.
C. Answer phone inquiries related to all aspects of Court relations.
D. Other duties as may be assigned.
§ 36-27 COURT § 36-30
36:111
§ 36-30. Education, experience and training.
The Bail Bond Assistant shall have the following education, experience and
training:
§ 36-31. Dress code.
Attire shall be business Professional. Attire must be suitable for the position
in order to maintain the professional image of the Municipal Court (no
jeans, shorts, T-shirts).
§ 36-32. Compensation; salary.
The Bail Bond Assistant shall receive as compensation for services an
annual salary, which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the
ordinances governing salaries.
A. Possess an associate's degree in related field (preferred).
B. Graduate from high school and full-time work experience in related
field may be substituted for college degree.
C. Must be computer literate with knowledge of PCs and automated
systems.
D. Have knowledge of general accounting, accounts payable/receivables,
and banking.
E. Able to work independently or as a team member.
F. Ability to prioritize and demonstrate excellent written and oral
communication skills.
§ 36-30 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 36-32
36:112
Chapter 45
FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 9.
Claims approval — See Ch. 31.
Purchasing Agent — See Ch. 59, Art. VI.
Personnel regulations — See Ch. 68.
§ 36-32 COURT § 36-32
36:113

ARTICLE I
Scope of Department
§ 45-1. Organization and authority.
There shall be a Department of Finance in the Borough of South River
under the supervision and control of the Chief Financial Officer hereinafter
created. The Chief Financial Officer shall report directly to the Borough
Administrator of the Borough of South River. The Department of Finance
shall exercise supervision and control over the Deputy Director of Finance
for Operations, Deputy Director of Finance for Accounting, Chief Financial
Officer, Tax Assessor, Treasurer, Utility Collections and such other agencies,
officers and employees as may be designated from time to time by the
Borough Council. The governing body of the Borough of South River shall
have oversight authority with respect to the Department of Finance. The
governing body member who is the Chairman of the Finance Committee
shall be the liaison between the governing body and the Department of
Finance.
§ 45-1 COURT § 45-1
36:115

ARTICLE II
Chief Financial Officer/Director of Finance/Treasurer
§ 45-2. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Chief Financial Officer/Director of
Finance/Treasurer within the Department of Finance with the Department
of Finance in the Borough of South River.
§ 45-3. Appointment and term.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed pursuant to state statute
and serve for a term of four years and until a successor shall have been
appointed and qualified, subject to the provisions respecting tenure
contained in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140 et seq. No person shall serve in a capacity
of Chief Financial Officer who is a member of the governing body.
§ 45-4. Qualifications and responsibilities.
A. The Chief Financial Officer shall be a certified municipal finance officer
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.
B. The Chief Financial Officer should carry out the responsibilities as set
forth under state statute, as specifically set forth under N.J.S.A.
52:27BB-26 et seq. In addition, the Chief Financial Officer/Director of
Finance/Treasurer shall have the following responsibilities:
(1) Analyze budget requests.
(2) Determine amounts of money involved in proposed salary changes.
(3) Review all requisitions for appropriateness of expenditure of funds
and follow-up on all questioned vouchers and requisitions.
(4) Authorize disbursement of funds.
(5) Review budget practices and perform research to make the budget
a more meaningful document.
(6) Direct preparation of the budget.
(7) Assure adherence to contractual obligations.
(8) Assign and supervise the work of subordinates.
(9) Compile difficult and other statements and reports using basic
data.
(10) Direct the preparation of annual financial statements and reports
required by law or contracts.
(11) Conduct periodic studies to determine the effectiveness of current
financial control methods.
§ 45-2 COURT § 45-4
36:117
(12) Direct all activities pertaining to the disbursement and collection of
funds and the installation of a uniform system of accounts and
accounting procedures.
(13) Develop and maintain an accounting system.
(14) Prepare annual debt statements according to law.
(15) Prepare supplemental debt statements according to local bond law
and municipal bond ordinances.
(16) Administer municipal debt sale of bond anticipation notes and
bonds, the preparation of necessary financial and statistical data
and the bond sale prospectus.
(17) Prepare resolutions to transfer monies from one account to
another.
(18) Prepare budget amendments.
(19)Work with data processing staff to revise or establish new
operational procedures.
(20) May maintain a running analysis of accounts.
(21) Supervise and perform highly responsible accounting work
involved in the installation, operation and auditing of accounts.
(22) Make difficult inspections of varied financial transactions and
records to insure that regulations and accounting procedures are
observed.
(23) Supervise the maintenance of essential accounting records and
files.
(24) Manage the work operations and/or functional programs and have
responsibility for employee evaluation and for effectively
recommending the hiring, firing, promoting, demoting and/or
disciplining of employees under his/her control.
(25) Be required to learn and utilize various types of electronic and/or
manual recording and information systems used by the agency,
office or related units.
(26) Supervise and perform the work involved in preparation of varied
financial reports and statements.
(27) Supervise and perform the work involved in negotiations of loan
and bond sales.
(28) Assign suitable assignments and instructions to subordinates.
(29) Plan and install auditing and accounting systems and forms.
(30) Handle correspondence pertaining to Treasurer's Office.
§ 45-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 45-4
36:118
§ 45-5. Criteria for appointment; salary.
(31) Prepare suitable reports containing findings, conclusions and
recommendations.
(32) Answer inquiries of a technical nature.
(33) Direct the establishment and maintenance of extensive
bookkeeping and other needed records and files.
(34) Any and all other responsibilities as assigned by the governing
body of the Borough of South River.
A. The Chief Financial Officer shall be chosen on the following criteria:
(1) Possession of a current, valid certificate as municipal finance
officer issued by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs,
Division of Local Government Services, or the ability to obtain the
same within legally acceptable time limits.
(2) Education/experience: graduation from an accredited college with
a bachelor's degree in accounting, budgeting, finance, economics
or public or business administration or in lieu of the same,
experience acceptable to the governing body of the Borough of
South River.
(3) Experience: sufficient supervisory experience in functional area of
financial management, such as accounting, budgeting, auditing or
financial or fiscal analysis.
(4) In depth knowledge of the principles, methods and procedures
used in budgeting, accounting, internal auditing, program
evaluation and financial and managerial reporting.
(5) Knowledge of the laws, rules and regulations governing the
installation, operation and keeping of accounts and their
applications to specific situations.
(6) Knowledge of the preparation of involved and detailed accounting
and other financial reports containing findings, conclusions and
recommendations.
(7) Knowledge of modern governmental budgeting problems, practices
and methods and their applications to specific situations.
(8) Ability to utilize principles, methods, techniques and systems of
financial management along with the ability to plan, direct and
coordinate difficult and complex financial programs.
(9) Ability to assist in developing, applying and adjusting financial
plans and policies to obtain objectives.
(10) Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships
with all levels of management and to apply sound, independent
§ 45-4 COURT § 45-5
36:119
§ 45-6. Political activity.20
Political activity shall be controlled by Article X of Chapter 68, Personnel
Regulations.
judgment in the solution of financial problems and in the
administration of financial programs.
(11) Ability to analyze complex financial problems and to make oral and
written presentations in a clear concise manner.
(12) Ability to learn to utilize various types of electronic and/or manual
recording and information systems used by the agency, office or
related units.
B. The position of Chief Financial Officer shall be a full-time position, and
compensation for the same shall be determined by the salary
ordinances of the Borough of South River.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 45-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 45-6
36:120
ARTICLE III
Deputy Director of Finance for Operations and Deputy Director of
Finance for Accounting
§ 45-7. Positions created.
It is hereby created within the Department of Finance the positions of
Deputy Director of Finance for Operations and Deputy Director of Finance
for Accounting.
§ 45-8. Appointment and term.
Deputy Director of Finance for Operations and the Deputy Director of
Finance for Accounting shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Borough Council of the Borough of South River and shall
serve at the will of the governing body.
§ 45-9. Qualifications for Deputy Director of Finance for Operations.
The qualifications for the Deputy Director of Finance for Operations shall
be as follows:
A. Graduation from an accredited college with a bachelor's degree in
accounting, budgeting, finance, economics or public or business
administrator or other related field or five years' experience in
bookkeeping and/or accounting.
B. Sufficient supervisory experience in functional areas of financial
management, such as accounting, banking, management, budgeting,
auditing or financial/fiscal analysis.
C. Possession of a current, valid certificate as municipal finance officer
issued by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Division of
Local Government Services, or the ability to obtain the same within
legally acceptable time limits.
D. Knowledge of the laws, rules and regulations governing the installation,
operation and keeping of accounts and the application to specific
situations.
E. Knowledge of the preparation of involved and detailed accounting and
other financial reports containing findings, conclusions and
recommendations.
F. Knowledge of modern governmental budgeting problems, practices and
methods and their applications to specific situations.
G. Ability to utilize principles, methods, techniques and systems of
financial management along with the ability to plan, direct and
coordinate difficult and complex financial programs.
H. Ability to assist in developing, applying and adjusting financial plans
and policies to obtain objectives.
§ 45-7 COURT § 45-9
36:121
§ 45-10. Qualifications for Deputy Director of Finance for
Accounting.
The qualifications for the Deputy Director of Finance for Accounting shall
be as follows:
I. Ability to establish and maintain effective working relationships with all
levels of management and to apply sound, independent judgment in the
solution of financial problems and in the administration of financial
programs.
J. Ability to analyze complex financial problems and to make oral and
written presentations in a clear concise manner.
K. Ability to learn to utilize various types of electronic and/or manual
recording and information systems used by the agency, office or related
units.
A. Graduation from an accredited college with a bachelor's degree
included or supplemented by 21 hour credits in professional accounting
or five years of equivalent experience in bookkeeping/accounting fields.
B. Possession of a current, valid certificate as municipal finance officer
issued by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Division of
Local Government Services, or certification as a certified public
accountant, registered municipal auditor or the ability to obtain the
same within legally acceptable time limits.
C. Knowledge of the principles, methods and procedures using modem
accounting and auditing.
D. Knowledge of the laws, rules and regulations governing the installation,
operation and keeping of accounts and the applications to specific
situations.
E. Knowledge of the preparation of involved and detailed accounting and
other financial reports containing findings, conclusions and
recommendations.
F. Knowledge of computerized accounting systems.
G. Ability to analyze complex accounting problems.
H. Ability to design, install and operate a large-scale accounting program.
I. Ability to give suitable assignments and instructions and oversee the
same.
J. Ability to prepare suitable reports and to direct the establishment and
maintenance of extensive accounting and related records and files.
K. Ability to learn to utilize various types of electronic and/or manual
recording and information systems used by the agency, office or related
units.
§ 45-9 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 45-11
36:122
§ 45-11. Compensation.
The position of Deputy Director of Finance for Operations and Deputy
Director of Finance for Accounting shall be either full-time or part-time
positions as required by the governing body, and compensation for the same
shall be determined and fixed by the salary ordinances of the Borough of
South River.
§ 45-12. Responsibilities of Deputy Director of Finance for
Operations.
The Deputy Director of Finance for Operations shall report to the Chief
Financial Officer and shall be responsible for the following:
A. Analyze budget requests.
B. Determine the amount of money involved in proposed salary changes.
C. Reviews all requisitions for appropriateness of expenditure or funds
and do follow-up on all questioned vouchers and requisitions.
D. Authorize disbursement of funds.
E. Assure adherence to contractual obligations.
F. Assign and supervise the work of subordinates.
G. Compile difficult and other statements and reports using basic data.
H. Conduct periodic studies to determine the effectiveness of current
financial control methods.
I. Administratively collect and review Borough-wide salary reports from
Department Directors and direct the execution and disbursement of the
payroll.
J. Oversee and issue reports regarding personnel and payroll matters.
K. Direct all activities pertaining to disbursement and collection of funds
and the installation of the uniform system of accounting and operating
procedures.
L. Recommend the revision of or establishment of new operational
procedures.
M. Make difficult inspections of the varied financial transactions and
records to insure that regulations and accounting procedures are
observed.
N. Supervise the operations of the billing and collection functions of the
municipal utilities, produce work orders and conduct investigations as
necessary.
O. Supervise the maintenance of essential accounting records and files.
§ 45-11 COURT § 45-12
36:123
§ 45-13. Responsibilities of Deputy Director of Finance for
Accounting.
The Deputy Director of Finance for Accounting shall report to the Chief
Financial Officer and shall be responsible for the following items:
P. Manage the work operations and/or functional programs and the
responsibility for employee evaluation for effectively recommending the
hiring, firing, promoting, demoting and/or disciplining of employees.
Q. Be required to learn to utilize various types of electronic and/or manual
recording information systems used by agency, office or related units.
R. Handle correspondence pertaining to the Treasurer's Office.
S. Prepare suitable reports containing findings, conclusions, and
recommendations and answers inquiries of a technical nature.
T. Direct the establishment, maintenance of extensive bookkeeping and
other needed records and files.
U. Prove out ledgers and bank statements on a monthly basis or as often as
required by the governing body of the Borough of South River.
A. Knowledge of the principles, methods and procedures using modern
accounting and auditing.
B. Knowledge of the laws, rules and regulations governing the installation
and operation and keeping of accounts and their applications to specific
situations.
C. Knowledge of the preparation of involved and detailed accounting and
other financial reports containing findings, conclusions and
recommendations.
D. Knowledge of computerized accounting systems and ability to analyze
complex accounting problems.
E. Ability to design, install and operate large-scale accounting programs.
F. Ability to prepare suitable reports and to direct the establishment and
maintenance of extensive accounting and related records and files.
G. Ability to give suitable assignments and instructions.
H. Ability to learn to utilize various types of electronic and/or manual
recording and information systems used by the agency, office or related
units.
§ 45-12 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 45-14
36:124
§ 45-14. Political activity.21
Political activity shall be controlled by Article X of Chapter 68, Personnel
Regulations.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 45-14 COURT § 45-14
36:125

ARTICLE IV
Tax Assessor
§ 45-15. Establishment of Office; salary.
§ 45-16. Duties.
§ 45-17. Hours of work; cooperation.
The Assessor shall perform his duties during the days and hours established
by the appropriate state or county governmental offices for the operation of
the Office of Tax Assessor as may be promulgated from time to time as well
as those established by the governing body as not inconsistent therewith
or as may be permitted by law. The Assessor shall cooperate with and
render assistance to other offices within the Borough of South River and any
municipal official or officials.
§ 45-18. Accountability.
The Assessor shall account to and be responsible for the proper expenditure
of the funds allotted to him/her in the municipal budget and comply with all
procedures established or to be established by the governing body for the
expenditure of municipal funds.
A. There is hereby established the Office of the Borough of South River Tax
Assessor, which office shall consist of a part-time Assessor and such
other clerical help and personnel as shall be necessary to properly
conduct the business of the Office of the Assessor.
B. The salary of the Assessor and any clerical personnel shall be
determined and fixed by the salary ordinances of the Borough of South
River.
A. The Assessor shall perform such duties as are or may be required by the
laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. The Assessor shall perform such duties as may be required by the
Mayor and Borough Council, which are not inconsistent with the duties
of a Tax Assessor. The Assessor shall be the custodian of all Borough
property pertaining to his/her office.
§ 45-15 COURT § 45-18
36:127

ARTICLE V
Borough Treasurer
§ 45-19. Establishment of Office; tenure.
The Office of Borough Treasurer is hereby established in the Department
of Finance. The Treasurer shall be appointed at the annual organizational
meeting in January of each year and shall serve for a term of one year
and until his/her successor shall have been appointed and qualified, subject
to the provisions for tenure contained in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-52. The Borough
Treasurer may be the same individual as the Chief Financial Officer within
the Borough of South River.
§ 45-20. Powers and duties.
The Treasurer shall have, perform and exercise all of the functions, powers
and duties as provided by general law and Borough ordinances. The
Treasurer shall keep and maintain books and records of all financial
transactions of the Borough in accordance with the standards and
requirements of the Division of Local Government of the Department of
the Treasury of the State of New Jersey. The Treasurer shall have custody
of all public monies of the Borough and shall make monthly reports to
the Director of Finance of all receipts, expenditures, commitments and
unexpended appropriations. All monies received from any source by or on
behalf of the Borough or any department, board, office or agency thereof,
except as otherwise provided by ordinance, shall be paid to the Treasurer,
who shall, by the next ensuing banking day after the receipt, deposit them
to the credit of the Borough in the authorized public depository of the
Borough to the credit of the proper account.
§ 45-19 COURT § 45-20
36:129

ARTICLE VI
Tax Collector
[Amended 6-9-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-25]
§ 45-21. Position.
There is hereby created the position of Tax Collector who shall serve in
the Department of Finance, and shall have, perform and exercise all of the
functions, powers and duties provided for by general law or ordinances.
The Tax Collector shall receive and collect all monies assessed or raised
by taxation or assessment for any purposes. The Tax Collector shall keep
proper records and shall report to the Director of Finance at least once
a month all receipts and deposits made and shall in such report account
for all monies for which said person is responsible. The Tax Collector shall
keep a current record of all tax title liens, advising the Director promptly as
such liens become subject to foreclosure under tax law. The Tax Collector
shall enforce the payment of delinquent taxes by the means provided by law
as soon as the same become delinquent. In addition to the above, the Tax
Collector shall plan and conduct the annual tax lien sale and prepare monthend
reports for reconciliation with the Finance Department and prepare and
forward the annual tax bills and notices.
§ 45-22. Qualifications.
The Tax Collector shall be a graduate from an accredited college with
a bachelor's degree in accounting and work experience in the field is
preferred. A bachelor's degree in a closely related field and additional
accounting experience may be substituted for the accounting degree. The
Tax Collector must possess a valid Tax Collector certification issued by the
State of New Jersey, Division of Local Government Services, Department of
Community Affairs, and must possess a valid driver's license from the State
of New Jersey. Said individual shall also be able to format, develop and audit
monthly activity and accounting reports and maintain various computer
files. Supervisory experience is required. Knowledge of office procedures,
computers, software and peripheral equipment is required. The individual
must also be able to lift 25 pounds on an intermittent occasion.
§ 45-23. Hours of work; salary.
The Tax Collector shall be either a full-time or part-time as determined by
the Mayor and governing body of the Borough of South River. At no time
shall the Borough have employed more than one full-time and one part-time
Tax Collector. The salary of the Tax Collector shall be determined and fixed
by the salary ordinances of the Borough of South River.
§ 45-24. Appointment, term of office.
The full-time and/or part-time Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Borough Council. The length of term of
each appointment shall be as set forth by N.J.S.A. 40A-141 et seq.
§ 45-21 COURT § 45-24
36:131

ARTICLE VII
Clerk/Meter Readers
§ 45-25. Creation of positions.
The position of Clerk/meter readers of the Borough of South River is hereby
created, and the employment of a person professionally trained and
educated and shall qualify by such requirements as set forth herein in order
to fill such position is hereby authorized. There shall be not more than two
full-time Clerk/meter readers within the Borough of South River and not
more than three part-time meter readers within the Borough of South River.
Said full-time Clerk/meter readers shall not hold any other employment.
§ 45-26. Appointment and term.
The Clerk/meter reader shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Borough Council for an indefinite term and may not be
removed except in accordance with the statute and such case made and
provided or by a majority vote of the authorized membership of the Borough
Council.
§ 45-27. Qualifications.
The clerks/meter readers shall be chosen on the basis of qualifications and
abilities and shall be required to have the following:
§ 45-28. Salary.
The Clerk/meter reader shall receive as compensation for their services an
annual salary, which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the
salary ordinances of the Borough of South River.
§ 45-29. Supervision; political activity.
§ 45-30. Duties.
The Clerk/meter reader is responsible for the following:
A. High school diploma or equivalent.
B. Possess and maintain a valid driver's license in the State of New Jersey.
C. Typing and/or computer operation skills.
A. The Clerk/meter reader shall report to the Chief Financial Officer or his
designee.
B. Political activity shall be controlled by Article X of Chapter 68,
Personnel Regulations.22
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 45-25 COURT § 45-30
36:133
A. Read utility meters.
B. Report damaged meters.
C. Report leaks or suspected tampering.
D. Record readings on provided forms or in approved formats.
E. Read recording dials of meters and records the information.
F. Inspect meters to see that seal is intact.
G. Keep necessary records and update necessary databases.
H. Perform any clerical function as required.
I. Relief in other areas of the utility billing and collection department or
finance department, as needed.
J. Handling of customer service problems and complaints.
K. Typing, filing and data entry.
L. Special projects as required.
M. Performance of any and all other duties as assigned from time to time.
§ 45-30 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 45-30
36:134
ARTICLE VIII
Administrative Assistant
§ 45-31. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of administrative assistant within
the Department of Finance in the Borough of South River. The number
of administrative assistants shall not exceed two in number and shall be
considered full-time positions.
§ 45-32. Appointment and term.
Administrative assistants shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Borough Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the
governing body.
§ 45-33. Qualifications.
The administrative assistant shall possess the following requirements:
A. High school diploma or equivalent.
B. Bachelor's degree in a related field is highly desirable.
C. One year of experience in clerical work.
D. The appointee will be expected to complete a state purchasing
certification requirement within two years of appointment or to hold a
valid qualified purchasing agent certification as issued by the State of
New Jersey.
E. Knowledge of methods and procedures involved in the requisition/
purchase of equipment, materials and/or supplies.
F. Ability to comprehend and analyze supply problems, establish and
maintain working relationships with vendors and department
representatives.
G. Maintain adequate purchase records.
H. Ability to learn and utilize various types of electronic and/or manual
recording and information systems used by the agency, office or related
units.
I. Knowledge of methods and procedures involving payroll, health
benefits, pension reports, fixed assets, cash receipts, bill lists,
developer reserves, purchase orders, requisitions, data entry, deposit
management, preparation of bank requisitions.
§ 45-31 COURT § 45-34
36:135
§ 45-34. Duties.
This position is solely responsible for all purchasing operations and is
directly responsible to assist the Deputy Directors of Finance in performing
the duties of that position and is responsible for the following items:
§ 45-35. Salary.
The administrative assistant shall receive as compensation for services an
annual salary, which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the
ordinance governing salaries of the Borough of South River.
A. Orders equipment, supplies of a limited nature according to accepted
purchasing methods as prescribed by laws, rules, regulations,
standards, policies and procedures.
B. Prepares simple specifications.
C. Receives and reviews requisitions prior to submission to the Chief
Financial Officer and Borough Administrator.
D. Interviews sale representatives who have been authorized by the Chief
Financial Officer and makes recommendations on purchases.
E. Communicates with vendors.
F. Receives, reviews and approves vendor claims and forwards them to
the Chief Financial Officer.
G. Maintains liaisons with municipal department heads and confirms with
them in regard to needs for materials and supplies.
H. Recommends the use of substitutes or alternative products.
I. Receives and handles complaints.
J. Is responsible for posting purchasing information into the purchasing
systems.
K. Performs clerical work involved in preparing contracts following the
awardance of bids.
L. Maintains records and files.
M. Types documents necessary for the smooth, efficient operation of the
department.
N. Learns or utilizes various types of electronic and/or manual recording
and information systems used by the agency, office or related units.
§ 45-34 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 45-36
36:136
§ 45-36. Political activity. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-31]
Political activity shall be controlled by Article X of Chapter 68, Personnel
Regulations.
§ 45-36 COURT § 45-36
36:137

ARTICLE IX
Deputy Tax Collector
[Added 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-3723]
§ 45-37. Position created.
There is hereby created within the Department of Finance the position
of Deputy Tax Collector. This is a "hands on" position responsible for the
accounting, planning, management, reporting, supervision of employees
and collections for the Borough's taxes and utility payments. Additional
responsibilities include work pertaining to general accounting as assigned
by the Chief Financial Officer.
§ 45-38. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Deputy Tax Collector shall include, but not be
limited to:
A. Assists in managing the financial affairs of the Borough by preparing
financial analyses and reports of Borough activities.
B. Prepares reports that outline the Borough's financial position with
regard to income, disbursements, and expenses based on past, present
and future activities.
C. Assists and/or prepares and implements budgets, financial reports,
financial plans, and forecasts for the financial needs of the Borough.
D. Recommends operational and/or procedural changes due to anticipated
changes in financial status.
E. The review, analysis, evaluation, and reporting on program
accomplishments in financial terms, the comparison of program
performance with operating plans and standards as reflected in
financial data, and reporting on and interpreting finance information
with the objective of promoting efficiency and economy in terms of the
results or program benefits as compared to monetary expenditures.
F. Responsible for administration of tax collections as directed by Tax
Collector as described in the Borough of South River Ordinances as
they relate to the collection, accounting and reporting of Borough
taxes.
G. Preparation and production of annual tax bills and notices as described
by the Tax Collector.
H. Assists the Tax Collector with the planning and execution of the annual
tax lien sales.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IX, Collector of Revenue/Deputy
Tax Collector, added 10-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-22.
§ 45-37 COURT § 45-38
36:139
§ 45-39. Required knowledge, abilities and skills.
The Deputy Tax Collector shall have the following knowledge, abilities and
skills, including, but not limited to:
§ 45-40. Education, experience and training.
The Deputy Tax Collector shall have the following education, experience
and training:
I. Prepares month-end reports for reconciliation with the Finance
Department.
J. Prepares to assume the role of Tax Collector.
A. Ability to be a "self-starter" with the ability to work with little or no
supervision.
B. Able to format, develop and audit monthly activity in accounting reports
and maintain various computer files.
C. Supervisor experience in a department of five or more employees.
D. Knowledge of office procedures, computers, software and peripheral
equipment.
E. Demonstrates skills in business correspondence, written and oral
communications.
F. Ability to prioritize duties and work effectively with Borough personnel
and citizens.
G. Demonstrates knowledge of Microsoft Office Products, including
Outlook, Access, Word, Excel and PowerPoint.
H. Experience with a service billing department or function, preferably a
utility function.
I. Experience with Edmonds billing software preferred.
J. Business and accounting experience required.
K. Must be able to lift 25 pounds on intermittent occasions.
A. Graduation from an accredited college with a Bachelor's Degree in
accounting and work experience in the field is preferred. A Bachelor's
Degree in a closely related field and additional accounting experience
may be substituted for the Accounting Degree.
B. Preferences will be given to candidates who possess a valid Tax
Collector's Certification issued by the State of New Jersey, Division of
Local Government Services, Department of Community Affairs, and/or
agree to immediately pursue such certification.
§ 45-38 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 45-40
36:140
§ 45-41. Dress code.
Attire is business professional. Attire must be suitable for the position in
order to maintain a professional image of the Tax and Finance Department
(no jeans, shorts, T-shirts).
§ 45-42. Compensation; salary.
The Deputy Tax Collector shall receive as compensation for services an
annual salary, which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the
ordinances governing the salaries.
C. Must possess a valid driver's license from the State of New Jersey.
§ 45-40 COURT § 45-42
36:141

ARTICLE X
Human Resource Coordinator
[Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-22]
§ 45-43. Position created.
The position of Human Resource Coordinator who shall work within the
Chief Financial Officer's office and under the direction of Chief Financial
Officer to assist in maintaining liaison between the Borough and other
government departments in matters of personnel administration and in
coordinating personnel programs, policies and practices for employees of
the Borough is hereby created. This individual may be required to do other
related duties as requested by the Chief Financial Officer.
§ 45-44. Power and duties.
The power and duties of the Human Resource Coordinator shall include but
not be limited to:
§ 45-45. Education, experience and training.
The Human Resource Coordinator shall have the following education,
experience and training:
A. May assist in organizing work programs and in the assignment and
supervision of staff.
B. May assist in the development and implementation of policy and
procedural changes.
C. Provide technical advice on personnel matters.
D. Supervise the preparation and maintenance of time, leave and payroll
records.
E. Prepare correspondence required in connection with personnel
matters.
F. Prepare and supervise the preparation of clear, concise, accurate and
informative statistical, financial and other reports containing findings,
conclusions and recommendations.
G. Supervise the establishment and maintenance of records and files
required in connection with the personal program of the agency.
A. Knowledge of problems encountered in the administration of a
personnel program.
B. Knowledge of theory, practices and principles of personnel
administration.
§ 45-43 COURT § 45-45
36:143
C. Ability to read and interpret provisions of New Jersey laws relating to
personnel matters and the rules and regulations of the New Jersey
Department of Personnel and to apply them to specific situations.
D. Ability to analyze and resolve personnel and technical problems
involved with the oversight of a personnel program.
E. Ability to establish and maintain cooperative working relationships with
associates and other individuals engaged in or concerned with the
issues relating to public employment.
F. Ability to prepare reports.
G. Ability to establish and maintain records and files.
H. Ability to handle from start to finish worker compensation claims,
including completing form listings wages for 26 weeks prior to date of
accident, reviewing the accident report completed by the immediate
supervisor of the injured employee, then submitting all necessary forms
to the Claims Office for Wage Reimbursement. When reimbursements
are received, a review must be completed for deposit to the Borough
bank account. By law, PEOSHA forms must be updated with each
accident and each department head must be given a copy of this form
listing their employees, the specific injuries with dates of the injuries.
Copies of all claims reports received must be given to the department
head involved.
I. Ability to handle disability benefits, including completing the Employer
Verification Form for any covered employee wishing to apply for longterm
disability; furnishing all pertinent information about the employee
and the specific disability to facilitate the claim being processed.
J. Ability to handle from start to finish health, dental and prescription
insurance benefits including reviewing the monthly health, dental and
prescription invoices for payment processing, involving contacting the
vendor's billing department and making any adjustments to billing
errors on the invoices. Invoices must be vouchered in a timely manner
to make the correct payment within the specified due dates. The Human
Resources Coordinator shall notify all of the potential covered
employees of open enrollment dates; process and submit the change
forms within the specified time limits; process the necessary forms to
add or delete dependents, depending on their situation, i.e. birth of a
new child, divorce, termination of a retired employee or to remove a
dependent who has reached the age limit of insurance; prepare and
submit COBRA forms to all terminated employees in a timely manner as
required by law.
K. Ability to handle New Jersey State Pension Retirement Forms, including
preparing and submitting the necessary forms for all employees who
wish to apply to the state of any type of retirement. These forms include
the Employer's Verification of Employee Wages for the last three years
§ 45-45 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 45-45
36:144
§ 45-46. Dress code.
Attire is business professional. Attire must be suitable for the position in
order to maintain the professional image of the Office of the Chief Financial
Officer (no jeans, shorts, T-shirts).
§ 45-47. Compensation; salary.
The Human Resource Coordinator shall receive as compensation for
services an annual salary, which shall be fixed in accordance with the
provisions of the ordinances governing the salaries.
of their working career and a Certification of Service and Final Salary
Form for the final 12 months that they worked.
L. Ability to handle disability for volunteer fire fighters and Rescue Squad
members, furnishing to each new volunteer insurance forms for
completion and review for completeness.
M. Familiarity and skills necessary to operate office machinery including
copiers, adding machines, fax machines and knowledge of computer
programs including Excel, Access, Printshop, Word and Internet; typing
45 words per minute minimum.
§ 45-45 COURT § 45-47
36:145

ARTICLE XI
Supervisor of Utilities
[Added 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-37]
§ 45-48. Position created.
There is hereby created within the Department of Finance the position of
Team Leader. This is a "hands on" position responsible for the accounting,
planning, management, reporting, supervision of employees and collections
for the Borough's utility payments. Additional responsibilities include work
pertaining to general accounting as assigned by the Chief Financial Officer.
§ 45-49. Power and duties.
The power and duties of the Team Leader shall include, but not be limited
to:
A. Assists in managing the financial affairs of the Borough by preparing
financial analyses and reports of Borough utility accounts.
B. Prepares reports that outline the Borough's financial position with
regard to income, disbursements, and expenses based on past, present
and future activities.
C. Assists and/or prepares and implements budgets, financial reports,
financial plans, and forecasts of the financial needs of the Borough.
D. Recommends operational and/or procedural changes due to anticipated
changes in financial status.
E. The review, analysis, evaluation, and reporting on program
accomplishments in financial terms, the comparison of program
performance with operating plans and standards as reflected in
financial data, and reporting on and interpreting finance information
with the objective of promoting efficiency and economy in terms of the
results or program benefits as compared to monetary expenditures.
F. Supervision of all employees assigned to the utility collection office.
G. Responsible to assure compliance with all state and Borough laws and
ordinances for the proper administration of the department.
H. Supervision for utility account data input and control, new and changed
accounts and final billing.
I. Maintains and updates consumer deposit programs and files.
J. Cash receipts input, monthly ledger and transmission to contracted
utility billing group.
K. Supervises the preparation of daily bank deposits and ensures that all
monies are recorded and deposited promptly and accurately.
§ 45-48 COURT § 45-49
36:147
§ 45-50. Required knowledge, abilities and skills.
The Team Leader shall have the following knowledge, abilities and skills,
including but not limited to:
L. Preparation and updating of monthly utility shut-off on Excel
spreadsheets for review by the Borough Administrator and use by the
Department of Public Works.
M. Performs utility collections as required.
N. Receives and investigates consumer inquiries on utility accounts,
investigates, analyzes and resolves billing/collection issues.
O. Prepares and completes monthly billing, utility consumption, cash flow
and monthly accounting report utilizing Excel spreadsheets analysis.
P. Supports and interacts with UBS (Billing Service Bureau), Finance
Department, Department of Public Works and Utility customers.
Q. Prepares month-end reports for reconciliation with Finance
Department.
A. Must be a "self-starter" with the ability to work with little or no
supervision.
B. Able to format, develop and audit monthly activity and accounting
reports and maintain various computer files.
C. Supervisor experience in a department of five or more employees.
D. Knowledge of office procedures, computers, software and peripheral
equipment.
E. Demonstrated skills in business correspondence, written and oral
communications.
F. Ability to prioritize duties and work efficiently with Borough personnel
and citizens.
G. Demonstrated knowledge of Microsoft Office Products, including
Outlook, Access, Word, Excel and PowerPoint.
H. Experience with a service billing department or function, preferably a
utility function.
I. Experience with Edmonds software preferred.
J. Business and accounting experience a plus.
K. Must be able to lift 25 pounds on intermittent occasions.
§ 45-49 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 45-51
36:148
§ 45-51. Education, experience and training.
The Team Leader shall have the following education, experience and
training:
§ 45-52. Dress code.
Attire is business professional. Attire must be suitable for the position in
order to maintain the professional image of the Finance/Utility Department
(no jeans, shorts, T-shirts).
§ 45-53. Compensation; salary.
The Team Leader shall receive as compensation for services an annual
salary, which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the
ordinances governing the salaries.
A. Must have at least four years' experience in municipal government,
utility experience a plus.
B. Must possess a valid driver's license from the State of New Jersey.
§ 45-51 COURT § 45-53
36:149

ARTICLE XII
Parking Utility
[Added 10-11-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-33]
§ 45-54. Creation of Utility.
Within the Department of Finance there is hereby created a Parking Utility.
The Parking Utility, while organized as a separate function and, for
budgeting purposes, a self-liquidating entity, shall operate within the
Finance Department of the Borough. The Parking Utility shall be operated
and organized in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:60-25.1 and the Code of the
Borough of South River. As any department, the Utility shall be ultimately
responsible for its administration to the Mayor and Council. The Utility shall
be under the direction of the Business Administrator.
§ 45-55. Operation.
The Parking Utility shall be operated as follows:
A. The Department of Finance shall be responsible for recommending
funding required for maintenance, construction and improvement of all
capital operations of the Parking Utility.
B. The Department of Finance shall be responsible for the collection of all
fees, investments of monies and all financial operations in conjunction
with the administration of public parking within the Borough of South
River.
C. The Parking Utility is authorized to charge and enforce parking rates in
accordance with Chapter 155 of the Borough Code.24
D. A monthly permit may be sold for parking at municipal parking lots of
the Borough, and preference will be given to South River residents
subject to rules and regulations to be adopted and implemented by the
Parking Utility.
E. The Collector of Revenue and the Chief Financial Officer shall account
for all parking receipts according to existing state law and subject to
the annual audit of the Parking Utility.
F. All moneys received by or on behalf of the Parking Utility shall be paid
to the Collector of Revenue, who shall deposit all such receipts within
48 hours.
G. An annual budget shall be prepared in accordance with the statute
providing for same.
H. The Parking Utility shall comply with all applicable provisions of the
laws of the State of New Jersey.
24.Editor's Note: See § 155-18.2.
§ 45-54 COURT § 45-55
36:151
I. The parking rates as set forth in Chapter 155 and the following
provisions for permitted parking shall be enforced by a Parking
Enforcement Officer employed by the Parking Utility:
(1) Driving the wrong way in parking lots.
(2) Parking in a nonauthorized area.
(3) Parking without payment.
(4) Parking without the appropriate permit.
(5) Stopping or standing in prohibited areas.
(6) Parking across a designated stall.
§ 45-55 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 45-55
36:152
Chapter 50
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental/Shade Tree Commission — See
Ch. 22, Art. IV.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 129.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 174.
Soil addition and grade alteration — See Ch.
282.
Soil removal — See Ch. 284.
Subdivision and site plan review; stormwater
management — See Ch. 295.
Tree removal and woodlands
management — See Ch. 319.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 45-55 COURT § 45-55
36:153

ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 50-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, in the Borough
of South River, a Planning Board of nine members consisting of the
following four classes:
§ 50-2. Terms of members.
A. Class I: the Mayor, or Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor
(N.J.S.A. 40-55D-23a).
B. Class II: one of the officials of the Borough other than a member of the
governing body to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if there is
an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and a member of the Board of Education among the Class IV members
or alternate members.
C. Class III: a member of the governing body, to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the Borough, to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
position or employment, except that one member may be a member of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment. A member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV Planning Board member, unless he
or she is among the Class IV, or alternate, members, both a member of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of
Education, in which case the member of the Environmental Commission
shall be deemed to be the Class II member of the Planning Board. For
the purpose of this section, membership on a municipal board or
commission whose function is advisory in nature, and the establishment
of which is discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be
considered the holding of municipal office.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with the
Mayor's official tenure, or if the member is the Mayor's designee, the
designee shall server at the pleasure of the Mayor during the Mayor's
official tenure.
B. The term of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for
one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of
office, whichever comes first, except for a Class II member who is also a
member of the Environmental Commission.
C. The term of a Class II or Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
§ 50-1 COURT § 50-2
36:155
§ 50-3. Alternate members.
completion of his term in office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever comes first.
D. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at completion of his Class IV
term, whichever comes first.
E. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that, to the greater practicable extent,
the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over the first
four years after their appointment as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which they
were appointed. Thereafter all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years except as otherwise provided herein.
F. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment
was made, except as otherwise specified herein.
G. No member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest.
H. Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he
requests one, may be removed by the governing body for cause.
A. There shall be two alternate members of the Planning Board who shall
be appointed by the Mayor and shall meet the qualifications of Class IV
members of the Planning Board. Said alternates shall be designated at
the time of their appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except
that the terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of
not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year;
provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate
members first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the approving
authority for the unexpired term only.
B. No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter on which
he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. An
alternate member may, after public hearing if he requests one, be
removed by the governing body for cause. Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in
the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
§ 50-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 50-3
36:156
§ 50-4. Vacancies.
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 50-5. Basic course in land use law and planning.
All regular and alternate members of the Planning Board shall be required
to successfully complete a course in land use law and planning which has
been authorized by the New Jersey Commissioner of Community Affairs
and/or New Jersey planning officials within 18 months of assuming Board
membership. No new member of the Planning Board shall be seated as a
first-term member or alternate member of the Planning Board unless the
person agrees to complete the basic course required and complete that
course within 18 months of assuming Board membership. The Mayor or
Class I member, a member of the governing body serving as a Class III
member, and any person licensed as professional planner shall be exempt
from this requirement.
§ 50-6. Organization of Board.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV, select a Secretary who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee, and create and fill such other
offices as established by ordinance.
§ 50-7. Planning Board Attorney.
There is hereby created the position of Planning Board Attorney. The
Planning Board shall annually appoint and fix the compensation of the
Planning Board Attorney for all legal service, including, but not limited to,
regular and special meetings of the Board, litigation, and such other legal
services as may be deemed necessary by the Board. The Board Attorney
shall be an attorney other than the Municipal Attorney or Zoning Board
of Adjustment Attorney. The Board shall not, however, exceed, exclusive of
gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use.
§ 50-8. Expert staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for services of planning
and/or engineering consultants and their staff and other services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not, however, exceed, exclusive of gifts
or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for services of a Board
Secretary. The Board shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the
governing body for its use.
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 50-3 COURT § 50-9
36:157
§ 50-9. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation and such
rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions
and purpose of this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of
oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal
Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2a:67a-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 50-10. Powers of Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall have such powers as are granted by law:
A. To make and adopt, and from time to time, amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the municipality, including in its consideration
areas outside its boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear
essential relation to the planning of the municipality, in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
B. To administer the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance25 of
the municipality in accordance with the provisions of said ordinances
and with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
C. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
D. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuing planning
process.
E. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvements and
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and recommend same to the governing body.
F. To consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulations submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
G. The Planning Board, when reviewing applications for approval of
subdivision plans, site plans or conditional uses, shall have the power to
grant to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Board of Adjustment, provided no variance under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d is
required:
(1) Grant variances, pursuant to Section 57c of Chapter 291 of the
Laws of New Jersey, 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c), from lot area, lot
dimension, setback and yard requirements, etc.
(2) Direction, pursuant to Section 25 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34), for issuance
of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainageway, flood-control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to Section 23 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32).
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ 50-9 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 50-10
36:158
§ 50-11. Environmental/Shade Tree Commission review.
Whenever the Environmental Commission27 has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality,
the Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission
an informational copy of every application for development to the Planning
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make such an informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 50-12. Time limits.
(3) Direction, pursuant to Section 27 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36), for issuance
of a permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
(4) Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of
a hearing on the application for development shall include
references to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of
a permit, as the case may be.
H. The Planning Board shall perform such other advisory duties as are
assigned to it by ordinance or resolution of the governing body for the
aid and assistance of the governing body or other municipal agencies or
offices.
I. To hold hearings on any application to establish any residential housing
facilities pursuant to Senate Bill No. 210, for the developmentally
disabled, and to approve any such application by resolution, setting
forth the terms and conditions of the approved.
J. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of all Borough ordinances
related to the powers, functions and duties generally performed by the
Planning Board, other than the Zoning Ordinance.26
A. Minor subdivision and minor site plans. Minor subdivision and minor
site plan approvals shall be granted or denied within 45 days of the date
of submission of a complete application to the Planning Board or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of
the Planning Board to act within the prescribed forty-five-day period
shall constitute minor subdivision. Minor subdivisions shall expire 190
days from the date of Planning Board approval unless within such
period a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions of the
Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), or a deed clearly describing
the approved minor subdivision, is filed by the developer with the
County Recording Officer, the Borough Engineer and the Borough Tax
Assessor. Any such plat or deed must be signed by the Chairman and
Secretary of the Planning Board before it will be accepted for filing by
the County Recording Officer.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Art. IV, Environmental/Shade Tree Commission.
§ 50-10 COURT § 50-12
36:159
(1) The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision
approval was granted shall not be changed for a period of two years
after the date on which the resolution of minor subdivision
approval is adopted, provided that the approved minor subdivision
shall have been duly recorded as provided in this subsection.
(2) The Planning Board may extend the one-hundred-ninety-day period
for filing a minor subdivision plat or deed pursuant to § 295-24 and/
or § 295-27 if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Planning Board that 1) the developer was barred or prevented,
directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental or quasigovernmental
entities, and 2) the developer applied promptly for
and diligently pursued the required approvals. The length of the
extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the wait
for the required approvals, as determined by the Planning Board.
The developer may apply for the extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date.
(3) The Planning Board shall grant an extension of minor subdivision
approval for a period determined by the Board but not exceeding
one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension
before what would otherwise be the expiration date of minor
subdivision approval or the 91st day after the developer receives
the last legally required approval from the other government
entities, whichever occurs later.
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivisions and major site plans. Upon
submission of a complete application for a subdivision of 10 acres of
land or less and 10 dwelling units or less, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Upon submission of a complete application for a subdivision
of more than 10 acres or more than 10 dwelling units, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for either size subdivision or site plan.
C. Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise it ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in § 50-10G, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of
the application within 95 days after submission by the developer of a
complete application or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the
§ 50-12 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 50-12
36:160
period described shall constitute approval of the application, and a
certificate of the administrative officer, as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act, shall be issued on the request of the applicant.
D. Final approval.
(1) Application for final subdivision approval or site plan approval shall
be granted or denied within 45 days of submission of a complete
application or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute final approval.
(2) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the county recording
officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the
period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days
from the date of signing of the plat.
(3) The Planning Board may extend the 95 days or the one-hundredninety-
day period if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Planning Board that (1) the developer was
barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of
delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental or quasi-governmental entities, and (2) the developer
applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals.
The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay
caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the
Planning Board. The developer may apply for the extension either
before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
§ 50-12 COURT § 50-12
36:161

ARTICLE II
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 50-13. Establishment; terms of members.
§ 50-14. Alternate members.
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq. consisting of seven residents of the Borough of South
River appointed by the governing body to serve for a term of four years
from January 1 of the year of their appointment. Nothing in this chapter
shall, however, be construed to affect the term of any present member
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office
until the completion of the term for which they were appointed.
B. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the Borough.
C. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
D. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be permitted to act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal
or financial interest.
E. A member may, after a public hearing if he requests it, be removed by
the governing body for cause.
A. There shall be two alternate members of the Board of Adjustment
appointed by the governing body. The alternate members shall be
designated at the time of appointment by the governing body as
"Alternate No. 1" and Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate
members shall be such that the term of not more than one alternate
member shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that in no
instance shall the terms of the alternate members first appointed
exceed two years.
B. The alternate member may participate in discussion of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
C. No alternate member of the Board of Adjustment shall be permitted to
act on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest.
D. An alternate member may, after a public hearing if he requests one, be
removed by the governing body for cause.
§ 50-13 COURT § 50-15
36:163
§ 50-15. Officers.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
its members and shall also select a Secretary, who may be either a Board
member or another municipal employee.
§ 50-16. Board of Adjustment Attorney.
There is hereby created the position of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, appointed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall annually appoint and fix the compensation of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney for all legal services, including, but
not limited to, regular and special meetings of the Board, litigation and such
other legal services as may be deemed necessary by the Board. The Board of
Adjustment Attorney shall be an attorney other than the Municipal Attorney
or Planning Board Attorney. The Board shall not, however, exclusive of gifts
or grants, exceed the amount appropriated by the governing body for its
use.
§ 50-17. Other expert staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for the
services of planning and/or engineering consultants and their staff and
other services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not, however,
exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
governing body for its use.
§ 50-18. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation and such
rules/regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and
purposes of this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of
oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal
Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 50-19. Powers of Zoning Board of Adjustment.
The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law to:
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant that there
is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
Administrative Official based on or made in the enforcement of the
Zoning Ordinance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55d-70a. In exercising the
above-mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in conformity
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or amendments thereto
or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm wholly or partly or
may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from, and make such other requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and, to that end, have all the
powers of the administrative officer from whom the appeal was taken.
§ 50-15 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 50-19
36:164
B. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Zoning Ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions upon
which such Board is authorized to pass by the Zoning Ordinance,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
C. Variances. a) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness,
or shape of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographical conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a
specific piece of property or by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or
the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
regulation pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance28 would result in peculiar
and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue
hardship upon, the developer of such property, grant, upon an
application or an appeal, a variance from such strict application of such
regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship; b) where, in an
application or appeal relating to a specific piece of property, the
purpose of this act or the Educational Facilities Construction and
Financing Act29 would be advanced by a deviation from the Zoning
Ordinance requirements and the benefits or the deviation would
substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations pursuant to Zoning Ordinance; provided,
however, that no variance from those departures enumerated in
Subsection D of this section shall be granted under this subsection; and
provided, further, that the proposed development does not require
approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use, in conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to review
a request for a variance.
D. In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to allow
departure restricted against such a) use or principal structure not
permitted; b) an expansion of a nonconforming use; c) deviation from a
specification or standard pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 pertaining
solely to a conditional use; d) an increase in the permitted floor area
ratio as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4; e) an increase in the permitted
density as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one- or two-dwelling-unit
buildings, which lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots
resulting from a minor subdivision; or f) a height of a principal structure
which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% of the maximum height permitted in
the district for a principal structure. A variance under this subsection
shall be granted only by affirmative vote of at least five members. No
variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and Zoning
Ordinance.30 Any application under this section may be referred to any
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 375, Zoning.
29.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 18A:7G-1 et seq.
§ 50-19 COURT § 50-19
36:165
§ 50-20. Additional duties.
In addition, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have power given by law
to:
§ 50-21. Appeals and application.
appropriate person or agency, for its report, provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a building
or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, floodcontrol
basin or public area reserved on the Official Map.
B. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a building
or structure not related to a street.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67
whenever the Board is reviewing an application for approval of a use
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
D. The developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
approval of the variance and a subsequent application for any required
approval of subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate
approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon the grant of all
required subsequent approvals by the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of the Zoning Officer of the municipality
based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or
Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a
notice of appeal and eight copies with the office from whom the appeal
is taken specifying the grounds of such appeal. The official from whom
the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was
taken.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Board of
Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application
to an administrative officer. Eight copies of the application shall be
filed. At the time of filing the appeal or application, but in no event less
than 10 days prior to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also
file all plot plans, maps or other papers required by virtue of any
provision of this chapter or any rule of the Board of Adjustment. The
applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 375, Zoning.
§ 50-19 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 50-21
36:166
§ 50-22. Modification on appeal.
The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or
may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and to that end have all the powers of the
administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 50-23. Stay of proceedings by appeal.
An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in the
appealed matter unless the officer from whose action the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court
upon notice of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause
shown.
§ 50-24. Environmental Commission review.
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Zoning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality,
the Zoning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission
an informational copy of every application for development to the Zoning
Board. Failure of the Zoning Board to make such an informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 50-25. Time for decision.
The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120 days
after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative
officer or after the submission of a complete application for development to
the Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72b, or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board
to render a decision within such period shall constitute a decision favorable
to the applicant. In the event the developer submits separate consecutive
applications, the aforesaid time period shall apply to the application for
approval of the variance. The period for granting or denying any subsequent
approval shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter. Failure of the Board
to render a decision within the prescribed period shall constitute a decision
favorable to the applicant.
§ 50-26. Expiration of variance.
Any variance from the items of this chapter hereafter granted by the Board
of Adjustment, permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or
Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Secretary of the Board shall inform
the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board.
§ 50-21 COURT § 50-26
36:167
structures or permitting a specified use of any premises, shall expire by
limitation within one year from the date of entry of the judgment or
determination of the Board of Adjustment, or in the case where a variance
was granted in conjunction with the approval of a development application
for a minor subdivision or site plan, the protection period for the variance
shall run concurrently with the protection period for the respective
development application, unless the applicable construction permits have
been obtained or the permitted use has actually been commenced by that
date; except, however, that the running of the period of limitation herein
provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision
of the Board of Adjustment to the court of competent jurisdiction until the
termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
§ 50-27. Lack of quorum.
If the Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because any of its regular or
alternate members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 from acting on a
matter due to the member's personal or financial interest therein, Class
IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that
matter only, as temporary members of the Board of Adjustment. The Class
IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve in order
of seniority of continuous service to the Planning Board until there are the
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon
the matter without any personal or financial interest therein, whether direct
or indirect. If a choice has to be made between Class IV members of equal
seniority, the Chair of the Planning Board shall make the choice.
§ 50-26 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 50-27
36:168
ARTICLE III
Provisions Applicable to Both Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment
§ 50-28. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 50-29. Application procedure.
A. All applications for development shall be filed with the administrative
officer. At the time of filing of application, the applicant shall also file
the fee, a completed checklist (as set forth in the schedule of forms
attached to and made a part of this chapter), any request for waiver and
any and all maps required by this section. The applicant shall file, at
least 14 days before the date of the monthly meeting of the Board, eight
copies of a sketch plat, eight copies of an application for minor
subdivision approval, eight copies of an application for site plan review,
conditional use approval or planned development. At the time of filing
the application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to the date set
for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other
papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of
the Planning Board. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from
the Secretary of the Board. The Secretary of the Board shall inform the
applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board.
B. Upon receipt of an application for development, the administrative
officer shall review the application and certify it as complete if all
requirements for completeness have been met.
C. Within 45 days from the filing as required above, the administrative
officer shall review and certify the application to be complete or
incomplete in writing.
(1) If incomplete, the administrative officer shall certify in writing the
deficiencies in the application on a checklist as specified in the
schedule of forms attached to and made part of this chapter.
(2) The application shall be deemed complete within 45 days of the
date of its submission if the administrative office does not certify
the application to be complete.
D. The applicant may request relief from one or more of the submissions
required above. The request must be in writing stating the reason
§ 50-28 COURT § 50-29
36:169
§ 50-30. Meetings.
§ 50-31. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the Borough Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right
to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a reasonable fee as indicated in the Fee Ordinance
for reproduction of the minutes for his use as provided for in the rules of the
Board.31
thereof. The administrative officer shall grant or deny the request
within 45 days of the request.
E. The administrative officer shall assign a hearing date and notify the
applicant of the same after the application has been deemed complete.
Notice to the applicant shall be in writing by regular mail. Upon receipt
of a date of hearing, the applicant shall proceed to give proper notice of
the hearing and comply with all other provisions of this chapter and the
Municipal Land Use Law.
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled as on an adopted calendar, and any
meeting scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack
of applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provisions of Chapter 291 of the Laws of
1975 (see N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9 et seq.).
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Act, Chapter 231 of the Laws
of 1975 (see N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.). An executive session for the
purpose of discussing and studying any matters to come before either
Board shall not be deemed a regular or special meeting in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
§ 50-29 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 50-32
36:170
§ 50-32. Documents and fees.
Forms and any other required documents for applications or for the
rendering of any service by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or any member of their administrative staffs which are not
otherwise provided for by ordinance may be provided for and adopted as
part of the rules of the Board. Copies of said rules or of the separate fee
and submission schedule shall be made available to the public. A schedule
of fees is detailed in Chapter 155 of this Code.
§ 50-33. Hearings.
A. Rules. The Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment may
make rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies,
which rules shall be consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing, or such person as he may
designate, shall have the power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the
parties, as well as the provisions of the County and Municipal
Investigations Law, P.L. 1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall
apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings of either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
F. Absent member. When any hearing before either the Planning Board or
the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall carry over two or more meetings,
a member of the Board who was absent for one or more the meetings
shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was
conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one or more of the
meetings; provided, however, that such Board Member has available to
him a transcript or recording of the meeting from which he was absent
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Fees.
§ 50-32 COURT § 50-33
36:171
§ 50-34. Notice requirements for hearings.
and certifies in writing to the Board from which he was absent that he
has read such transcript or listened to such recording.
A. Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development,
except for minor subdivisions, minor site plans, final site plans and final
subdivisions, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall
give notice thereof as follows:
(1) Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper
of the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
(2) Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown on
the current tax duplicates, located within 200 feet in all directions
of the property which is the subject of such hearing and whether
located within or without the municipality in which the applicant's
land is located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof
on the owner as shown on the said current tax duplicate or his
agent in charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by
certified mail to the property owner at his address as shown on the
said current tax duplicate. A return receipt is not required. Notice
to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner.
Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its
president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation.
(3) Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice
required to be given to the owners of lands in such adjoining
municipality which are located within 200 feet of the subject
premises.
(4) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Middlesex County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to an existing county road or
proposed road shown on the Official County Map or the Middlesex
County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or situated within
200 feet of a municipality boundary.
(5) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
New Jersey Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an
application for development of property adjacent to a state
highway.
(6) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
State Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
§ 50-33 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 50-34
36:172
§ 50-35. List of property owners.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the administrative officer
of the municipality, the Municipal Tax Collector, shall, within seven days
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Section
6b of Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975 (see N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10).
B. Minor applications.
(1) Notice of hearings on applications for approval of minor
subdivision or a site plan not defined as a minor site plan requiring
public notice pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall be given
by personal service or certified mail to the corporate secretary of
all public utilities and the general manager of all cable television
companies that own land on any facility or that possess a right-ofway
or easement within 200 feet in all directions of the property
which is the subject of this hearing.
(2) In addition to any notification requirement otherwise imposed
under this act, an applicant seeking approval of a development
which does not require notice as provided in Subsection B(1) of this
section shall be required to provide notice, by personal service or
certified mail, to the corporate secretary of any public utility and
the general manager of any cable television company that
possesses a right-of-way or easement situated within the property
limits of the property which is the subject of the application for
development approval under this subsection.
(3) The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the
municipal agency holding the hearing on the application for
development in the event that the applicant is required to give
notice pursuant to this section.
(4) All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at
least 10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant
shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the
hearing on the application for development.
(5) Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
C. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the
nature of the matters to be considered; and identification of the
property proposed for development by street address and/or by
reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the Municipal Tax Assessor's Office; and the location and
times at which any maps and documents for which approval is sought
are available as required by law.
§ 50-34 COURT § 50-35
36:173
after receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee
as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, make and certify a list from the current
tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to Article III, § 50-34A(2), of this chapter.
§ 50-36. Decisions.
§ 50-37. Publication of decisions.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
applicant, and said notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for
publication within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
§ 50-38. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, the
requirement that every application for development submitted to the
Planning Board or to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied
by proof that no taxes or any other outstanding fees owed to the Borough
are due or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such
application may be waived at the discretion of the reviewing board. No
zoning permits, building permits, certificates of occupancy or other permits
shall be issued unless proof is submitted by the applicant that no taxes or
any other outstanding fees owed to the Borough are due or delinquent on
the property which is the subject of such application.
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which shall include findings of fact
and legal conclusions based thereon, and shall be memorialized by
resolution. Said adoption shall not occur later than 45 days after the
date of meeting at which the reviewing agency voted to grant or deny
approval. Only members of the Board who voted for the action taken
may vote on the memorialization resolution.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed
in the office of the Municipal Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those fees established for copies of
other public documents in the municipality.
§ 50-35 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 50-38
36:174
ARTICLE IV
Appeals
§ 50-39. Appeal to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the Construction Official of the
Borough based on, or made in, the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or
Official Map.32 Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of
appeal in the manner set forth herein and in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 of the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975.
§ 50-40. Appeal from decision of Planning Board.
Any interested party shall appeal a final decision of the Planning Board by
commencing an action in lieu of prerogative writ in the Superior Court of
New Jersey pursuant to the applicable Rules of Court.
§ 50-41. Appeal from decision of Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Any interested party may appeal to the governing body any final decision of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment approving an application for development.
Such appeal shall be made pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17 et seq.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ 50-39 COURT § 50-41
36:175

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 50-42. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on
any such applications shall be governed by the provisions of Article III of
this chapter.
§ 50-43. Notice of applications.
Any other provisions of the ordinances of the Borough of South River to
the contrary notwithstanding, public notice and notice with respect to all
applications for development, with the exception of applications for final
approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50, shall be given in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
§ 50-44. Informal review.
At the request of the developer, the reviewing board shall grant an informal
review of a concept plan for development for which the developer intends to
prepare and submit an application for development. The amount of any fees
for such an informal review shall be a credited toward the application fees
for review for the application for development. The developer shall not be
bound by any concept plan for which review is requested, and the reviewing
board shall not be bound by any such review.
§ 50-45. Electronic files required.
A. In addition to the current required submittals set forth above, all
drawings associated with the preliminary and final application of major
site plans, minor subdivisions, and major subdivisions and their
applicable reports shall be submitted in Adobe Portable Document
Format (PDF) at 400 by 400 dpi. All other documents, such as but not
limited to application, escrow sheet, completion checklist,
environmental impact study, traffic study, stormwater report, sewer and
water report, reforestation or woodland management plan, and permits
associated with the application, shall be submitted in Adobe Portable
Document Format (PDF) at 300 by 300 dpi. All revisions and
resubmissions shall also be submitted in these formats.
B. All filed maps and required final as-built plans shall be submitted in one
of the following formats: Autocad Drawing File (dwg), ESRI Shape File
(shp), Drawing Exchange Format File (dxf) or Microstation drawing file
(dgn) and contain coordinate values for at least three identifiable
boundary corners (preferably in the 1983 New Jersey State Plane
Coordinate System). Exceptions may be granted by the approving board
for circumstances where production of a CAD file presents an undue
hardship.
§ 50-42 COURT § 50-46
36:177
§ 50-46. Conditional approvals; expiration of variance.
A. Conditions precedent.
(1) Whenever any application for development is approved subject to
specified conditions intended to be fulfilled before the approval
becomes effective, said conditional approval shall lapse and
become null and void unless all specified conditions, other than
those contemplated by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-22b, are fulfilled within 180
days of the date of conditional approval.
(2) Proof that applications have been filed with all other agencies
having jurisdiction over any aspect of the application for
development shall be filed with the municipal agency.
(3) The fulfillment of all conditions precedent shall be reported in
writing to the municipal agency, which may cause such reports to
be verified in an appropriate manner. Only upon fulfillment of all
conditions shall any subdivision map or site plan be signed or any
required building permit, occupancy permit or zoning permit be
issued.
(4) When all conditions have been fulfilled with respect to any minor or
major subdivision, the applicant shall, within 45 days of the
fulfillment of all such conditions, submit his deed or map for
signature in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47 or 40:55D-54 or
any such approval shall lapse and be of no force and effect;
provided, however, that the applicant may, for good cause shown,
obtain an extension either before or after the lapse of said fortyfive-
day period within a reasonable exercise of the Board's
judgment.
B. Conditions subsequent.
(1) Whenever any application for development is approved subject to
conditions, which by their terms are incapable of being fulfilled or
are not required to be fulfilled prior to the final approval of the
application, the performance of which are not guaranteed by bonds
or securities of any type, failure to fulfill any such conditions within
180 days from the date of final approval of the application for
development shall be grounds for the issuance of a stop-work order
by the enforcing official and the withholding of any zoning permit,
certificate of occupancy or any other approval until such condition
or conditions are fulfilled.
(2) Nothing herein contained shall be construed as preventing the
municipal agency from specifying a longer period of time within
which any specific condition must be fulfilled or from granting upon
an ex parte application an extension of time for good cause shown.
§ 50-46 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 50-46
36:178
§ 50-47. Basic course in land use law and planning.
All regular and alternate members of the Planning Board and the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be required to successfully complete a course
in land use law and planning which has been authorized by the New
Jersey Commissioner of Community Affairs and/or New Jersey planning
officials within 18 months of assuming Board membership. No new member
of the Planning Board/Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be seated as a
first-term member or alternate member of the Board unless the person
agrees to complete the basic course required and complete that course
within 18 months of assuming Board membership. The Mayor or Class I
member, a member of the governing body serving as a Class III member,
and any person licensed as a professional planner shall be exempt from this
requirement.
(3) The fulfillment of all conditions shall be reported in writing to the
municipal agency, which may cause such reports to be verified in an
appropriate manner.
(4) For purposes of calculating the time period in which conditions
must be fulfilled, such time period shall commence from the date on
which the resolution memorializing an approval was adopted.
C. Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the
Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment permitting the erection or
alteration on any structure or structures or permitting a specified use of
any premises shall expire by limitation unless such construction or
alteration shall have been actually commenced on each and every
structure permitted by said variance, or unless such permitted use has
actually been commenced, within nine months from the date of entry of
the judgment or determination of the Board of Adjustment; except,
however, that the running of the period of limitation herein provided
shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the
Board of Adjustment to the governing body, or to a court of competent
jurisdiction until the determination in any manner of such appeal or
proceeding.
§ 50-46 COURT § 50-47
36:179
Chapter 54
LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM
§ 54-1. Program created.
A length of service awards program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997 to reward members of the
South River Volunteer Fire Department and South River Volunteer First Aid
Squad for their loyal, diligent and devoted services to the residents of the
Borough of South River.
§ 54-2. Contributions to deferred income account. [Amended
4-8-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-8]
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth below;
that such contributions be made in accordance with a plan that shall be
established by the Borough of South River pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388;
and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws of
the State of New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue Code and this
chapter.
A. Volunteer Fire Department: acquiring 100 points within the calendar
year January 1 to December 31 of a given year as set forth in the criteria
stated below for members of the South River Volunteer Fire
Department.
(1) To receive the yearly tax deferred income benefits, an active
volunteer of the South River Volunteer Fire Department must
acquire 100 points from the calendar year January 1 to December
31. Point shall be acquired as hereinafter set forth:
(a) Alarms: one point for every dispatched emergency call (75
points maximum per year).
(b) Drills: one point for every official fire company/monthly drill or
other drills designated by the Chief (15 points maximum per
year). Members must be in attendance for the total duration of
the drill, faithfully and actually participating. Drills start at the
stated time and are not complete until the apparatus are
properly housed and ready for emergency service.
(c) Training: one point for every two hours of each classroom
course attended (10 points maximum per year). Points
accumulated for instruction/training will be given in the same
year as the instruction/training occurred and no other year. If
said instruction/training class had a pass/fail test, a passing or
having acquired a certificate of completion must be obtained to
receive said points. The date on any certificate is the year in
which the credit shall be given. Training will only be approved
§ 50-47 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 54-2
54:180
that directly relates to the Fire Department functions. Training
shall be provided in-house or other locations by qualified
persons. An individual, who has special expertise or abilities in
a subject area, whether or not the instructor is a member of
the Fire Department or a qualified fire service instructor, may
conduct a training class as approved by the Fire Chief.
(d) Meetings: one point for every company meeting/special
meeting attended (12 points maximum per year). The member
must be in attendance for the total duration of the meeting.
Meeting started at a stated time will commence with the call to
order and not be concluded until adjournment. Missing any
portion of the meeting will not allow said points to be earned.
(e) Length of service: one point for every five years of service to
the Fire Department (10 points maximum).
(f) Work details: one point for every assignment completed,
including but not limited to truck reports, SCBA reports and
House Committee (10 points maximum per year).
(g) Position: an active member of the volunteer Fire Department
who has completed a one-year term in an elected or appointed
position as set forth below shall receive the stated points for
such: (40 points maximum)
[1] Administrative officers.
[a] President (President shall acquire no points for being
the XEX officer of all committees): 15 points.
[b] Vice President: five points.
[c] Secretary: 10 points.
[d] Treasurer: 10 points.
[e] Trustee/Representatives: 10 points.
[2] Line officers.
[a] Chief: 20 points.
[b] Assistant Chief: 15 points.
[c] Captain: 15 points.
[d] Lieutenants: 10 points.
[e] Chief Drive: 10 points.
[f] Driver: five points.
§ 54-2 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 54-2
54:181
§ 54-3. Estimated cost. [Amended 7-19-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-32]
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows: for
regular annual services excluding administration, not to exceed $112,800.
§ 54-4. List of qualifying members; vesting. [Added 4-8-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-8]
Chapter 59
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 9.
Department of Finance — See Ch. 45.
Personnel regulations — See Ch. 68.
Department of Public Safety — See Ch. 72.
Utilities Department — See Ch. 86.
(h) Delegate to the NJ State Firemen's Convention/Exemption
Association: 10 points. Member must attend each session of
the convention in order to receive points.
(i) Life members for the NJ State Firemen's Convention/Exempt
Association: 10 points. Member must attend each session of
the convention in order to receive points.
(j) Special events: participation in activities not otherwise listed
which are announced in advance by the Chief of the Fire
Department, one point per each activity (10 points maximum
per year).
(2) No points shall be awarded for the following items: personal leave
of absence, medical leave of absence, Federal Family and Medical
Leave Act, State Family Medical Leave Act, military leave or
absence and inactive status.
B. South River Rescue Squad: attendance at 15% of all calls/alarms for
volunteers of the South River First Aid Squad.
A. Annually, a list certified under oath to the Mayor and Council of all
volunteer members who have qualified for credit under the LOSAP
Program for the previous year shall be provided to the governing body
by the Chief and President of the Fire Department and Rescue Squad,
respectively.
B. A member will be vested upon completion of five years of accredited
service without three consecutive noncredited years.
§ 54-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 54-4
54:182
ARTICLE I
Elective Officers
[Adopted 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6 (Ch. 39, Art. I, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 59-1. Elective officers enumerated.
The elective officers of the Borough shall be the Mayor, six Councilmen, the
Collector and the Assessor.
§ 59-2. Terms of Mayor and Councilmen.
The Mayor shall hold office for four years and until his successor shall have
qualified. The Councilmen shall hold office for three years and until their
successors shall have qualified. Their terms shall be arranged so that the
terms of two Councilmen shall expire at the end of each year.33
33.Editor's Note: Original § 39-3, Assessor: term, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-31.
§ 59-1 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 59-2
54:183

ARTICLE II
Mayor
[Adopted 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6 (Ch. 39, Art. II, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 59-3. Powers and duties.
The Mayor shall see that the laws of the state and the ordinances of
the Borough are faithfully executed and shall recommend to the Council
such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of
the Borough. He shall maintain peace and good order and have power to
suppress riots and tumultuous assemblies in the Borough.
§ 59-3.1. Fees for marriages and civil unions. [Added 2-11-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-1]
Any fee for service rendered by the Mayor or for reimbursement of outof-
pocket expenses to him/her for performing ceremonies to solemnize
marriages and civil unions shall be disbursed through the elected officials
salary line item pursuant to the salary ordinance or schedule for mileage
or other direct costs incurred by him/her after appropriate authorization by
the governing body. The Mayor may waive any fees or reimbursement to
which he/she may be entitled at his/her sole discretion.
§ 59-3 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 59-3.1
54:185

ARTICLE III
Council
[Adopted 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6 (Ch. 39, Art. III, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 59-4. Council constituted; meetings; Mayor's vote.
A. The Mayor and Councilmen of the Borough shall constitute the Council
thereof. They shall hold an annual meeting on January 1 at 12:00 noon
or during the first seven days of January in any year and such other
meetings or adjourned meetings at such time and place as they may by
resolution direct, but all regular meetings shall be held within the
Borough. The Mayor shall, when necessary, call special meetings of the
Council; in case of his neglect or refusal, any four members of the
Council may call such meeting at such time and place in such Borough
as they may designate, and in all cases of special meetings notice shall
be given to all the members of the Council or left at their place of
residence.
B. Three Councilmen and the Mayor, or, in the absence of the Mayor, four
Councilmen, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business;
but a smaller number may meet and adjourn from time to time.
C. The Mayor shall preside over all meetings except as in this article
otherwise provided, but shall not vote except to give the deciding vote
in case of a tie.
D. In addition to the order of business set forth in the Rules of Council
which may be adopted by the governing body from time to time, there
shall be an item of business consisting of a consent agenda resolution.
These resolutions shall be resolutions of a routine and noncontroversial
nature needing little, if any, discussion. Consent agenda resolutions
shall not be discussed separately by the governing body, but may be
discussed by the public in the public portion of a Council meeting, or
the resolution may be removed from the consent agenda if any member
of the governing body, including the Mayor, so requests or if the
unanimous consent of the governing body cannot be attained for
placement of a resolution on the consent agenda. Resolutions to be
placed on the consent agenda shall be discussed at the Council business
meeting preceding the regular meeting, and, if necessary, a vote shall
be taken to place the resolutions on said consent agenda. [Added
6-18-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-26]
E. The order of business set forth in the Rules of Council adopted by the
governing body shall provide for public comment or discussion. When
recognized by the Mayor or other presiding officer, the person so
recognized shall proceed to the floor and give his or her name and
address. Unless further time is granted by the governing body, the
person so recognized shall limit his or her statement or questions to 10
minutes, which period shall be inclusive of any response requested from
§ 59-4 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 59-4
54:187
§ 59-5. President of Council.
The Council at its annual meeting shall, by the vote of a majority of said
Council, elect from its number a President of the Council, who shall preside
at all its meetings when the Mayor does not preside. He shall hold office
for one year and until the next annual meeting. He shall have the right
to debate and vote on all questions before the Council. If the Council at
its annual meeting fails to elect a President, the Mayor shall appoint the
President from the Council, and in that case no confirmation by the Council
shall be necessary.
§ 59-6. Acting Mayor.
If the Mayor is absent from the Borough for a period of three days or for
any reason is unable to act, the President of the Council shall perform
all the duties of the Mayor during such absence or inability. The Mayor,
in case of his intended absence from the Borough for more than three
days at any one time, shall notify the President in writing of such intended
absence, whereupon the President shall be and become Acting Mayor from
the receipt of such notice and continue to act until the Mayor's return.
In case of the temporary inability of said President of Council to so act,
the member of Council having the longest term of service as such may act
temporarily for said President of Council.
§ 59-7. Adoption of ordinances.
The Council may make, amend, repeal and enforce ordinances in
accordance with the authority conferred by Subtitle 3 of Title 40, N.J.S.A.
40:42-1 et seq., and N.J.S.A. 40:88-4.
§ 59-8. Power to license.
The Council shall possess all the power relating to licenses issuable by the
Borough now or hereafter conferred on municipalities by Chapter 52 of Title
40 (N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 et seq.) or any other law, but no person shall be required
to take out a license in order to sell at wholesale or to sell any produce of
his farm.
§ 59-9. Penalties for violating ordinances.
The Council may prescribe penalties for the violation of the ordinances it is
authorized to pass and may enforce the same in the manner prescribed in
and subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.
the governing body. Statements or questions shall be addressed to the
governing body as a whole and not to any member thereof. [Added
6-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-23]
§ 59-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 59-9
54:188
ARTICLE IV
Appointive Officers
[Adopted 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6 (Ch. 39, Art. IV, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 59-10. Officers to be appointed. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-31; 3-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-3]
In addition to the officers to be elected, there shall be appointed a Borough
Clerk, a Borough Treasurer, a Borough Construction Official, an Assessor, a
Collector and such other officers as Council may deem necessary.
§ 59-11. Terms of office.
The terms of office of all appointive officers, except for officers appointed
to fill vacancies, shall commence on January 1 of the year in which they are
appointed and continue for the terms prescribed by law.
§ 59-12. Collector's term. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-31]
The Tax Collector shall hold office for a term of four years from the first
day of January next following appointment. Vacancies due to other than
expiration of term shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term or
until the earlier appointment and qualification of a successor.
§ 59-10 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 59-12
54:189

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)34
§ 59-13. through § 59-15. (Reserved)
34.Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Borough Attorney, adopted 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6 (Ch.
39, Art. V, of the 1977 Code), was repealed 3-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-3.
§ 59-13 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 59-13
54:191

ARTICLE VI
Purchasing Agent
[Adopted 4-24-1974 by Ord. No. 1974-4 (Ch. 39, Art. VI, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 59-16. Office created.
There is hereby created the office of Purchasing Agent of the Borough of
South River.
§ 59-17. Appointment; term of office.
The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council and shall serve for a term of one year or until his
successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 59-18. Bond required.
Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Purchasing Agent shall
file with the Clerk of the Borough a fidelity bond in the principal amount of
$10,000 with a corporate surety, conditioned upon the faithful performance
of the duties and to reimburse the Borough for any loss due to the failure to
faithfully perform such duties.
§ 59-19. Duties and responsibilities.
Except as otherwise specifically provided by the Council or as specifically
otherwise required by law, the Purchasing Agent shall make all purchases
of material, equipment or supplies for the municipality authorized by the
Borough Council. The Purchasing Agent shall be responsible for making
all such purchases pursuant to law and shall see to it that the material,
equipment or supplies delivered are correct in number or amount and
comply with the standards and specifications prescribed by the governing
body as agreed to at the time of purchase and as set forth in the Municipal
Contract Law of the State of New Jersey. The Purchasing Agent will be
responsible for setting up a filing system for vendors and purchasers and
will handle the requisition purchase order system and control the
adherence to such system by all departments in order to maintain a uniform
system of purchasing.
§ 59-20. Establishment of specifications.
The Purchasing Agent, where possible, shall establish or obtain sets of
specifications to control all purchases by the Borough and shall prepare
or obtain such specifications as to quality, size and variety of articles,
equipment and supplies used by the offices and departments of municipal
government as will make possible uniform purchasing for all Borough
departments and offices in pursuance of the Municipal Contract Law.
§ 59-16 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 59-21
54:193
§ 59-21. Notice to bidders.
Where calling for bids is required by law or where such procedure will
benefit the municipality, the Purchasing Agent shall prepare or arrange for
the preparation of specifications and notice to bidders and shall see that the
required notices are published.
§ 59-22. Purchases in advance and in bulk.
The Purchasing Agent shall advise the governing body as to the anticipated
needs for purchases whenever possible and shall ask authority to make
purchases in advance of needs or in bulk amounts where such practices
would result in economy or improved efficiency.
§ 59-23. Keeping of inventory.
Any commodity, equipment or supplies purchased in advance of actual
need shall be the subject of an inventory, and it shall be the duty of the
Purchasing Agent to cause such inventory to be kept and to furnish a copy
thereof to the Mayor and Council.
§ 59-21 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 59-23
54:194
ARTICLE VII
Local Historian
[Adopted 3-12-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-7 (Ch. 39, Art. VII, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 59-24. Establishment of position; compensation; appointment.
The position of Local Historian is hereby established. The Local Historian
shall serve without compensation, but the governing body may annually
appropriate such funds as may be necessary to reimburse the Historian for
expenses incurred in the performance of his duties and responsibilities. The
Local Historian shall be appointed in the manner generally provided by law
for appointments in the Borough, and he shall serve at the pleasure of the
governing body.
§ 59-25. Powers and duties.
The Local Historian shall have the following powers and responsibilities:
A. The Local Historian shall carry out an historical program, including but
not restricted to collecting, preserving and making available materials
relating to the history of the Borough. The Historian shall store such
materials in such a manner as to ensure their preservation and shall
notify the governing body of any materials which should be acquired for
preservation. Upon leaving the position, the Local Historian shall turn
over all materials and records and reports into the possession of the
successor, if then appointed, or to the governing body until a successor
shall be appointed.
B. The Local Historian shall make an annual report to the Mayor and
Council of the Borough, stating all the work performed and
accomplished during that year. The Local Historian shall transmit a
copy of such report to the New Jersey Historical Commission. The New
Jersey Historical Commission may advise the Local Historian of general
guidelines along which his historical program may be implemented.
C. The Local Historian may research, write and cause to have published a
municipal history and may recommend appropriate historical materials
for publication.
D. The Local Historian may assist the Historical Society, as well as advise
the governing body, concerning the acquisition, administration, use and
disposition of any landmark or historic site, including such places in his
jurisdiction included on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places.
Such advice may be furnished to the Historic Sites Section, Department
of Environmental Protection.35
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 59-24 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 59-25
54:195
§ 59-26. Employment of assistants.
The Local Historian may employ such clerical assistants as may be
necessary in order to carry out the duties and responsibilities set forth in
this article, within the limits of such funds as may be made available by the
governing body for such purposes in the annual budget of the Borough.
E. The Local Historian shall assist in projects of commemoration,
including the erection of monuments, historic markers and guide signs.
§ 59-25 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 59-26
54:196
Chapter 63
PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT
§ 59-26 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 59-26
54:197

ARTICLE I
Volunteer Fire Fighter, Rescue Squad and EMS Workers
[Adopted 11-9-1969 by Ord. No. 1969-20 (Ch. 41 of the 1977 Code);
amended 2-2-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-1; amended in its entirety at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 63-1. Pension for spouse and surviving children established.
A pension, payable from public funds, is hereby established for the surviving
spouse, children of any volunteer fire fighter, rescue squad or EMS worker
who has died or shall have died as the result of injuries sustained in
the course of performance of duty as a member of the South River Fire
Department or South River Rescue Squad pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 43:12-28.1 et seq.
§ 63-2. Amount of pension.
The pension established pursuant to this article shall be in the amount
of $5,000 annually and shall be paid to the surviving spouse during her/
his widowhood/widowerhood, or to the minor child or children of such
fire fighter, rescue squad members, and EMS worker if he/she leaves no
surviving spouse or to such minor child or children after the death of such
surviving spouse.
§ 63-3. Proof of fatality.
For the purpose of this article, said pension shall only be payable after the
submission to the governing body of the Borough satisfactory proof that
said volunteer fire fighter or rescue squad worker suffered a fatality as a
direct and proximate result of fighting a fire, or related line of duty death
while performing their fire fighter, rescue squad, and EMS duties within or
without the Borough while acting as a member of a volunteer fire company
and rescue squad.
§ 63-4. Annual payment.
The pension shall be in the amount of $5,000 annually and shall be paid to
the surviving spouse during her/his widowhood/widowerhood.
§ 63-1 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 63-4
54:199

ARTICLE II
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 8-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-29]
§ 63-5. Participation required for eligible positions; exempt
positions; general provisions.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
(1) Business Administrator;
(2) Recreation Director;
(3) Director of Office on Aging;
(4) Municipal Court Judge;
(5) Municipal Prosecutor.
B. Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
(1) Tax Collector;
(2) Chief Financial Officer;
(3) Construction Code Official;
(4) Tax Assessor;
(5) Registered Municipal Clerk;
(6) Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
(7) Principal Public Works Manager.
C. If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in Subsection
A and the individual is not serving in a position as described in
Subsection B above, the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality
may determine that the individual is not required to join the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program if that individual:
(1) Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement
System on July 1, 2007, and continuously since that time; or
(2) Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
(3) Is appointed on a temporary, interim or acting basis to a position
requiring state certification, as set forth in Subsection B herein,
and is in pursuit of the required certification; or
§ 63-5 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 63-5
54:201
(4) Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
D. This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the
aforesaid Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as
amended from time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents
from the Local Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
E. Should any part or parts of this article be held to be invalid by any
competent court of law, such invalidity shall only affect the part or parts
held to be invalid, and all other parts shall remain in effect.
F. A copy of this article shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
§ 63-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 63-5
54:202
Chapter 68
PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Administration — See Ch. 9.
Boards, commissions and authorities — See
Ch. 22.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 59.
Department of Public Safety — See Ch. 72.
Utilities Department — See Ch. 86.
§ 63-5 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 63-5
54:203

ARTICLE I
Personnel Policy
§ 68-1. Declaration of policy.
The governing body does hereby declare the following principles to
constitute the personnel policy of the Borough of South River:
§ 68-2. Employee and Personnel Policy Manual.
An Employee and Personnel Policy Manual will be passed, at minimum, at
the annual reorganization meeting of the Mayor and Council.
§ 68-3. Allocation of offices and positions.
A. Employment in the local government shall be based on merit and fitness
and be free of personal and political considerations and any
discrimination because of age, race, color, religion, sex or national
origin.
B. Just and equitable incentives and conditions shall be established and
maintained in order to promote efficiency and economy in the operation
of the local government.
C. Positions with similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and
compensated on a uniform basis.
D. Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions requiring the
application of the merit principle shall be based on systematic tests and
evaluations of knowledge and performance.
E. Every effort shall be made to stimulate high morale by fair
administration of this chapter and by consideration of the rights and
interests of employees, consistent with the best interests of the public
and the Borough of South River.
F. Continuity of employment shall be subject to good behavior, satisfactory
performance of work, necessity for the performance of work and
availability of funds.
A. All offices and positions of the Borough shall be and are hereby
allocated to the classified or exempt service.
B. The exempt service shall include the following:
(1) All elected officials and all members and employees of citizen
boards and committees.
(2) Borough Clerk, Borough Attorney, Borough Engineer, Borough
Auditor, Borough Tax Collector, Judge of the Municipal Court,
Borough Tax Assessor, Utility Engineer, Programmer, Borough
Prosecutor, Code Enforcement Officer, Construction Official,
§ 68-1 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-3
54:205
§ 68-4. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to the classified service
unless otherwise specifically provided therein.
Sewer/Water Supervisor and department heads and assistant
department heads.
(3) Positions involving seasonal, part-time and temporary employment
or consulting services.
(4) Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to serve without
compensation.
(5) Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional
services.
C. The classified service shall include all other full-time positions in the
Borough service which are not specifically placed in the exempt service
by this section.
§ 68-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-4
54:206
ARTICLE II
Classification Plan
§ 68-5. Establishment of plan.
The governing body shall make or cause to have made an analysis of
the duties and responsibilities of full-time positions in the Borough and
shall assign each position to an appropriate class in accordance with the
approved position-classification plan.
§ 68-6. Basis of classification.
Each employee shall be assigned or allocated to an appropriate job
classification on the basis of the kind and level of his duties and
responsibilities, to the end that all positions in the same classification shall
be sufficiently alike to permit the use of a single descriptive title, the
same test of competence and the same salary range, thus carrying out
the basic principle of classification, which is equal pay for equal work. A
job classification may contain one position or a number of positions. The
governing body shall from time to time review the job classifications.
§ 68-7. Change in classification plan.
A. The classification plan may be amended from time to time by the
governing body. Such changes may result from the need of creating new
positions, changes in organization or change in assigned duties and
responsibilities.
B. The Councilman in charge of the respective committee or department
shall review all requests for creation of new positions, the abolition or
consolidation of present positions, reclassification of positions to
different job classes or the reallocation of positions to new salary
ranges. In such review, he shall study the current duties and
responsibilities of the position concerned and recommend to the
governing body appropriate action necessary to ensure the correct
classification and allocation of the position.
C. Each department head shall report to the Chairman of his committee
changes in his organization or assignment of duties and responsibilities
to a given employee which result in changes in the positionclassification
plan or in the classification of any of the positions in his
department.
D. An employee may submit a request in writing to the Councilman in
charge of the respective committee or department at any time for a
review of the duties and responsibilities of his position. Such a request
shall be submitted through his department head and shall include the
employee's own description of his current duties and responsibilities.
The Councilman in charge of the respective committee or department
shall then make an investigation of the position to determine its correct
allocation. He shall report his findings in writing to the governing body
§ 68-5 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-7
54:207
§ 68-8. Abolishment of position.
A position may be abolished or the number of personnel reduced by the
governing body for reasons of economy or for reasons of a reorganization
within a department or departments. In the Police Department such events
shall be governed by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-143. Every effort shall
be made to reassign any affected permanent employees to another position
in the Borough service for which the employee may be qualified, prior to
taking applications for the vacancy. If an employee is demoted because of
economy or departmental reorganization, he shall be placed in a new salary
grade in the same step he held in his prior position before demotion.
and shall furnish a copy to the employee requesting the review and to
his department head.
§ 68-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-8
54:208
ARTICLE III
Pay Plan
§ 68-9. Notice of salary grade; further increases.
After each class or position has been assigned to a salary grade and the pay
plan and rules for its administration have been adopted by the governing
body, each employee shall be advised of his pay step and the salary grade
to which his position title has been assigned. When an employee attains
the maximum step in the salary grade for his position, he shall not receive
further salary increases unless:
§ 68-10. Transfers.
If an employee is transferred or reassigned into another department, his
service will be considered continuous for the purpose of promotion,
seniority, layoff and vacation.
A. His position is reclassified;
B. He is promoted to another position having a higher salary grade;
C. His position's salary range is increased; or
D. A general salary increase is granted to all employees.
§ 68-9 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-10
54:209

ARTICLE IV
Appointments; Competitive Examinations; Employment Status
§ 68-11. Qualifications for appointment.
§ 68-12. Application for appointment.
Applicants for Borough employment shall apply on forms provided by the
Borough and designed to obtain pertinent information concerning the
applicant's education, training, experience, character and other factors
A. Classification.
(1) Applicants for appointment to the South River Police Department
shall be classified for appointment as follows:
(a) Resident of the municipality.
(b) Other residents of Middlesex County.
(c) Other residents of New Jersey.
(d) All other qualified applicants.
(2) The appointing authority shall first appoint all those in Class (a)
and then in each succeeding class in the order above listed and
shall appoint a person or persons in any such class only to a
vacancy or vacancies remaining after all qualified applicants in the
preceding class or classes have been appointed or have declined an
offer of appointment.
B. Competitive examinations; interviews.
(1) Original appointments to vacancies in the Borough's service shall
be based upon merit, which shall be determined by competitive
examinations insofar as practicable. Such competitive
examinations may be waived, except for appointment to or
promotions within the Police Department, by the governing body if
in its judgment it will be in the best interests of the Borough to do
so. Examinations may include such factors as education,
experience, aptitude, knowledge, character and physical and
mental fitness, but they shall not include inquiry into the political or
religious affiliation or the race or sex of any candidate. In the
selection for the appointment, the governing body shall use its
judgment based upon the factors described in this subsection and
personal interviews with the applicants.
(2) Based upon the results of competitive written examinations, the
governing body may conduct oral interviews of a designated
number of applicants and may permit or direct that said interviews
be attended by members of the department for which the applicant
has applied.
§ 68-11 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-12
54:211
necessary to determine his fitness and qualifications for service in the
Borough.
§ 68-13. Rejection of application.
§ 68-14. Types of competitive examinations.
The examination for initial appointments may be oral, written or
performance, psychiatric, physical or any combination thereof. The type and
extent of examination shall be determined by the governing body in arriving
at the best decision in appointing new employees.
§ 68-15. Announcement of examinations.
Examinations shall be given in such convenient places and at such times
as to attract qualified candidates and adequate notice shall be given to all
qualified applicants.
§ 68-16. Examination rating; effect.
A. Applications may be rejected where the candidate:
(1) Does not possess the established qualifications and requirements
for the position for which he has applied.
(2) Is physically unfit to perform the duties of the position to which he
seeks appointment.
(3) Has been dismissed from previous employment for delinquency,
insubordination or misconduct.
(4) Has practiced or attempted to practice any deception or fraud in
his application, in his examination or in securing his eligibility for
appointment.
B. A candidate may, even after he is permitted to take a competitive
examination, be declared ineligible for employment for any of the
foregoing reasons. Employment during a probationary period shall not
be considered a waiver of such reason.
A. Candidates who qualify for appointment through the examination
procedures shall be placed on a list for the appropriate classification
title in the rank order of the grades they obtained on the examination.
B. Insofar as may be applicable, the following rules shall determine the
final examination grade:
(1) Candidates may be required to attain a satisfactory grade on one or
more parts of an examination in order to continue the examination
or to be eligible for appointment.
§ 68-12 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-16
54:212
§ 68-17. Probationary period.
(2) Final grades shall be determined by averaging the grades of each
part of the examination in accordance with the predetermined
weight to be given to each part.
C. Final grades in examinations shall be filed in the office of the Personnel
Director.
D. Each candidate who participated in the examination shall be entitled to
obtain his examination result.
A. Each new employee shall serve a probationary period of 12 months. At
the completion of the third month, the sixth month and the ninth month,
the department head shall prepare a written evaluation of the
probationary employee. At the completion of the twelfth month, the
employee's department head shall prepare a written evaluation of the
employee's performance in which the department head shall
recommend the retention or dismissal of the probationary employee. If
at the end of the 12 months the probationary employee shall be deemed
by the governing body to have successfully completed his probationary
period by means of written recommendation by the department head,
he shall be granted status as a regular employee, with all rights and
privileges to his employment or position. If, however, at the conclusion
of his probationary period the employee shall not be deemed by the
governing body to have successfully completed his probationary period,
he shall be dismissed. Nothing contained in this Article shall be
construed to prohibit the suspension or dismissal of a probationary
employee at any time during his probationary period if in the judgment
of the governing body such an action would be in the best interests of
the Borough.
B. A twelve-month probationary period, together with written evaluation
at the third, sixth, ninth and twelfth months based on performance only,
shall also pertain to an employee promoted to a higher classification.
Such probationary status shall in no way affect the rights and status in
the original or lower classification.
C. Each new police officer shall be required to satisfactorily complete a
basic police training program recognized by the New Jersey Police
Training Commission during the first year and prior to receiving a
permanent appointment. The twelve-month probationary period does
not commence for a police officer until he has completed the recognized
police training program.
D. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, all probationary
employees shall be considered permanent employees from the date of
their employment for the purpose of coverage under the Public
Employee's Retirement System.
§ 68-16 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-18
54:213
§ 68-18. Permanent employment status.
Classified employees who satisfactorily complete their probationary period
shall have permanent employment status, conditional upon good behavior
and satisfactory job performance and, where required by statute, continued
residence in the Borough. They shall be subject to removal by the governing
body only for cause or for reason of economy, after proper notice and the
opportunity to be heard as set forth in Article XIII.
§ 68-19. Waiver of certain residence requirements.
It is hereby found and determined that adherence to the residence
requirements of the general statutes which require members of the Police
Department to reside within the municipality will seriously impede the
Borough's ability to establish and maintain competent personnel for the
Police Department.36
36.Editor's Note: Currently, see N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.1 et seq.
§ 68-18 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-19
54:214
ARTICLE V
Promotions
§ 68-20. Meaning of terms; reclassification.
§ 68-21. Promotion procedures.
A. "Promotion" means a change in job classification having:
(1) New duties of greater difficulty or responsibility; and
(2) A salary grade having greater maximum.
B. When there is a major change in the duties or responsibilities of a
position resulting in its reallocation to a higher classification, the job
title may be considered vacant and subject to filling under promotional
procedures.
A. Determination of fitness.
(1) Vacancies shall be filled by utilizing promotional examinations on a
competitive basis. Examinations may be written, oral or
performance or a combination thereof. Such types of examinations
shall be designed to assist the governing body in arriving at its
decision in promoting Borough employees. Employees shall have
the right to see their examination grade and also the right, in the
case of written objective examinations, to see the test papers.
(2) If written examinations, oral examinations or interviews, time in
grade and/or service, performance ratings or similar criteria or any
combination of the foregoing are utilized to determine the three
eligible candidates, then the governing body shall determine the
weight to be accorded to each such factor before any state of the
examination process is commenced.
B. Where the governing body finds that no employee is qualified for
promotion to the vacancy, the governing body may order a competitive
examination open to candidates outside the Borough's employ. In any
case, promotions shall give appropriate consideration to the applicant's
qualifications, record of past performance and the length and quality of
his service.
C. If two or three vacancies arise in the same position or rank
simultaneously or within six months of each other measured from the
dates of discharge, termination of employment, resignation or
retirement, then no further testing shall be conducted and the
additional vacancy or vacancies shall be filled by the governing body
from the three candidates who attain the highest examination scores.
Selection shall be made from the top three candidates as a result of
such examination process as soon thereafter as practicable after
completion of the examination process.
§ 68-20 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-21
54:215

ARTICLE VI
Compensation
§ 68-22. Pay period; hourly rate.
§ 68-22.1. Mandatory direct deposit. [Added 9-28-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-21]
§ 68-23. Overtime.
A. The Borough normally shall pay its employees on a biweekly payroll
schedule, that is, once in every two weeks. Each payroll period shall
consist of 10 working days, so that the daily rate of pay of each salaried
employee normally shall be 1/260 of his annual salary.
B. The hourly rate shall be computed by dividing the weekly rate by the
number of hours in the employee's prescribed workweek.
C. Whenever an employee is temporarily assigned by resolution of the
governing body to another position where the rate of pay is higher, said
employee shall be paid at the rate of pay for that position. This
subsection shall not be applicable to the regular uniformed members
(police officers) of the South River Police Department.
A. Establishment of direct deposit program. As of the payroll date of
January 1, 2016, mandatory direct deposit of net pay is established for
all employees of the Borough of South River, including any person
holding public office, position, or employment whose net pay is paid by
the Borough of South River in accordance N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f(b).
B. Exceptions to direct deposit. Seasonal and temporary employees who
are employed by the Borough of South River are exempt from the direct
deposit mandate.
A. Employees may be compensated for overtime work when such
compensation has been recommended by the department head,
approved by the committee Chairman and certified by the Personnel
Director.
B. When an employee works a prescribed workday of less than eight
hours, overtime pay shall be computed at the normal equivalent hourly
rate up to eight hours, after which the time-and-one-half provisions
would take effect. When an employee works a prescribed workweek of
less than 40 hours, overtime pay shall be computed at the normal
hourly rate up to 40 hours, after which the time-and-one-half provisions
would take effect.
C. For employees working on a shift basis, overtime pay at 1 1/2 times the
normal hourly equivalent shall take effect only after the employee has
worked 80 hours in a pay period.
§ 68-22 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-23
54:217
§ 68-24. Deductions for leave without pay.
Deductions in salary for leave without pay shall be computed on the basis of
hourly rate as prescribed in § 68-22.
§ 68-25. Salary increments.
D. When it becomes necessary for personnel to be called out on
emergency, such personnel will be credited with a minimum of two
hours' time at the appropriate hourly rates.
E. Overtime pay for the Police Department shall be as prescribed by PBA
agreement.
A. Annual salary step increments may be granted to each employee
effective on his anniversary date until the employee's salary shall have
reached the maximum salary provided for his position title. No
employee, however, shall be granted a salary step increment until his
department head has certified in writing to the governing body that
during the past year the employee's performance and service were such
as to make him deserving of an increase, setting forth the basis for such
conclusion.
B. An employee who is promoted to a classification having a higher salary
grade shall receive such salary as is comparable to but not less than his
present salary.
§ 68-23 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-25
54:218
ARTICLE VII
Hours of Work
§ 68-26. Official workweek.
The official workweek of the Borough shall be five days, 40 hours per week.
The governing body, however, may reduce the hours of work required of
employees in specific departments to not less than 35 hours per week.
§ 68-27. Scheduling.
The governing body shall set forth the hours of work for each department,
including the amount of time that shall be allowed for lunch. In specialized
departments, employees may be scheduled on a two-week basis, provided
the total hours are equal to twice the normal workweek of 40 or 35 hours.
§ 68-26 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-27
54:219

ARTICLE VIII
Vacations and Leaves of Absence
§ 68-28. Meaning of terms.
Wherever the word "employee" is used, it shall be construed to include and
is fully restricted to only those persons employed by the Borough on a fulltime
classified or full-time exempt service basis and receiving compensation
from the Borough for service rendered. Part-time, provisional, temporary
and seasonal employees are hereby specifically excluded from the effect and
application of this entire article, with the exception of § 68-31.
§ 68-29. Sick leave.
A. As used in this article, "sick leave" shall mean paid leave that may be
granted to each employee who through sickness or injury becomes
incapacitated to a degree that makes it impossible for him to perform
the duties of his position or who is quarantined by a physician because
he has been exposed to a contagious disease.
B. All employees of the Borough of South River shall earn a total sick leave
not exceeding 12 days in any one calendar year.
C. Said sick leave shall be cumulative and, if not used in one year, may be
accrued from year to year and be available when required.
D. To be eligible to receive regular compensation during any such period
of sick leave, the employee:
(1) Must notify his immediate superior, at or before the time he would
normally begin his work, of the nature of his illness and of his
inability to report to work.
(2) A medical doctor's certificate shall be required when absence
caused by an illness exceeds three consecutive working days in
duration. In addition to the foregoing, a medical doctor's certificate
shall be required from the first day of all absences due to illness
which constitute the third separate absence due to illness of an
employee in a calendar year.
(3) Shall not be eligible to receive his usual compensation unless the
employee files with his immediate supervisor, and the supervisor in
turn files with the Borough Personnel Director, a medical doctor's
certificate when required by Subsection D(2), setting forth
precisely the nature of the illness, his inability to work and the
probable duration of such disability. The Borough's Personnel
Director shall then certify receipt of such medical doctor's
certificate to the Comptroller's office, which shall then be noted on
the employee's attendance record, and then payment shall be made
to the employee.
§ 68-28 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-29
54:221
§ 68-30. Jury duty.
In the event an employee is summoned to service as a grand juror or petit
juror in any court of the State of New Jersey or in the United States District
Court of New Jersey, he shall be excused from his employment on all days
he is required to be present in court in response to the summons for jury
service. He shall be entitled to receive his usual compensation for each day
he is excused for jury service, upon presentation of proper evidence of jury
service, less such reimbursement received from the court.
§ 68-31. Temporary disability compensation.
(4) Must have been employed six months. Thereupon, sick leave shall
be accumulated at the rate of one day per month. When sick leave
is required, a fraction of a day in total accumulation shall be
considered as a full day allowable.
E. Absence from work caused by accidental injury shall be excluded in the
calculation of sick leave.
F. The Borough Treasurer is hereby authorized and empowered to pay
employees their full compensation during any absence caused by illness
within the limits hereinabove set forth but shall be without authority to
pay any such compensation beyond the maximum of 12 days in any one
calendar year as herein set forth. Payment of compensation for sick
days beyond the maximum of 12 days in any one calendar year can only
be authorized by the Borough Personnel Director.
G. In determining the amount of sick leave allowable to each employee,
the number of days of sick leave taken since January 1, 1947, shall be
deducted.
H. When an employee leaves the employment of the Borough for any
reason whatsoever and is rehired within three months' period, prior
accumulated sick leave will continue; however, no sick leave shall be
granted for the period absent from Borough employ. If an employee is
rehired after a three-month period has elapsed, sick leave accumulation
shall commence as of the date permitted under Subsection D(4) as for
all new employees.
I. In the event that an employee shall leave work due to sickness after
having reported for regular daily work, the time remaining on the
employee's regular workday shall be charged to the employee as sick
time to the nearest hour.
A. All employees of the Borough of South River who shall sustain injuries
which arise out of the scope and course of their employment with the
Borough of South River, but not otherwise, shall, in accordance with the
terms and provisions hereinafter set forth, receive temporary disability
compensation at the rate and schedule set forth below.
§ 68-29 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-31
54:222
§ 68-32. Maternity leave.
Maternity leave may be granted up to six months, provided that the request
for such leave is made in writing to the Personnel Director no later than the
fourth month of pregnancy. Requests for maternity leave must be favorably
endorsed by the department head and approved by the governing body
before becoming effective. Such leave, if granted, shall be without pay.
§ 68-33. Leave without pay.
Leave without pay shall be granted only to full-time employees. Normally, it
shall be granted only when the employee has used his accumulated sick and
vacation leave in the case of illness or has used his vacation leave if leave
without pay is requested for reasons other than illness. Written request for
leave without pay must be initiated by the employee, favorably endorsed by
his department head and approved by the governing body before becoming
effective. Such leave shall not be approved for a period longer than three
months at one time. The governing body may extend such leave for an
additional period upon written application and approval by the governing
body.
§ 68-34. Court leave.
Court leave is the authorized absence, without charge to leave or loss of
compensation, of a Borough employee from official duty or for attending
court in a nonofficial capacity as a witness on behalf of the Borough.
B. A "disabling injury" shall mean an injury arising out of the course of an
employees employment with the Borough of South River, the nature of
which entitles the employee to receive temporary disability
compensation pursuant to the New Jersey Workmen's Compensation
Act, N.J.S.A. 34:15-1 et seq.
C. The disabled employee shall receive from the Borough of South River
for the period of his temporary disablement, in addition to the benefits
paid directly to him from the workmen's compensation insurance
carrier and as a supplement thereto, an amount which, when combined
with the said insurance payments, shall be equal to said employee's
basic weekly wage or salary. The benefits due from the Borough set
forth herein shall not be applicable to any employee whose employment
with the Borough commences after the effective date of the ordinance
amending this section, unless specifically allowed by written negotiated
contract.
D. All payments by the Borough of South River to the disabled employee
shall terminate simultaneously with the termination of temporary
disability payments being made directly to the employee by the
workmen's compensation insurance carrier or at such time as a duly
licensed doctor of medicine, after having examined the employee at the
direction of the governing body, certifies that the employee is able to
resume work.
§ 68-31 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-34
54:223
§ 68-35. Convention, seminar and conference leave.
Convention, seminar and conference leave with pay may be granted upon
proper application to the governing body. Such leave may be granted with
pay to Borough employees covered by statute, local practice or negotiated
contract.
§ 68-36. Educational leave.
Educational leave with pay may be granted upon proper application to
the governing body. Such allowance may be granted when it is deemed
necessary to provide a Borough employee the opportunity for selfdevelopment
or for advancing acquisition of skills necessary for full
performance in his position. This leave with pay covers only those classes
which are not available during off-duty hours.
§ 68-37. Request for leave.
A request for any type of leave, except sick leave or death leave, shall be
made far enough in advance to permit approval and at the same time to
permit coverage for the particular employment so that municipal services
shall not suffer.
A. Appearance in court in connection with official duty is considered
normal duty time.
B. Appearance in court at the call of the Borough when not job-connected
is chargeable to court leave.
C. Appearance in court under other circumstances is a private matter
chargeable to personal leave.
D. Appearance in court by any part-time, seasonal, temporary employee or
volunteer on behalf of the Borough, by reason of a subpoena being
issued to said employee and as a result of which said person shall lose
compensation from his normal place of employment other than the
Borough, is considered leave for which said person shall receive a
reimbursement for such lost compensation at an hourly rate of pay not
to exceed $10 per hour for criminal proceedings and $10 per hour for
civil proceedings. All such appearances shall be documented as
required by the Borough Administrator.
§ 68-34 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-37
54:224
ARTICLE IX
Other Benefits
§ 68-38. Severance pay.
All full-time employees shall receive a severance pay of two weeks upon
their employment's being terminated by the governing body.
§ 68-39. Medical insurance.
Pursuant to the New Jersey Health Benefits Program Act (N.J.S.A.
54:14-17.25 et seq.), the Borough of South River shall provide full family
coverage for each full-time employee of the Borough of South River in the
New Jersey Health Insurance Plan. Such coverage shall include Blue Cross-
Blue Shield, Rider J and major medical. The governing body may offer such
coverage to designated part-time employees by resolution duly adopted.
Eligibility for enrollment shall be after completion of two calendar months
of continued employment or at the annual enrollment period of each year.
§ 68-40. Life insurance.
The Borough of South River shall provide group life insurance coverage for
each full-time employee of the Borough of South River in a reputable life
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey,
with coverage as deemed necessary by the Borough Council.
§ 68-41. Prescription drug insurance.
The Borough of South River shall provide full family coverage for each
full-time employee of the Borough of South River in a prescription drug
expense plan. Said plan shall be placed with a reputable insurance company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. Upon retirement of
any full-time Borough employee and/or official and attaining age 55 with
at least 25 years of service, said employee or official shall be entitled
to continue his/her prescription benefits at the employee's or official's
sole cost and expense, and such coverage shall continue until Medicare
eligibility commences, so long as said retired employee and/or official shall
not receive such a benefit from any employment in which said employee
and/or official may engage subsequent to retirement, if no other family
member has such coverage or unless said employee and/or official returns
to another paid municipal position.
§ 68-42. Dental insurance.
The Borough shall provide a dental insurance plan for each full-time
employee and official. The Borough shall pay the full cost of the employee
coverage, except that for each police officer and managerial employee the
Borough shall contribute a maximum of $300 toward the cost of a full family
coverage plan.
§ 68-38 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-42
54:225

ARTICLE X
Political Activity
§ 68-43. Policy regarding appointments.
It shall be the declared policy of the governing body of the Borough of
South River to appoint all employees, either classified or exempt, without
regard to political considerations. For the purpose of this article, the term
"municipal employees" is defined to include full-time temporary,
probationary, seasonal or part-time personnel receiving an annual or hourly
reimbursement for their services.
§ 68-44. Seeking political office.
Employees shall not engage in any political activities nor seek or accept
nomination or election to any municipal office or Board of Education during
working hours or on municipal property without first obtaining a leave of
absence. Violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed sufficient
cause for suspension or dismissal from the Borough service. Any employee
who has been elected as a member of the governing body shall be granted
a leave of absence without pay for the term to which he has been elected.
§ 68-45. Permitted activities.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent employees from
becoming or continuing to be members of any political party, club or
organization; attending political meetings; expressing their views in private
on political matters outside working hours and off municipal premises; or
voting with complete freedom in any election.
§ 68-43 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-45
54:227

ARTICLE XI
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 68-46. Reporting accidents.
An employee who is injured in the performance of his duties shall
immediately report the accident to his supervisor, who shall complete a
form provided for such reports. The completed accident report form shall
then be submitted to the Personnel Director.
§ 68-47. Outside employment.
§ 68-48. Departmental rules and regulations.
§ 68-49. Time and attendance.
A. Employees shall not accept outside employment or engage in outside
business activities without the prior approval of the governing body.
Applications for permission to accept outside employment shall be
made in writing to the governing body.
B. No application for permission to accept outside employment or engage
in outside business shall be approved if in the governing body's
judgment there is any reasonable probability that such outside
employment will interfere with the employee's performance or
compromise an employee's position with the Borough through a conflict
of interest.
A. The department head may, from time to time, establish, amend and
supplement rules and regulations for governing the internal operations
of his department and the conduct of its personnel. Such departmental
rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent or in conflict with the
provisions of any statute of this state, this chapter or other Borough
ordinances or resolutions.
B. All departmental rules and regulations require the approval of the
governing body before they become effective.
A. Accurate and complete time and attendance report records for all
personnel will be maintained by each department head or such person
in charge of any unit, office or activity in the Borough of South River.
Such time and attendance report will be certified to by the person in
charge of such unit and delivered to the Personnel Director on forms so
provided on the last day of each pay period.
B. The Personnel Director shall, after reviewing each department's time
and attendance report record, forward the same to the Payroll Clerk for
computation of payroll checks.
C. All Borough employees shall be at their assigned posts ready for work,
unless on vacation, absent or on leave of absence. Being on time is of
§ 68-46 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-49
54:229
§ 68-50. Maintenance of personnel records.
The Administration shall maintain adequate personnel records for each
employee of the Borough. Such records shall include dates of appointments
and promotions, job titles, salaries, commendations, disciplinary actions,
leave of any type taken or accumulated and the like. The personnel records
of each employee shall be made available to him for his inspection upon
request. Personnel files shall be classified as confidential records and
available for inspection only by authorized personnel.
the utmost importance; consequently any lateness and the reason for it
will be so noted on the time and attendance report record.
D. The lunch period shall be specified by each department head and
normally shall not exceed one hours' duration.
E. The regular closing hour for all Borough offices and activities (other
than those requiring hours of duty ending at some other hour) is 4:30
weekdays.
F. Any change in the approved Borough office hours must be authorized in
advance by the governing body.
§ 68-49 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-50
54:230
ARTICLE XII
Separation From Service
§ 68-51. Types of separation.
Classified employees who have acquired permanent employment status as
provided in § 68-18 may be temporarily suspended from the Borough's
employ by layoff or suspension or permanently separated by resignation or
dismissal, as more particularly set forth in this article.
§ 68-52. Layoff.
Whenever there is a lack of work or a lack of funds requiring a reduction
in the number of employees in a department of the Borough government,
the required reductions shall be made in such job classification or
classifications as the governing body may designate in consultation with the
department head. Employees shall be laid off in the inverse order of their
length of service. Within each affected job class, all temporary employees
shall be laid off before probationary employees, and all probationary
employees shall be laid off before any permanent employee. Employees so
affected shall be given a minimum of two weeks' notice or two weeks' pay
in lieu thereof.
§ 68-53. (Reserved)37
§ 68-54. Dismissal or demotion.
A permanent employee may be dismissed from the service or demoted for
cause. The causes sufficient for removal from the employ of the Borough
shall include the following:
A. Neglect of duty.
B. Absence without leave or failure to report after authorized leave has
expired or after such leave has been disapproved or revoked; provided,
however, that any regular member or officers of the Police Department
who shall be absent from duty without just cause for a term of five days
continuously shall, at the expiration of such five days, cease to be a
member of the Police Department as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122,
as amended.
C. Incompetency, inefficiency or incapacity due to mental or physical
disability.
D. Insubordination or serious breach of discipline.
E. Intoxication while on duty.
F. Commission of a criminal act.
37.Editor's Note: Former § 68-53, Retirement, was repealed 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-7.
§ 68-51 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-54
54:231
§ 68-55. Suspension.
G. Participating in any political activity prohibited by § 68-44.
H. Disobedience of the established departmental rules and regulations.
I. Nonresidence.
J. Conduct unbecoming of a public employee.
K. Chronic or excessive absenteeism.
L. Chronic or excessive lateness.
A. The Business Administrator may, when in his opinion the circumstances
surrounding disciplinary charges pending against a permanent
employee are sufficiently serious, temporarily suspend such employee
until the next regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body, at
which time the governing body may either confirm the action taken by
the Business Administrator or overrule said action.
B. When, in the judgment of the governing body, any employee's work
performance or conduct justifies disciplinary action short of dismissal,
the employee may be suspended without pay for a period not exceeding
90 working days.
§ 68-54 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-55
54:232
ARTICLE XIII
Grievance Procedure
§ 68-56. Statement of policy.
It is the policy of the Borough that every employee at all times be treated
fairly, courteously and with respect. Conversely, each employee is expected
to accord the same treatment to his associates, supervisors and to the
public.
§ 68-57. Verbal or written grievance.
§ 68-58. Formal written grievance.
A. Whenever an employee has a grievance, he should first present it
verbally, or in writing if the employee chooses, to his immediate
supervisor. It is the responsibility of the supervisor to attempt to
arrange a mutually satisfactory settlement of the grievance within five
working days after it is first presented to him, or failing in that, he must
within that time advise the employee of his inability to do so.
B. When an employee is informed by his supervisor that he is unable,
within the discretion permitted him, to arrange a mutually satisfactory
solution to the grievance, the employee must, if he wishes to present
the grievance to higher authority, do so in the manner prescribed in
§ 68-58.
A. The employee will prepare the grievance, in writing, in duplicate. The
grievance should be stated as completely and as clearly as possible in
order to permit prompt handling. One copy of the grievance shall be
immediately forwarded to the Business Administrator.
B. The other copy of the grievance shall be presented by the employee to
his immediate supervisor to whom the grievance was made verbally.
The supervisor will report the facts and events which led up to its
presentation in writing, including in his written report any verbal
answer he may have previously given to the employee concerning his
grievance. Within five working days after receipt of the written
grievance, the supervisor must present it with the information required
to the Business Administrator.
C. The Business Administrator will attempt to find a mutually satisfactory
solution to the grievance within five working days. Failing to find a
solution, the complaint accompanied by a written report on the matter
prepared by the Business Administrator must be forwarded to the
governing body.
D. The Personnel Director will attempt to find a mutually satisfactory
solution to the grievance within five working days. Failing to find a
solution, the complaint accompanied by a written report on the matter
§ 68-56 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-58
54:233
by the Personnel Director must be forwarded to the Administrative
Committee.
E. The governing body will then consider and formally act on the
complaint, which complaint shall be resolved within 30 days. Any action
taken by the governing body, whether sustaining or overruling a
decision of the Business Administrator, shall require a two-thirds vote.
F. In the event that a grievance determined by the governing body shall
have involved a Comprehensive Employment and Training
Administration (CETA) employee, said employee, if not satisfied with
the solution to the grievance as determined by the governing body, shall
have a right to appeal to the Regional Office of the Comprehensive
Employment and Training Administration (CETA).
§ 68-58 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-58
54:234
ARTICLE XIV
Code of Ethics
§ 68-59. Declaration of policy.
§ 68-60. Definitions.
The terms used in this Code of Ethics are hereby defined as follows:
EMPLOYEE — Any person elected or appointed to or employed or retained
by any public office or public body of the municipality, whether paid or
unpaid and whether part-time or full-time.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any interest which shall yield, directly or
indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit (other than the duly
authorized salary or compensation for this services to the Borough) to
the employee or to any person employing or retaining the services of the
employee.
PERSONAL INTEREST — Any interest arising from blood or marriage
relationships or from close business or political associations, whether or not
any financial interest is involved.
PUBLIC BODY — Any agency, board, body, commission, committee,
department or office of the Borough.
A. The public judges its government by the way public employees conduct
themselves in the posts to which they are elected or appointed.
B. The people have a right to expect that every public employee will
conduct himself in a manner that will tend to preserve public
confidence in and respect for the government he represents.
C. Such confidence and respect can best be promoted if every public
employee, whether paid or unpaid and whether elected or appointed,
will uniformly:
(1) Treat all citizens with courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality
under the law; and
(2) Avoid both actual and potential conflicts between his private selfinterest
and the public interest.
D. To help public officials and employees achieve these goals is one of the
objectives of the Code of Ethics.
E. The other objective is based on the proposition that no man can serve
two masters, nor should he attempt to do so. Therefore, this Code of
Ethics proposes to relieve him of the impossible task of judging himself.
This code places judgment in the hands of the governing body, which
will review the facts and measure the facts by the yardstick of public
morality established by this code.
§ 68-59 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-61
54:235
§ 68-61. Fair and equal treatment.
No employee shall grant or make available to any person any consideration,
treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice
to grant or make available to the public at large.
§ 68-62. Use of public property.
No employee shall request, use or permit the use of any publicly owned
or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, labor or service for
the personal convenience or the private advantage of himself or any other
person. This rule shall not be deemed to prohibit an employee from
requesting, using or permitting the use of such publicly owned or publicly
supported property, vehicle equipment, material, labor or service which it
is the general practice to make available to the public at large or which is
provided as a matter of stated public policy for the use of employees in the
conduct of official business.
§ 68-63. Conflicts of interest.
No employee, either on his own behalf or on behalf of any other person,
shall, unless otherwise permitted by law, have any financial or personal
interest in any business or transaction with any public body in the Borough.
§ 68-64. Disclosure of interest; disqualification.
Whenever the performance of his official duties shall require any employee
to take action on any matter involving his financial or personal interest, he
shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of such interest and disqualify
himself from participating in the deliberation as well as in the voting, unless
otherwise permitted by law so to act, as stated in an opinion of the Borough
Attorney.
§ 68-65. Incompatible employment.
No employee shall engage in private employment with or render services
for any private person who has business transactions with any public body
of the Borough unless he shall first make public disclosure of the nature and
extent of such employment or services.
§ 68-66. Representation of private persons.
No employee shall appear on behalf of any private person, other than
himself, before any public body in the Borough.
§ 68-67. Confidential information.
A. No employee shall, without prior formal authorization of the governing
body having jurisdiction, disclose any confidential information
concerning any employee or any other person or any property or
governmental affairs of the Borough.
§ 68-61 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-67
54:236
§ 68-68. Enforcement; sanctions.
In the event that the governing body shall, after due and proper hearing
(public or private), make its determination that the conduct of any employee
was improper, it may, based upon written findings, conclusions and
determinations, censure, suspend or remove the employee from office.
B. Whether or not it shall involve disclosure, no employee shall use or
permit the use of any such confidential information to advance the
financial or personal interest of himself or any other person.
§ 68-67 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-68
54:237

ARTICLE XV
Modified-Duty Policy
§ 68-69. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to control the Borough's worker's
compensation costs, aid in the rehabilitation of the employees who are
injured on the job and to assure that the Borough is able to maintain the
required level of services to its citizens.
§ 68-70. Eligibility.
Those eligible for modified duty are Borough of South River full-time
employees who have reported, recorded and verified on-the-job injury and
because of the conditions are temporarily not able to perform his/her
regularly duty assignment.
§ 68-71. Procedure.
A. General provisions.
(1) Temporary modified-duty assignments are limited in number and
variety. The Borough Administrator, upon recommendation from
the employee's department head, may authorize modified-duty
assignments based upon the needs of the Borough, the physical and
professional abilities of the employee and the availability of work.
(2) Requests for temporary modified duty must be accompanied by a
medical certification to support the requested reassignment, which
must be signed by the attending physician. The certification must
include an assessment of the nature and probable duration of the
disability, prognosis for recovery, nature of work restrictions and an
acknowledgement by the attending physician of familiarity with the
modified-duty assignment and the fact that the employee can
physically assume the duties involved.
(3) The Borough Administrator may consult with the employee's
attending physician to determine the employee's suitability for
modified duty and to ensure that the assignments given to the
employee will not be detrimental to the employee's rehabilitation.
As a condition of continued assignment to modified duty, employees
shall be required to provide periodic assessments of their condition
from an attending physician.
(4) An employee may be assigned to modified duty absent his/her
request if so recommended by the head of his/her department.
Such recommendation must be accompanied by a certification from
the attending physician. The certification must include information
identified in § 68-71A(2) of this policy.
(5) An employee's regular work schedule (days and hours) may be
modified to conform to the duties and responsibilities of the
§ 68-69 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-71
54:239
§ 68-72. Modified duty limitations.
modified assignment, ensuring adequate supervision and
accountability.
(6) Any outside employment in which the employee may reasonably be
expected to perform functions, which are inconsistent with
limitations assigned by the attending physician, is prohibited.
(7) An employee may not refuse a modified-duty assignment supported
by and consistent with the recommendations of the attending
physician. Failure to accept an assignment will result in a leavewithout-
pay status and may subject the employee to disciplinary
action up to and including termination.
A. The Borough of South River does not have any permanent modified- or
light-duty positions.
B. Modified-duty assignments shall not be provided to an employee who
cannot obtain documentation from his/her attending physician that
there is a reasonable expectation that the employee will be able to
return to full duty.
C. Modified-duty assignments are strictly temporary in nature and shall
not be granted to more than two employees in a single department
(determined on a first-come-first-served basis) and shall not be granted
for more than 60 days. If, after 60 days, an employee on modified duty is
still not able to return to his/her regular duty assignment, the modifiedduty
assignment for that employee shall be terminated.
D. Any employee who has a reported, recorded and verified on-the-job
injury, and because of the condition is permanently (this includes
permanent intermittency of ability) unable to perform all of his/her
regular duty assignments, is required to notify his/her department head
immediately. Such employees shall be required to be examined by a
physician selected by the Borough. If the permanent condition is
confirmed, the employee shall be evaluated for possible pensionretirement
procedures and/or termination of employment.
E. Department heads are required to notify the Borough Administrator of
any employee who has a reported, recorded and verified an on-the-job
injury, and because of the condition has been unable to perform his/her
regular duty assignments (this includes 12 months of intermittency of
ability) for a twelve-month period. Such employees shall be required to
be examined by a physician selected by the Borough. If the permanent
condition is confirmed, the employee shall be evaluated for possible
pension-retirement procedures and/or termination of employment.
§ 68-71 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-73
54:240
§ 68-73. Applicability.
This policy becomes effective immediately upon adoption and applies to all
Borough employees, including those who are currently on modified-duty
status.
§ 68-73 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-73
54:241

ARTICLE XVI
Redevelopment Pay-to-Play Reform
[Added 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-38]
§ 68-74. Prohibition against entering into or amending
redevelopment agreements with certain contributors.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the Borough
of South River or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its
independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an
agreement, amend an agreement, or otherwise contract with any
redeveloper for the planning, replanning, construction or undertaking
or any redevelopment project, including the acquisition or leasing of
any public property in conjunction with the redevelopment of any area
within the Borough of South River pursuant to the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law, if that redeveloper has made any
contribution of money or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
construction, during the applicable time period as specified below, to a
campaign committee of any South River Borough candidate or holder of
public office within the Borough of South River having responsibility for
arranging, entering into, or approving the redevelopment agreement,
or for appointing those who enter into the agreement on behalf of the
Borough of South River or to any municipal political campaign
committee, or to any county party committee, or to any political action
committee which regularly engages in the support of municipal
elections and/or municipal parties or which engages in the support of
Borough of South River municipal campaigns (PAC). For purposes of
this section, the "applicable time period" shall be defined as the time
period between the date that the property which is the subject of the
redevelopment project has been included in a memorializing resolution
adopted by the governing body directing the Planning Board to conduct
a preliminary investigation to determine if the site is in need of
redevelopment pursuant to and in accordance with the New Jersey
Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., and
the date of entering into the redevelopment agreement, or the 12
months prior to entering into the agreement, whichever is shorter.
B. All redevelopment agreements or amendments thereto entered into by
the Borough of South River shall contain a provision prohibiting
redevelopers as defined in Subsection C from soliciting or making any
contribution of money or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, to any South River Borough candidate or holder of public
office within the Borough of South River having responsibility for
arranging, entering into, or approving the redevelopment agreement or
for appointing those who enter into the agreement on behalf of the
Borough of South River or to any South River Borough political
campaign committee, or to any South River Borough or county party
committee, or to any political action committee which regularly
engages in the support of municipal elections and/or municipal parties
or which engages in the support of South River Borough municipal
§ 68-74 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-74
54:243
§ 68-75. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a redeveloper to any Borough of South River
candidate for Mayor, Borough Council or Borough of South River political
campaign committee shall be deemed a violation of this article nor shall
an agreement for redevelopment projects of any kind whatsoever be
disqualified thereby if that contribution or agreement was made by the
redeveloper prior to the effective date of this article.
§ 68-76. Notice given by municipality; sworn statement of
redeveloper.
campaigns (PAC), between the time of first communication between
that redeveloper and the municipality regarding a redevelopment
project and the later of the termination of negotiations or the
completion of all matters specified in the redevelopment agreement.
C. As defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-3, a "redeveloper" means any person,
firm, corporation or public body that shall enter into or propose to enter
into a contract with a municipality or other redevelopment entity for the
redevelopment or rehabilitation of an area in need of redevelopment, or
an area in need of rehabilitation, or any part thereof, under the
provisions of this article, or for any construction or other work forming
part of a redevelopment or rehabilitation project. For the purpose of
this article the definition of a redeveloper includes all principals who
own 10% or more of the equity in the corporation or business trust,
partners and officers in the aggregate employed by the provider as well
as any affiliates or subsidiaries directly controlled by the redeveloper.
Spouses and adult children at home shall also be included.
D. For the purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
responsibility for arranging and entering into the redevelopment
agreement under the Act shall be:
(1) The Borough Council of the Borough of South River if the
redevelopment agreement requires approval or appropriation from
the Council or a public officer who is responsible for arranging and
entering into the redevelopment agreement if that public officer is
appointed by Council; or
(2) The Mayor of South River if the redevelopment agreement requires
the approval of the Mayor or a public officer which is responsible
for arranging and entering into the redevelopment agreement if
that public officer is appointed by the Mayor; or
(3) A designated redevelopment entity, if the redevelopment
agreement requires the approval of the redevelopment entity.
A. It shall be the municipality's continuing responsibility to give notice of
this article when the municipality gives notice of redevelopment
§ 68-74 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-76
54:244
§ 68-77. Contribution restrictions and disclosure requirement
applicability to consultants.
§ 68-78. Return of excess contributions.
A developer or municipal candidate or office holder or municipal or County
party committee or PAC referenced in this article may cure a violation of
§ 68-74 and deemed not to be breach if, within 30 days after the cited
violation, the redeveloper notifies the Municipal Council in writing and
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-6 and when the municipality adopts a
resolution directing the Planning Board to prepare a redevelopment
plan and at the time that the municipality adopts the ordinance to
implement the redevelopment plan.
B. Prior to arranging and entering into the redevelopment agreement with
any redeveloper, the Borough of South River or any of its purchasing
agents or agencies or independent authorities, as the case may be, shall
receive a sworn statement from the redeveloper that the redeveloper
has not made any contribution in violation of § 68-74A above.
Furthermore, the redeveloper shall have a continuing duty to report
any violation of this article that may occur while arranging and entering
into the redevelopment agreement, and until all specified terms of the
agreement have been completed. The sworn statement required under
this subsection shall be made prior to entry into the agreement with the
municipality and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may
be required by any other provision of law.
A. The contribution and disclosure requirements in this article shall apply
to all redevelopers as well as professionals, consultants or lobbyists
contracted or employed by the business entity ultimately designated as
the redeveloper to provide services related to:
(1) Lobbying of government officials in connection with the
examination of an area and its designation as an area in need of
redevelopment or in connection with the preparation, consultation
and adoption of the redevelopment plan;
(2) Obtaining the designation or appointment as redeveloper;
(3) Negotiating the terms of a redevelopment agreement or any
amendments or modifications thereto; and/or
(4) Performing the terms of a redevelopment agreement.
B. It shall be a breach of the consultant's contract, and shall require
immediate termination, for a consultant to violate the contribution
limits and/or disclosure requirements in this article.
C. A redeveloper who participates in, or facilitates, the circumvention of
the contribution restrictions through consultants or professionals shall
be deemed to be in breach.
§ 68-76 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-78
54:245
seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from the municipal
candidate or municipal or County political party or PAC referenced in this
article.
§ 68-79. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be a breach of the terms of the Borough of South River
Redevelopment Agreement for a redeveloper to:
(1) Make or solicit a contribution in violation of this article;
(2) Knowingly conceal or misrepresent a contribution given or
received;
(3) Make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Make or solicit any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be contributed to a campaign committee of
any candidate or holder of the public office of the Borough of South
River;
(5) Engage or employ a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution which, if made or solicited by the
redeveloper itself, would subject that entity to the restrictions of
this article;
(6) Fund contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members, and employees;
(7) Engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this article; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means, do
any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
article.
B. Furthermore, any redeveloper who violates Subsection A(2) through (8)
shall be disqualified from eligibility for future South River Borough
redevelopment agreements for a period of four calendar years from the
date of the violation.
§ 68-78 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 68-79
54:246
Chapter 72
PUBLIC SAFETY, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Length of service awards program — See Ch.
54.
Pensions — See Ch. 63.
§ 68-79 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 68-79
54:247

ARTICLE I
Scope of Department
[Adopted 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6 (Ch. 47, Art. I, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 72-1. Organization and authority. [Amended 8-18-1993 by Ord.
No. 1993-14; 5-30-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-26]
There shall be a Department of Public Safety in the Borough of South River
under the supervision and control of a Public Safety Committee. The Public
Safety Committee shall consist of three members of the Borough Council,
one of whom shall be designated Chairman, and who shall be appointed at
the annual organizational meeting in accordance with the Rules of Council.
The Department of Public Safety shall exercise supervision and control over
the Fire Department, the Fire Prevention Bureau, the Police Department
and the Rescue Squad and such other agencies, officers or employees of the
Borough as may be designated from time to time by the Borough Council.
§ 72-1 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-1
54:249

ARTICLE II
Fire Department
[Adopted 3-21-1973 by Ord. No. 1973-6 (Ch. 47, Art. II, of the 1977
Code); amended in its entirety 11-28-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-21]
§ 72-2. Reestablishment of Department; compensation; equipment;
membership.
§ 72-3. Qualifications; discipline; duties; Fire Police.
A. Reestablishment of Department. There is hereby reestablished a Fire
Department and for the Borough of South River, to be known as the
"South River Fire Department" and to consist of three companies,
namely, Engine Company No. 1, Reliable Fire Company and Summit
Engine Company. The fire companies hereby created shall comply with
all the requirements of this article and any rules or regulations
promulgated hereunder.
B. Compensation. The officers and members of the South River Fire
Department shall receive such annual compensation as may be
determined by the governing body.
C. Equipment. All apparatus, accessories, vehicles, equipment and
supplies necessary for the maintenance and operation of the said Fire
Department shall be bought and paid for by the Borough of South River.
A. Qualifications.
(1) No person shall hereafter become a member of the Fire
Department of the Borough of South River or any company thereof
unless he/she shall:
(a) Have attained the age of 18 years.
(b) Be a citizen of the United States or legal resident with a social
security card. [Amended 6-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-14]
(c) Work and/or live within a ten-mile radius of the Borough at all
times during membership in the Department.
(d) Be physically fit to perform the duties of a fireman as
evidenced by a certificate to that effect by a licensed practicing
physician of the State of New Jersey.
(e) Be in good moral standing.
(2) All prospective members of any of the companies of the South River
Fire Department shall be subject to criminal background
investigation by the South River Police Department and the New
Jersey State Police. In order to facilitate the background check,
prospective members shall be subject to fingerprinting
administered by the South River Police Department. Disclosure of
§ 72-2 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-3
54:251
the results of the criminal background investigation shall not be
considered public information. Said results may be released only to
the governing body, Business Administrator, Borough Attorney and
Fire Chief.
(3) Each new member appointed by the Mayor and Council shall,
within two years of acceptance, submit a certificate stating that he/
she has completed a course set forth by the New State Division of
Fire and Safety at an approved Fire School. Failure to do such shall
be a cause for removal from the Fire Department.
(4) Any individual from another fire department seeking membership
to the South River Fire Department must submit a letter of
reference from their current department along with the application
and possess all certificates needed for the position they are
seeking.
(5) Each person seeking to join the Fire Department shall make
application to the fire company which he/she desires to join, and
upon his/her appointment to membership of the company, he/she
shall become a member in good standing of the Fire Department.
After appointment by the Mayor and Council, said individual's
name shall be entered onto the roll as a firefighter kept by the
Municipal Clerk. Said individual shall be given a badge of
membership by his/her unit.
B. Disciplinary proceedings.
(1) The Chief of the Fire Department and the Fire Committee shall be
responsible to see that this article is carried out by the officers and
members of the Fire Department. The Chief is empowered to take
disciplinary action, such as expulsion, suspension or censure.
(2) In the event that disciplinary action is taken against a member by
the Chief, the member has the right to appeal before the three
Chiefs and all line officers of the South River Fire Department.
C. General duties.
(1) Each member of the Fire Department shall obey all lawful orders of
superior officers.
(2) Each member of the Fire Department shall obey all his company's
bylaws.
D. Exempt certificates. Exemption certificates will be issued to members
of the South River Fire Department who shall have served seven years
in active duty, under municipal control, as required by law. Said
certificates shall be signed by the municipal officers and the Chief of the
Department.
E. Fire Police; Each individual shall be a member of the South River Fire
Department. Fire Police shall serve for a term of one year commencing
§ 72-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-3
54:252
§ 72-4. Officers.
January 1, be recommended by the Fire Chief and appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council. Fire Police
will attend training set forth by the New Jersey Division of Fire and
Safety, and shall have the same qualifications, discipline and duties as
set forth within this chapter.
A. The officers of the South River Fire Department shall consist of a Chief,
a First Assistant Chief and a Second Assistant Chief. A person
nominated to serve as Chief or First Assistant Chief shall have first
served in the rank immediately below the rank in the South River Fire
Department for which the position is sought. The officers of each
company shall consist of a Captain, a Lieutenant, a President, a Vice
President, and a Secretary and such other officers as each company
may select. Each January the three Chiefs shall appoint an Incident
Safety Officer (ISO). Said individual's term shall be for one year
commencing January 1. The ISO shall follow all guidelines set forth by
the Public Occupational Safety and Health Administration (POSHA) and
New Jersey Division of Fire and Safety and the Chiefs of that year. An
individual shall qualify to be appointed as an ISO if he has been a
regular member of the South River Fire Department for at least seven
years and the individual shall have completed an approved ISO training
course set forth by the New Jersey State Division of Fire and Safety.
B. Election of officers.
(1) On the first Monday of December at 8:00 p.m. (EST), the Fire
Department shall elect a Chief, First Assistant Chief and Second
Assistant Chief. The terms of office shall commence on January 1 of
the following year, and the Chiefs serve a term of one year or until
their successors are confirmed by the Mayor and Council.
(2) At least two weeks before said election, the Borough Clerk shall
post notices in each of the fire stations. Prior to the December
election, one candidate from each company shall be elected by his/
her company at their regular monthly meeting. The positions of
Chief, First Assistant Chief and Second Assistant Chief shall be
filled by a member of a different company. The individual elected by
each company shall have at least three years membership in the
South River Fire Department and shall have served as a Captain
and/or Lieutenant in a Fire Department. At the time of election the
individual shall meet the requirements set forth by the New Jersey
State Division of Fire Safety for such position. The Chairman of the
Public Safety Committee shall preside at and conduct such
election. In the event that a person elected to one of the Chief
positions shall be unable to complete a full term due to incapacity,
resignation or other reason, the company in which the vacancy
arises shall hold a special meeting pursuant to its bylaws; at said
meeting members of the company shall fill the vacancy for the
unexpired term with a qualified individual set forth in this article.
§ 72-3 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-5
54:253
§ 72-5. Duties of Chief.
§ 72-6. Duties of Captain.
§ 72-7. (Reserved)
§ 72-8. Chain of Command.
In the absence of the Chief, his command shall devolve upon and his duties
be performed by the First Assistant Chief; in the absence of the Chief and
the First Assistant Chief, command shall devolve upon and the duties shall
be performed by the Second Assistant Chief; and in the absence of the
Chief, First Assistant Chief and Second Assistant Chief, said command and
duties shall devolve upon the next senior officer of the Fire Department in
attendance at said incident. In the absence of any line officer, the driver of
the first arriving apparatus shall assume command.
§ 72-9. (Reserved)
§ 72-10. Secretary of company.
A. The Chief of the South River Fire Department shall be responsible for
heading the South River Fire Department and shall be the chief
executive officer of the Fire Department.
B. The Chief, First Assistant and/or Second Assistant Chief shall attend all
business meetings held by the Mayor and Council, and any other
meeting deemed necessary by the Fire Chief of that year.
C. The Chief shall report to the Chairman of the Public Safety Committee
on all drills held each month, stating date, time and purpose.
D. The Chief shall be responsible for all Fire Department property,
excluding buildings and grounds.
E. The Chief shall be responsible for preparing the annual budget request
and for the proper expenditure of funds as prescribed in the fiscal
policy of the Borough.
F. It shall be the duty of the Chief to examine thereafter all reports each
month for all apparatus and request the annual hydrant report from the
water department.
A. It shall be the duty of the Captain of each company to keep a permanent
record of attendance for fires and drills for each member of his
company. The Captain shall submit each January 31 of the following
year a signed certified report stating members that have qualified for
L.O.S.A.P.
B. The Captain of each company shall submit monthly a truck and
equipment maintenance report to the Chief of the Fire Department.
§ 72-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-10
54:254
§ 72-11. (Reserved)
§ 72-12. Bylaws.
Each company shall have the power to adopt bylaws for the conduct and
management of such company and the officers and members thereof, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this article or any ordinance of the
Borough of South River or any statutory law applicable thereto.
§ 72-13. (Reserved)38
A. Each company shall have a Secretary, who shall be elected by ballot at
the annual meeting of the company in each and every year.
B. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of each company to submit to the
Secretary of the Local Firemen's Relief Association a complete list of all
active members of his company; said list when filed shall carry the
name of the member, date of joining the Department and age at the time
of joining.
C. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of each company to notify the
Mayor and Council of any membership changes.
D. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of each company to notify the
Chairman of the Public Safety Committee of their respective company's
nomination for the position of Chief, First Assistant, and Second
Assistant Chief prior to the first Monday of December.
38.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Bureau of Fire Prevention, adopted 12-16-1970 as Section 2
of Ord. No. 1970-24, as amended, was repealed 5-30-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-22. For
current provisions, see Ch. 169, Fire Prevention.
§ 72-10 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-13
54:255

ARTICLE III
Police Department
[Adopted 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-3039]
§ 72-14. Establishment; composition.
There is hereby recreated in and for the Borough of South River a Police
Department which shall consist of one Chief of Police, one Deputy Chief of
Police, no more than three Lieutenants, no more than six Sergeants, and no
more than 24 regular police officers to carry out the functions of the Police
Department for the protection and promotion of the general health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the Borough of South River.
§ 72-15. Function and duties.
The Police Department of the Borough of South River shall have as its
major functions and duties, which shall be the obligation of all sworn police
personnel of the Police Department of the Borough of South River, the
following:
§ 72-16. Designation of Public Safety Committee as appropriate
authority.
The Public Safety Committee shall be designated as the appropriate
authority as provided in the New Jersey statutes. The appropriate authority
shall be responsible for the overall performance of the Police Department.
The appropriate authority shall adopt and promulgate rules and regulations
for the governing of the Police Department and for the discipline of its
members.
A. The preservation of peace.
B. The protection of life and property.
C. The arrest of violators of the law and recovery of property.
D. The prevention and detection of crime.
E. The enforcement of all laws of the United States of America, the State
of New Jersey, the County of Middlesex and all ordinances of the
Borough of South River.
F. Aid and service to the public.
G. Regulation of traffic and parking.
H. Youth guidance.
39.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, Police Department, adopted
9-15-1969 over veto by Ord. No. 1969-16 (Ch. 47, Art. IV, of the 1977 Code), amended in
its entirety 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-24.
§ 72-14 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-17
54:257
§ 72-17. Chain of command.
All necessary orders and directives for the management and regulation of
the Police Department shall be given through the chain of command. The
chain of command shall be as follows:
§ 72-18. Chief of Police.
A. The Chief of Police;
B. The Deputy Chief of Police;
C. The Lieutenant(s);
D. The Sergeant(s);
E. The regular police officers.
A. The head of the Police Department shall be the Chief of Police, who
shall be appointed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq. from the
Lieutenant(s) and Deputy Chief of the South River Police Department
by nomination of the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council.
B. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, as adopted June 22, 1981, and
amended from time to time thereafter, known as the "Chief's
Responsibility Act," the Chief of Police shall be head of the police force,
and he shall be directly responsible to the appropriate authority for the
efficient and routine day-to-day operations thereof. He shall, pursuant
to the policies established by the appropriate authority:
(1) Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the Police
Department and its members and officers.
(2) Have exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Department.
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers.
(4) Delegate such of his/her authority as he/she may deem necessary
for the efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised
under his/her direction and control.
(5) Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed by the appropriate authority on the operation of
the Police Department during the preceding month, and make such
other reports as may be requested by the appropriate authority.
(6) In the event that the Chief of Police is unable to perform his/her
duties due to vacation, ill health, leave of absence, suspension or
any other reason, and the Deputy Chief of Police is unable to
assume his/her duties, the Chief of Police shall designate an officer
§ 72-17 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-18
54:258
§ 72-19. Deputy Chief of Police. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-35]
There shall be within the Police Department of the Borough of South River
one Deputy Chief of Police. The Deputy Chief of Police shall properly
maintain the efficiency of the Police Department and supervise all personnel
as assigned by the Chief of Police and shall promote, enforce and abide by
the rules and regulations of the Police Department of the Borough of South
River. In the event that the Deputy Chief of Police is unable to perform
his/her duties due to vacation, ill health, leave of absence, suspension or
any other reason, the Chief of Police may designate a Lieutenant who shall
assume the duties and responsibilities of the Deputy Chief of Police in his/
her absence.
§ 72-20. Lieutenants. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-35]
There shall be within the Police Department of the Borough of South River
a maximum of three Lieutenants to properly maintain the efficiency of
the Police Department. The Lieutenant(s) shall supervise all personnel as
assigned by the Chief of Police and shall promote, enforce and abide by
the rules and regulations of the Police Department of the Borough of South
River. In the event that a Lieutenant is unable to perform his duties due to
vacation, ill health, leave of absence, suspension or any other reason, the
Chief of Police may designate a Sergeant who shall assume the duties and
responsibilities of the Lieutenant in his/her absence.
§ 72-21. Sergeants.
There shall be within the Police Department of the Borough of South River
a maximum of six Sergeants to properly maintain the efficiency of the
Police Department. Each Sergeant shall supervise all personnel as assigned
by the Chief of Police and shall promote, enforce and abide by the rules
and regulations of the Police Department of the Borough of South River.
A Sergeant shall be scheduled to work on each working shift within the
Borough of South River. In the event that a Sergeant is unable to perform
his duties due to vacation, ill health, leave of absence, suspension or any
other reason, the Chief of Police may designate an officer who shall assume
the duties and responsibilities of the Sergeant in his/her absence.
§ 72-22. Regular police officers; Detective Bureau.
Regular police officers shall be divided into the following categories:
who shall assume the duties and responsibilities of the Chief of
Police in his/her absence.
A. Regular full-time officers, regardless of rank:
(1) All appointments as regular police officers shall be on a full-time
basis only, and no part-time police officers shall be appointed.
§ 72-18 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-22
54:259
§ 72-23. Appointment of regular police officers.
(2) All regular officers of the Police Department, including the Deputy
Chief of Police, Lieutenants, Sergeants, patrol officers and
detectives, shall serve as full-time police officers at such hours and
in such manner as directed by the Chief of Police.
(3) Each full-time member shall devote his time and attention to the
services of the Department, with certain hours being allocated for
the performance of regular hours of duty. Full-time officers are
considered to be at all times available for duty and must act
promptly at any time that their services are required, except when
on authorized leave or if a disability occurs.
B. There shall be established a Detective Bureau:
(1) This bureau shall be responsible for the follow-up investigation of
all crimes, including those that are juvenile in nature.
(2) The Detective Bureau shall consist of officers assigned by the Chief
of Police to carry out their prescribed functions.
(3) The Detective Bureau shall be staffed by as many detectives as
deemed necessary by the Chief of Police.
A. Qualifications. Specific entrance qualifications for persons to be
appointed as regular members of the Police Department shall be as
follows:
(1) United States citizenship.
(2) A resident of the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-122.8.
(3) Age of not less than 21 years or more than 35 years. However, age
restrictions shall not conflict with current state or federal law
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-127.
(4) A minimum of a high school diploma or a GED equivalent shall be
required at the time of appointment. [Amended 1-27-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-3]
(5) The applicant must pass a physical agility test which determines
that the applicant has adequate height, weight, strength and
endurance for the performance of essential job functions.
(6) Vision and hearing adequate to perform essential job functions.
(7) If an applicant has a criminal conviction, other than a disqualifying
conviction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:51-2, the Detective Bureau of the
South River Police Department shall investigate such record and
consider such factors as may be required by law to determine
whether the applicant is qualified.
§ 72-22 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-23
54:260
(8) The applicant must possess a valid motor vehicle license that is in
good standing and issued by this state.
(9) The applicant must be able to pass a psychological and/or
psychiatric evaluation prior to appointment as a regular police
officer.
(10) The applicant must be able to pass a comprehensive medical
examination prior to appointment as a regular police officer.
B. Application process. All applicants for appointment as regular members
of the South River Police Department must submit a completed
application for appointment to the Chief of Police. Said application shall
be on a form promulgated by the Chief of Police.
C. Examination process. Each applicant for appointment to the Police
Department shall undergo the following application process, in the
following order:
(1) Written examination.
(a) A written examination for appointment as a regular police
officer will be conducted by the New Jersey State Chiefs of
Police Association Examinations Committee, which is hereby
established as the South River Police Department's choice to
conduct written examinations for appointment, which are jobrelated
and nondiscriminatory.
(b) The New Jersey State Chiefs of Police Association will be
responsible for scoring the written test. The written test is
scored on a one through 100 scale.
(c) Passing score equals 70.
(d) Candidates must receive a passing score to continue their
eligibility for the examination process.
(2) Physical agility examination.
(a) The physical agility test shall be conducted by members of the
South River Police Department as designated by the Chief of
Police.
(b) All candidates for appointment who have qualified to
participate in the physical agility examination by obtaining a
passing score of 70% or higher on the written examination
shall be required to obtain a certification from a physician,
licensed in the State of New Jersey, stating that the applicant is
physically fit and shall be able to engage in strenuous exercise.
(c) All exercises performed during the physical agility test shall be
job-related for the position of police officer.
§ 72-23 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-23
54:261
(d) The South River Police Department’s physical agility test shall
be comprised of five events: push ups, sit ups, fifty-yard dash,
pull ups (flex arm hang – females) and a one-and-a-half-mile
run. [Amended 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-23]
(e) Passing score equals 70.
(f) Candidates must receive a passing score to continue their
eligibility for the examination process.
D. Scoring. Those individuals who have successfully passed both the
written and physical agility examinations shall have their scores from
both examinations combined and then averaged to produce an overall
score for this portion of the appointment process. Candidates shall be
ranked, with the person achieving the highest overall score ranked
number one. The list of eligible candidates for consideration for
appointment will begin with the officer who finished number one in the
process.
E. Background examination. Pass/Fail.
(1) All background investigations for appointment to the position of
regular patrol officer shall be conducted by the Detective Bureau of
the South River Police Department. [Amended 12-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-35]
(2) The names of the top 10 candidates for appointment as established
under Subsection D shall be submitted to the Detective Bureau for
background investigation.
(3) As part of the background investigation process, each applicant
shall have his or her fingerprints taken and forwarded to the New
Jersey State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(4) Considered during the background investigation will include, but
not be limited to:
(a) Applicant's criminal record.
(b) Applicant's driving history.
(c) Applicant's prior law enforcement experience.
(d) Applicant's prior work history.
(e) Applicant's current and prior credit history.
(f) Applicant's truthfulness in completing the application.
(5) Candidates must receive a passing result during their background
investigation in order to continue their eligibility for the
examination process.
§ 72-23 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-23
54:262
(6) If any of the top 10 candidates for appointment fails his/her
respective background investigation, the name of the next
candidate on the list of eligible candidates shall be submitted to the
Detective Bureau for background investigation.
(7) This process shall continue until the Detective Bureau has
established a list of 10 candidates for appointment who have
passed their background investigation and are now eligible to
continue to the oral examination phase of the appointment process.
F. Oral examination. Pass/Fail.
(1) Oral examination shall be conducted by an interview board
consisting of the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police and one
additional superior officer holding the rank of Sergeant or higher
within the South River Police Department to be designated by the
Chief of Police.
(2) No more than 10 candidates for appointment will be eligible to
participate in the oral examination phase of the appointment
process based on their overall scores pursuant to Subsection D and
who have successfully passed their background investigation.
(3) The oral examination shall consist of a review of the applicant's
initial application, background investigation, and a series of
situational questions to test the candidate's overall qualifications.
(4) Candidates must receive a passing score to continue their
eligibility for the examination process.
G. Medical examination. Pass/Fail. Candidates must receive a passing
result to continue their eligibility for the examination process.
H. Psychological and/or psychiatric examination. Pass/Fail. Candidates
must receive a passing result to continue their eligibility for the
examination process.
I. Mandatory substance abuse test. Pass/Fail. Candidates must receive a
passing result to continue their eligibility for the examination process.
J. Training course required. A training course shall be required as follows:
(1) No person shall be given or shall accept a permanent appointment
as a regular police officer unless such person has successfully
completed a police training course at a school approved and
authorized by the Police Training Commission in the State
Department of Law and Public Safety pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq.
(2) This subsection shall not prohibit the giving or accepting of a
probationary or temporary appointment as a police officer for a
period not to exceed six months to enable a person seeking a
§ 72-23 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-23
54:263
permanent appointment to complete a police training course as
prescribed by the Police Training Commission.
(3) Every person holding a probationary or temporary appointment as
a police officer in the Borough of South River shall enroll in a police
training course as prescribed by the Police Training Commission,
and such appointee shall be entitled to a leave of absence with pay
during the period of the police training course.40
K. Appointment.
(1) A list of eligible candidates for appointment will be created based
on the candidate's oral interview, with consideration given to the
candidate's performance in the written examination, physical
agility examination and background investigation.
(2) The Chief of Police is not bound to make recommendations based
solely on the numerical rankings of the candidates who have
successfully completed the process.
(3) All recommendations for appointment as regular police officers
shall originate with the Chief of Police as head of the Police
Department.
(4) All candidates recommended for appointment by the Chief of Police
must successfully pass a medical examination, psychological and/or
psychiatric examination and substance abuse test prior to
appointment as regular police officers with the South River Police
Department.
(5) The Mayor and Council shall not appoint a candidate to the position
of regular police officer who has not been recommended for
appointment by the Chief of Police.
L. Probationary period.
(1) All appointments to the position of regular police officer shall be
probationary from the date of hire and shall continue for one year
from the date of certification by the Police Training Commission.
However, if the applicant holds a valid certification at the time of
appointment, the probationary period shall be for one year from the
date of appointment by the Mayor and Borough Council.41
M. Oath of allegiance. Any member appointed or hired shall, as a requisite
to becoming a member of the Police Department and before entering
upon his duties as such, take and subscribe to the oath of allegiance, as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 41:1-1, and shall further swear or affirm to abide by,
uphold and enforce the ordinances of the Borough, including the
40.Editor's Note: Former Subsection J(4), regarding specific training course requirements,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 1-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3.
41.Editor's Note: Former Subsection L(2), regarding the extension of the probationary period,
which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 1-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-3.
§ 72-23 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-23
54:264
§ 72-23.1. Eligibility for appointment. [Added 2-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-2]
§ 72-23.2. Alternate route appointments. [Added 1-27-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-3]
provisions of this article, and to further swear or affirm to faithfully,
impartially and justly perform all the duties of his position or office to
the best of his ability. Such oath or affirmation shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk.
A. Notwithstanding any eligibility hiring list process, the governing body
may make appointments to fill vacancies in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:17B-69.1 and N.J.S.A. 52:17B-69.2 for
individuals who have completed a police training course certified by the
New Jersey Police Training Commission, who have been individually
recommended by the Chief of Police and who have been discharged
from police service for no longer than one year due to budgetary
constraints of a prior employer.
B. The purpose of this subsection is to permit the hiring of individuals who
have served as sworn officers in other jurisdictions and who have been
certified by the New Jersey Police Training Commission.
C. The following screening process will be utilized for appointment of such
eligible police officers.
(1) Such candidates shall participate in the oral interview with the
Chief of Police, a background investigation, a medical examination,
and a psychological examination.
(2) Any candidate failing any phase of the hiring process as outlined
above will cease to be a candidate for the position of Police Officer
in the South River Police Department.
A. Notwithstanding any eligibility hiring list which may be in existence,
the governing body may make appointments to fill vacancies in the
Police Department in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:17B-69.1 et seq. by
hiring individuals via the alternate route, who have been individually
recommended by the Chief of Police. Individuals appointed pursuant to
this section must have completed, prior to appointment, a police
training course certified by the New Jersey Police Training Commission
and must have passed and received PT certification from the respective
Police Academy.
B. The purpose of this section is to permit the hiring of individuals who
have attended and graduated from a Police Academy and have been
certified by the New Jersey Police Training Commission.
C. The following screening process will be utilized for appointment of such
eligible alternative route police officers:
§ 72-23 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-23.2
54:265
§ 72-24. Method of promotion for Deputy Chief, Lieutenants and
Sergeants.
(1) Alternative route candidates shall:
(a) Participate and pass an oral interview with the Chief of Police
and two superior officers holding the rank of Sergeant or above
in the South River Police Department to be designated by the
Chief of Police; and
(b) Undergo and pass a background investigation conducted by
the Detective Bureau of the South River Police Department in
accordance with § 72-23E.
(2) Following successful completion of the oral interview and
background investigation, and upon recommendation for
appointment by the Chief of Police, the governing body may make a
conditional offer of employment to a candidate subject to:
(a) Successful completion of a medical examination confirming
that the candidate can perform the essential functions of the
position of police officer, with or without accommodation;
(b) Successful completion of a substance abuse test; and
(c) Successful completion of a psychological examination
confirming that the candidate is fit for duty as a police officer.
(3) The governing body may, prior to a conditional offer of
employment, interview any candidate recommended for
appointment by the Chief of Police.
(4) Any candidate failing any phase of Subsection C(2) above will have
his or her conditional offer of employment with the Borough of
South River withdrawn.
D. Upon successful completion of all phases of the hiring process as
outlined above, the appointment to the position of regular police officer
pursuant to this section shall be probationary for a period of one year
from the date of appointment. Upon expiration of the probationary
period, the appointment shall become permanent unless, at any time
prior thereto, the Chief of Police shall terminate the probationary
appointment.
A. Promotion eligibility.
(1) A member of this Police Department must serve at least five years
with this Police Department before becoming eligible for promotion
to the rank of Sergeant.
(2) Supervisory personnel with a rank greater than patrol officer
(Sergeants, Lieutenants, and Deputy Chief) shall not be eligible for
§ 72-23.2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-24
54:266
additional promotion until they have completed at least one year of
service in that grade.
(3) Candidates for promotion must have completed their necessary
year(s) of service as set forth in this section prior to the start of the
promotional testing procedures.
(4) When the length of service standards of this section provide two or
fewer candidates for a promotional examination, the Chief of Police
may open the examination to members of the Police Department in
the next lower rank who meet the criteria set forth in this section.
(5) Candidates who have completed their necessary year(s) of service
with this Police Department as set forth in this section and who are
desirous of competing in the promotional testing shall indicate in
writing their intent to take part in the process and submit same to
the Chief of Police.
(6) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-129, due consideration shall be
given to the length and merit of service and preference shall be
given according to seniority of service within this Police
Department during promotional testing procedures.
(7) A candidate for promotion must successfully pass all sections of the
promotional testing procedures prior to being eligible for
promotion.
(8) The Chief of Police may designate a patrol officer to act in the
capacity of a sergeant or designate a sergeant to act in the capacity
of lieutenant or designate a lieutenant to act in the capacity of
Deputy Chief until such time as there is an officer who has met the
length of service in rank as set forth in Subsection A(1) and (2).
(9) (Reserved)42
(10) All promotions in the Police Department shall be made on the basis
of general qualifications, service record and examination to
determine police knowledge, skills, abilities and methods.
(11) The Chief of Police recognizes, maintains and asserts the right to
recommend for promotion within the top three ranked individuals
after completion of the entire testing process, based on previous
evaluations, job performance, leadership qualities, disciplinary
history and attendance record. The list of eligible candidates for
promotion will be adjusted after each selection by the Chief of
Police to maintain a ranking of first through last based on the
overall scores of the remaining candidates for promotion.
42.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(9), regarding the salary of an officer acting in a
superior position, was repealed 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-35.
§ 72-24 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-24
54:267
(12) The Chief of Police is not bound to make recommendations based
solely on the numerical rankings of the officers who have
successfully completed the process.
(13) The Mayor and Council shall not promote any officer who has not
been recommended for promotion by the Chief of Police.
(14) The list of eligible officers for consideration for promotion will
begin with the officer who finished number one in the process.
(15) A list of these candidates who successfully pass all phases of the
promotional process shall be maintained for a period of two years
from the date of the completion of the written test.
(16) If a position in the Police Department becomes vacant within two
years from the date of completion of the written test, the Chief of
Police shall make his recommendation from those remaining and
available officers.
B. Promotional criteria.
(1) The promotional criteria for the ranks of Sergeant and Lieutenant
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) Eligibility for promotion.
(b) Seniority.
(c) Educational background.
(d) Written examination.
(e) Oral interview(s) as referenced in Subsection C(2)(a) through
(l).
(f) Psychological and/or psychiatric examination certifying the
candidate's fitness for the duty.
(2) Each candidate for promotion shall be required to meet all the
eligibility requirements and successfully pass the written
examination, oral interview and psychological and/or psychiatric
examination prior to being placed within the promotion list or
actually being promoted.
(3) Review and appeal by employees of adverse decisions for eligibility,
review of written exams and any facets of promotional procedure
will follow the grievance adjustment procedure as outlined in the
agreement between the Borough of South River and the current
collective bargaining agreement.
(4) Each candidate shall be permitted a review of the testing key,
provided it is authorized by the testing agency.
C. Examination for promotion for the Lieutenant and Sergeant.
§ 72-24 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-24
54:268
(1) Written examination. (50% of total weighted score).
(a) A written examination for the ranks of Lieutenant and
Sergeant will be conducted by the New Jersey State Chiefs of
Police Association Examinations Committee, which is hereby
established as the South River Police Department's choice to
conduct written examinations for promotion, which are jobrelated
and nondiscriminatory.
(b) The New Jersey State Chiefs of Police Association will be
responsible for scoring the written test.
(c) The maximum obtainable score for the written examination
conducted by the New Jersey State Chiefs of Police Association
shall be 100%.
(d) The New Jersey State Chiefs of Police Association will provide
study guides and a book list of sources for study purposes.
(e) Each candidate will be allowed a minimum of eight weeks from
the date of the promotional announcement to the date when
the written test is given. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-35]
(f) All eligible candidates for the ranks of Lieutenant and
Sergeant, who achieve a score of 70% or higher on the written
examination conducted by the New Jersey State Chiefs of
Police Association, will be eligible to advance in the selection
process as detailed below.
(g) Candidates who receive written test scores of 70% or above
and who want to proceed in the selection process shall submit,
in memorandum form, a memorandum detailing their
respective experiences with the South River Police
Department. This memorandum should reflect the assignments
held by each individual within the Department, a description of
any program or programs that the individual participated in or
initiated. Additionally, such things as productivity, attendance,
experience, education, training and departmental awards
should be mentioned in this writing. This memorandum shall
be submitted to the Chief of Police at least four weeks prior to
the date of the oral interview. These memoranda will be
reviewed for accuracy by the Chief of Police or designee and
will be forwarded to the oral interview panel for its review and
use during the oral interviews. [Amended 12-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-35]
(h) Candidates for the rank of Lieutenant and Sergeant who
achieve a score of 70% or above on the written examination
and advise the Chief of Police that they wish to proceed in the
promotional process will be further evaluated in the following
three areas: oral interview, seniority, and education. Each of
§ 72-24 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-24
54:269
these areas and their respective ranking and weights are
defined as follows:
(2) Oral interview (50% of total weighted score).
(a) Candidates for the position of Lieutenant and Sergeant who
achieve a score of 70% or higher on the written examination
will be interviewed by a panel consisting of the Chief of Police
and two active and/or retired members of the law enforcement
community, selected by the Chief of Police, who possess a
minimum of 20 years of law enforcement experience and have
obtained the rank of Captain or higher, whom the Chief of
Police deems qualified to assist him/her with this selection
process. Candidates will be interviewed for a minimum of 45
minutes.
(b) The scheduling of these interviews will be announced when the
actual number of individuals to be interviewed is determined
after the written examination.
(c) The posting of the dates and times of the oral interviews shall
contain a list of publications related to the issues of
supervision, organization, and command that each candidate
can utilize in preparing for his/her oral interview.
(d) Each candidate for promotion shall appear in his/her
departmental class one uniform for his/her scheduled oral
interview.
(e) Subject matter for these interviews will include, but will not be
limited to, general principles of supervision, command,
leadership, organization, planning, budgeting, criminal law,
state and federal court decisions, the United States
Constitution and the New Jersey State Constitution, rules of
evidence, court rules, Title 39, Title 40, Title 2C of the Statutes
of the State of New Jersey and the South River Police
Departmental rules, regulations, policies and procedures, the
South River Borough municipal ordinances and current
policies, procedures and directives of the State of New Jersey
Attorney General and the Middlesex County Prosecutor.
(f) During the oral interview, candidates will be asked questions
based on the subject matter outlined in Subsection C(2)(e) and
graded on the response given.
(g) Each member of the oral interview panel will be provided with
a copy of each candidate's memorandum as referenced in
Subsection C(1)(g) to be utilized as part of the oral interview
process.
(h) The oral interview panel will also have access to the
information contained in each candidate's personnel file,
§ 72-24 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-24
54:270
including but not limited to prior evaluations by supervisors,
disciplinary action, commendations and awards, and any other
information commonly available in the candidate's personnel
file.
(i) Each candidate shall be interviewed by the oral interview
panel under similar conditions in order to evaluate the merit
and fitness of such candidate for promotion.
(j) Each member of the oral interview panel shall consider the
following factors when scoring candidates during the oral
interview process. Each factor shall be uniformly considered
and applied to all candidates.
[1] Appearance, manner and bearing (10% of total score).
[2] Self expression (10% of total score).
[3] Judgment (20% of total score).
[4] Decisiveness (20% of total score).
[5] In-service and/or specialized training (20% of total score).
[6] Scope and level of experience, including merit
commendations (20% of total score).
(k) Each member of the oral interview panel shall assign a score
between one and 100 to each candidate. These three scores
will then be combined and then averaged to obtain the
candidate's overall score for the oral interview.
(l) Candidates for the position of Lieutenant and Sergeant must
achieve a score of 70% or higher during their oral interview to
be considered eligible for promotion, and continue in the
promotional process.
(3) Seniority and educational background. Additional points will be
added to the candidate's overall score, independent of the possible
top score of 100 in the written examination and oral interview as
referenced in Subsection C(1) and (2), based on the candidate's
seniority and educational background utilizing the following
criteria:
(a) Seniority.
[1] Seniority for the rank of Sergeant is defined as time with
the South River Police Department at the rank of
patrolman. Candidates with equal time at the rank of
patrolman will receive equal rankings.
[2] Seniority for the rank of Lieutenant is defined as time with
the South River Police Department at the rank of Sergeant.
§ 72-24 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-24
54:271
Candidates with equal time at the rank of Sergeant will
receive equal rankings.
[3] Seniority for the rank of Deputy Chief is defined as time
with the South River Police Department at the rank of
Lieutenant. Candidates with equal time at the rank of
Lieutenant will receive equal rankings.
[4] Seniority points will be given for fully completed years of
service on the South River Police Department as of the
announced closing date for eligibility to take the written
test as follows:
Completed Years of
Service
Seniority Points
5 0.25
6 0.50
7 0.75
8 1.00
9 1.25
10 1.50
11 1.75
12 2.00
13 2.25
14 2.50
15 2.75
16 3.00
17 3.25
18 3.50
19 3.75
20 4.00
21 4.25
22 4.50
23 4.75
24 5.00
25 5.25
26 5.50
27 5.75
28 6.00
29 6.25
30 6.50
§ 72-24 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-24
54:272
[5] Candidates for promotion who have 31 or more years of
completed service will receive 0.25 seniority points for
each additional fully completed year of service.
(b) Education.
[1] Candidates shall be ranked against competing candidates
based upon the level of education attained. Candidates will
receive the following ranking for their respective levels of
education:
[a] High school diplomas or GED equivalent: one (1).
[b] Associate's degree(s) or in excess of 63 college credits
accumulated towards a bachelor's degree: two (2).
[c] Bachelor's degree: three (3).
[d] Master's degree(s): four (4).
[e] PhD or J.D. degree(s): five (5).
[2] The ranking for any category shall not exceed the number
in parenthesis at the end of each category. By way of
example, if a candidate has two associate's degrees, his
ranking will be two and not four.
[3] For degrees or college credits accumulated towards a
bachelor's degree, said degree or college credits must be
received from a college whose accreditation meets the
standards set for college accreditation by the State of New
Jersey.
[4] Candidates who intend to assert their level of education
attained as part of this promotional process shall be
required to have a certified copy of their high school
diploma or GED equivalent and their college transcript(s)
forwarded to the Chief of Police from their respective high
school, college, or university no later than the date of their
oral interview. The early submission of this information
will allow for the resolution of any conflicts prior to the
selection process and will avoid any delay in the final
tabulation of overall scores. [Amended 12-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-35]
(4) Scoring.
(a) Those individuals who have successfully passed both the
written examination and oral interview shall have their scores
from both examinations combined. Additional points for
seniority and educational background will then be added to
establish each candidate's combined score to produce an
overall score for the promotional process. Candidates shall be
§ 72-24 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-24
54:273
ranked, with the person achieving the highest overall score
ranked number one. The list of eligible officers for
consideration for promotion will begin with the officer who
finished number one in the process.
(b) The Chief of Police shall certify the composite score of each
candidate and shall post the same in a conspicuous place in
police headquarters, indicating the order of finish of the
candidates; such list shall be posted within 30 days after the
completion of all tests and interviews.
(c) Any candidate, upon written request to the Chief of Police
within five working days of the posting of such results, shall be
entitled to a review of his/her test scores and ranking with the
Chief of Police or his/her designee.
(d) For each promotion, the Chief of Police shall consider the first
three names of candidates standing highest on the list of
eligible candidates. The Chief of Police shall select one of the
three eligible candidates. In the event that the candidates have
the same score, preference shall be given to Borough of South
River residents, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.6.
(e) The list of eligible candidates for promotion will be adjusted
after each selection by the Chief of Police to maintain a ranking
of first through last based on the overall scores of the
remaining eligible candidates for promotion.
D. Procedure for promotion to the rank of Deputy Chief.
(1) Eligibility requirements. All candidates for promotion to the rank of
Deputy Chief must meet the following eligibility requirements:
(a) A member of this Police Department must serve at least five
years with this Police Department before becoming eligible for
promotion to the rank of Deputy Chief.
(b) Supervisory personnel with a rank greater than patrol officer
(Sergeants and Lieutenants) shall not be eligible for additional
promotion until they have completed at least one year of
service in that grade.
(c) Candidates for promotion must have completed their
necessary year(s) of service prior to the time they provide
written notification to the Chief of Police of their intention to
compete for the vacant position of Deputy Chief.
(d) When the length of service standards established in this
section provide two or fewer candidates for the promotional
selection process to the rank of Deputy Chief, the Chief of
Police may open the selection process to members of the Police
§ 72-24 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-24
54:274
Department in the next lower rank who meet the criteria set
forth in this section.
(2) Promotional selection process.
(a) Personnel eligible for promotion to the rank of Deputy Chief
who wish to participate in the promotional selection process
shall provide written notification to the Chief of Police of their
intention to compete for the vacant position. This notice of
intent shall be completed on a South River Police Department
official report form, and shall be submitted to the Chief of
Police no later than four weeks from the date of the
promotional procedure announcement. [Amended
12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-35]
(b) All eligible candidates for promotion to the rank the rank of
Deputy Chief shall also be required to submit, in memorandum
form, a memorandum detailing their respective experiences
with the South River Police Department. This memorandum
should reflect the assignments held by each individual within
the Department, a description of any program or programs
that the individual participated in or initiated. Additionally,
such things as productivity, attendance, experience, education,
training and departmental awards should be mentioned in this
writing. This memorandum shall be submitted to the Chief of
Police no later than four weeks from the date of the
promotional procedure announcement.
(c) Candidates will be evaluated by the Chief of Police. The Chief
of Police shall consider the length of service and the merit and
fitness of all eligible candidates for possible promotion to the
rank of Deputy Chief as required and in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 et seq. The Chief of Police shall then select
the eligible candidate of his choice to be promoted to the rank
of Deputy Chief.
E. Promotion notifications.
(1) Whenever any promotional examination is to be conducted, the
Chief of Police shall notify the eligible members of this Police
Department of the vacancy, and the promotional examinations,
criteria, evaluations and procedures to be employed in filling the
vacancy.
(2) This notification shall be contained in a written announcement that
shall either be posted in a prominent location within the Police
Department available to all personnel, and/or shall be issued to
each eligible candidate personally.
(3) This written notification shall be issued at least eight weeks prior to
the date of the written examination. [Amended 12-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-35]
§ 72-24 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-24
54:275
(4) This written notification will include but not be limited to job title
opening, date, time and location of the exams, eligibility
requirements and the process to be used. These notices will include
the numerical weight(s) assigned to each part of the promotional
procedure.
(5) Personnel eligible for promotion who wish to participate in the
promotional process shall provide written notification to the Chief
of Police of their intention to compete for the vacant position. This
notice of intent shall be completed on a South River Police
Department official report form, and shall include the officer's
hiring date as a police officer with South River Borough and the
level of education that he/she intends to assert during this selection
process and should be submitted to the Chief of Police no later than
four weeks prior to the date of the examination. The early
submission of this information will allow the Chief of Police or
designee to verify the information contained in the individual's
personnel file. The early submission of this information will allow
for the resolution of any conflicts prior to the start of the selection
process and will avoid any delay in the final tabulation of overall
scores. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-35]
(6) Upon completion of promotional testing procedures, all eligible
candidates for promotion shall be notified in writing of their score
and of their ranking within those eligible for promotion to the
vacant position. [Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-35]
F. Preference to residents. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.6,
when a resident and a nonresident of South River Borough have
achieved the same final score in the promotional testing procedures,
the resident of South River Borough shall be ranked above the
nonresident.
(1) If a tie still exists because two or more candidates are residents,
the officers' written test scores will be used as a tiebreaker.
(2) If a tie still exists after utilizing the officers' written test score, the
officer's oral interview scores will be used as a tiebreaker.
(3) If a tie still exists after utilizing the officer's written test and oral
interview scores, the officers' date of hire in the Police Department
will be used as a tiebreaker.
G. Psychological and/or psychiatric examination. All candidates for
promotion must pass a psychological and/or psychiatric examination
certifying the candidate's fitness for duty prior to being recommended
for promotion by the Chief of Police.
H. Promotional appointments.
(1) The Chief of Police recognizes, maintains and asserts the right to
recommend for promotion to the Mayor and Council within one of
§ 72-24 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-24
54:276
§ 72-25. Disciplinary action, demotion and/or reduction in rank.
[Amended 12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-35]
§ 72-26. Administrative Assistant of the Police Department.
the top three ranked individuals for each vacancy after completion
of the entire testing process, based on previous evaluations, job
performance, leadership qualities, disciplinary history and
attendance record. The list of eligible candidates for promotion will
be adjusted after each selection by the Chief of Police to maintain
a ranking of first through last based on the overall scores of the
remaining candidates for promotion.
(2) The Chief of Police shall only recommend for promotion from the
list of candidates who have successfully completed and passed all
aspects of the promotional testing procedures.
(3) The Chief of Police is not bound to make recommendations based
solely on the numerical rankings of the officers who have
successfully completed the process.
(4) All recommendations for promotion will originate from the Chief of
Police, who shall forward the names of the recommended
candidate(s) to the Mayor and Borough Council for appointment.
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147, no member of this Police
Department shall be demoted or reduced in rank, except for just cause,
and without a proper complaint being filed and heard by the proper
authority. Any such action asserted by the Borough Council, or any
agent or representative thereof, shall be subject to the grievance
procedure as set forth by the collective bargaining agreement.
B. Such demotion or reduction in rank procedures shall apply to all
probationary promotions, as well as permanent grades or positions.
C. No member or officer of the Police Department shall be suspended,
removed, fined, or reduced in rank for any cause other than for
incapacity, misconduct or disobedience as provided in the New Jersey
Statutes and the Police Department rules and regulations.
A. There shall be within the Police Department the position of
Administrative Assistant of the Police Department, to be located in the
Department of Police Records. Said position shall be a full-time
nonsworn position.
B. Appointment. The Administrative Assistant of the Police Department to
be located in the Police Records Department shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough Council, for an
indefinite term and shall not be removed except as required by law.
C. Salary. The Administrative Assistant of the Police Department to be
located in the Police Records Department shall receive as compensation
§ 72-24 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-26
54:277
§ 72-26.1. Executive Assistant to Chief of Police. [Added 7-14-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-19]
for his/her services an annual salary as set forth in the Borough of
South River annual salary ordinance.
D. Qualifications. The Administrative Assistant of the Police Department to
be located in the Police Records Department must possess a high school
diploma and have knowledge of office procedures, typing and
computers and demonstrate skill in correspondence and written and
oral communications.
E. Responsibilities and job duties. The individual will be responsible for
various clerical work of moderate complexity involving the processing
and keeping of various police records. Said position shall also require
the employee to perform any and all clerical functions as directed
within the scope of the operations of the South River Police
Department, all at the direction of the Chief of Police.
F. Oath of confidentiality. The individual shall be required to sign a
confidentiality agreement as promulgated by the Chief of Police.
A. There shall be within the Police Department the position of Executive
Assistant to the Chief of Police, to be located within the Office of the
Chief of Police. Said position shall be a full-time, nonsworn position,
nonunion position.
B. Appointment. The Executive Assistant to the Chief of Police shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, for an indefinite term and shall not be removed except as
required by law.
C. Salary. The Executive Assistant of the Chief of the Police Department
shall receive as compensation for his/her services an annual salary as
set forth in the Borough of South River annual salary ordinance.
D. Qualifications. The Executive Assistant of the Chief of Police must
possess a high school diploma and have knowledge of office procedures,
typing and computers and demonstrate skill in correspondence and
written and oral communications.
E. Responsibilities and job duties. The individual will be responsible for
the following:
(1) Coordinating and performing a variety of confidential and complex
secretarial functions for the Chief of Police and staff.
(2) Providing executive-level administrative support to the Chief of
Police.
(3) Responding to phone, mail, e-mail and in-person inquires and
requests from citizens and staff.
§ 72-26 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-26.1
54:278
§ 72-27. Special Law Enforcement Officers. [Amended 5-29-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-19]
(4) Scheduling appointments, meetings and conferences and making
travel and training arrangements.
(5) Preparing written correspondence, written reports and other
documentation.
(6) Gathering data and information and performing research and
analysis as assigned.
(7) Maintaining supplies and preparing requisitions, purchase orders
and other agreements.
(8) Preparing the Department's payroll.
(9) Maintaining vacation, personnel and compensatory time-off
records for the Police Department.
(10) Updating and maintaining departmental records and files.
(11) Answering, screening, and directing incoming calls.
(12) Attending meetings, recording proceedings, and preparing
summaries or minutes.
(13) Assisting with administrative duties for community policing events.
(14) Tracking and maintaining a record of all residential/commercial
alarms.
(15) Performing other related duties as directed by the Chief of Police.
F. Oath of confidentiality. The individual shall be required to sign a
confidentiality agreement as promulgated by the Chief of Police.
A. Establishment. The position of Special Law Enforcement Officer is
hereby established.
B. Placement. Special Law Enforcement Officers shall be assigned within
the Administration Bureau.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CLASS ONE SPECIAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person
appointed pursuant to this article to temporarily or intermittently
perform duties similar to those performed regularly by members of the
Police Department or to provide assistance to the Police Department
during unusual or emergency circumstances or at individual times
during intermittent peak periods.
CLASS THREE SPECIAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any
person appointed pursuant to this article to exercise full powers and
§ 72-26.1 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-27
54:279
duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly appointed full-time
police officer while providing security at a public or nonpublic school on
the school premises during hours when the public or nonpublic school
is normally in session or when it is occupied by public or nonpublic
school students or its teachers.
EMERGENCY — Any sudden, unexpected or unforeseeable event
requiring the immediate use or deployment of law enforcement
personnel as shall be determined by the Chief of Police, or, in the
absence of the Chief, other chief law enforcement officers to whom the
authority of designating an emergency has been prescribed by local
ordinances.
D. Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers.
(1) Application, appointment and qualifications for employment
(a) A person may apply for the position of Class One Special Law
Enforcement Officer by submitting a written application for
appointment or reappointment to the Chief of Police. Said
application shall be on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police.
(b) No person shall be appointed as a Class One Special Law
Enforcement Officer unless that person meets the
qualifications of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146 et seq.43, and, specifically,
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10.
(c) If appointed, such appointment shall be for a period of one
year, beginning January 1 and terminating December 31 of the
same year, or such part of any year beginning upon date of
appointment and terminating on December 31 of the same
year.
(d) After appointment, no Class One Special Law Enforcement
Officer may commence his duties as a Class One Special Law
Enforcement Officer unless he has successfully completed a
training course established by the municipality and approved
by the New Jersey Police Training Commission.
(e) A maximum of 20 Special Law Enforcement Officers may be
appointed in any one calendar year.
(f) The number of Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers
shall consist of a maximum of two Class One Special Law
Enforcement Officer Sergeants and 18 Class One Special Law
Enforcement Officers.
(g) The Chief of Police shall be responsible for designating up to
two Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers who will hold
the position of Sergeant during their period of appointment.
43.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146 was repealed by L.1985, c. 439, § 14, effective October
1, 1986. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.1 et seq.
§ 72-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-27
54:280
(h) Residency. All Borough of South River Class One Special Law
Enforcement Officers shall be residents of the State of New
Jersey.
(2) Duties and limitations of authority.
(a) Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers shall be
authorized to perform routine traffic details, court security
details, spectator control at any and all public events and other
such similar duties. Class One Special Law Enforcement
Officers shall have the power to issue summonses for
disorderly persons offenses, petty disorderly offenses,
violations of municipal ordinances, and violations of Title 39 of
the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey and have arrest
powers as allowed by Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of the
State of New Jersey.
(b) All Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers shall be under
the supervision and direction of the Chief of Police or his direct
designee and shall perform all of their duties only in the
Borough of South River unless they are in fresh pursuit of any
person who has committed an offense in the Borough of South
River.
(c) A Class One Special Law Enforcement Officer shall be deemed
to be on duty while performing the public safety function on
behalf of the Borough of South River and when receiving
compensation, in any way, from the Borough of South River at a
rate hereinafter established.
(d) The Class One Special Law Enforcement Sergeants will be
responsible for the scheduling of Class One Special Law
Enforcement Officers to any given assignment at the direction
of the Chief of Police or his direct designee.
(3) Uniforms.
(a) All Special Law Enforcement Officers appointed by the
Borough of South River shall not commence their duties until
they have obtained a uniform authorized by the Borough of
South River, which uniform shall include state insignia issued
by the New Jersey Police Training Commission. The cost of said
uniform shall be paid by the individual Special Law
Enforcement Officer after his or her appointment.
(b) Each Class One Special Law Enforcement Officer shall be
compensated, as a clothing allowance, at the rate of $250 per
year, conditioned on each individual law enforcement officer
working as a Class One Special Law Enforcement Officer for a
minimum of 100 hours during his or her period of appointment.
The compensation shall be paid only upon the above condition
having been met.
§ 72-27 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-27
54:281
(c) The Class One Special Law Enforcement uniform shall
prominently display a patch that clearly indicates the status as
a Class One Special Law Enforcement Officer.
(4) Employment status. All Class One Special Law Enforcement
Officers shall be considered part-time employees of the Borough of
South River. No vacation or sick leave shall be accrued during the
period of employment as a Class One Special Law Enforcement
Officer, nor shall the Class One Special Law Enforcement Officer be
entitled to receive other benefits which are accrued to full-time
employees of the Borough of South River, except those required to
be provided by state law, including but not limited to workers'
compensation insurance and liability insurance.
(5) Carrying of weapons. No Class One Special Law Enforcement
Officer shall carry any firearms or other similar weapon when off
duty. Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers shall not be
allowed to carry weapons or self-defense equipment while on duty
except as expressly authorized by the Chief of Police and the
Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
(6) Fingerprinting and background investigations.
(a) Every applicant for the position of Class One Special Law
Enforcement Officer shall have his or her fingerprints taken,
which fingerprints shall be filed with the Division of State
Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(b) Every applicant for the position of Class One Special Law
Enforcement Officer must successfully pass a background
investigation conducted by the South River Police Department.
(7) Supervision; applicable regulations.
(a) Each appointed Class One Special Law Enforcement Officer
shall be under the direct supervision of the Chief of Police and
shall abide by the rules and regulations applicable to the
conduct and decorum of the regular police officers of the
municipality and such other rules and regulations as the Chief
of Police may from time to time promulgate with regard to
training, duties, and use limitations of authority.
(b) While on duty, all Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers
will be under the direct supervision of the patrol shift
supervisor or the senior police officer assigned to any given
event or assignment.
(c) All Class One Special Law Enforcements Officers shall perform
their duties in accordance with the policies, procedures, rules,
and regulations that govern the South River Police
Department.
§ 72-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-27
54:282
(d) All Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers who fail to
comply with the policies, procedures, rules, and regulations of
the South River Police Department shall be subject to the
progressive discipline process.
(8) Compensation.
(a) Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers will be entitled to
receive salary compensation at the following rates while
working their respective regular hours of employment with the
Borough of South River:
[1] During academy: minimum wage.
[2] Upon completion of academy through the first year: $10
per hour.
[3] Second year through the third year of service: $12 per
hour.
[4] Fourth year through the fifth year of service: $14 per hour.
[5] Six or more years of service: $16 per hour.
[6] Class One Sergeants: $18 per hour.
[7] Outside/quasi-duty employment: $32 per hour.
(b) All Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers shall be paid
for all hours actually worked or the sum of two hours,
whichever is greater.
(c) All Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers shall be paid
for a minimum of four hours for all outside/quasi-duty
assignments.
(d) All Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers shall be
limited to a maximum of 20 hours of special law enforcement
work in any one week. This will not include outside/quasi-duty
assignments where the Class One Special Law Enforcement
Officer's salary is being paid to the Borough of South River by a
third party.
(e) Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers who are assigned
to work at any South River public school event will be
compensated at a rate of pay determined through agreement
with the South River Police Department and the South River
Board of Education.
(f) Class One Special Law Enforcement Officers may not be
compensated from private sources unless authorized by the
Chief of Police or his or her designee.
E. Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers.
§ 72-27 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-27
54:283
(1) Application, appointment and qualifications for employment.
(a) A person may apply for the position of Class Three Special Law
Enforcement Officer by submitting a written application for
appointment or reappointment to the Chief of Police. Said
application shall be on a form prescribed by the Chief of Police.
(b) No person shall be appointed as a Class Three Special Law
Enforcement Officer unless that person meets the
qualifications of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146 et seq.44, and, specifically,
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10.
(c) If appointed, such appointment shall be for a period of one
year, beginning January 1 and terminating December 31 of the
same year, or such part of any year beginning upon date of
appointment and terminating on December 31 of the same
year.
(d) After appointment, no Class Three Special Law Enforcement
Officer may commence his or her duties unless he or she has
successfully completed a training course established by the
municipality and approved by the New Jersey Police Training
Commission.
(e) Residency. All Borough of South River Class Three Special Law
Enforcement Officers shall be residents of the State of New
Jersey.
(f) All Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers must
complete a training course for safe schools resource officers
developed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-71.8.
(g) All Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers must be
retired law enforcement officers who are less than 65 years of
age. Note: A law enforcement officer shall not be considered
retired if the officer's return to employment violates any
federal or state law or regulation which would deem the
officer's retirement as not being bona fide.
(h) All Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers must have
served as a duly qualified, fully trained, full-time officer in any
municipality or county of this state or as a member of the New
Jersey State Police and have separated from that prior service
in good standing, within three years of appointment. Note:
Until December 1, 2017, the separation period from prior
service can be within five years of appointment. "Good
standing" means to exclude a retirement resulting from injury
or incapacity.
44.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146 was repealed by L.1985, c. 439, § 14, effective October
1, 1986. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.1 et seq.
§ 72-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-27
54:284
(i) All Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers must be
physically capable of performing the functions of the position,
determined in accordance with PTC guidelines.
(j) All Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers must
possess a valid New Jersey PTC Basic Police Officer
certification or New Jersey State Police Academy certification.
(k) All Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers must be
hired only in a part-time capacity.
(2) Duties and limitations of Class Three Special Law Enforcement
Officers.
(a) Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers and personnel
are employees of the South River Police Department and are
subordinate to the Chief of Police and his or her designees.
Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers are not school
employees and not subject to the school's chain of command.
(b) Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers should not
refuse any reasonable request by a school official if the duty is
consistent with this article and the Police Department's
policies, procedures and rules and regulations.
(c) Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers shall contact
the shift supervisor for guidance if a request appears to be in
conflict with this article and/or the Police Department's
policies, procedures and rules and regulations.
(d) Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers are responsible
for security in their assigned school and shall work in
cooperation with the school security supervisor/administrator.
(e) Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers shall provide
security at school activities and functions, including, but not
limited to:
[1] School opening;
[2] Student assembly;
[3] Lunch;
[4] Recess (where applicable);
[5] School dismissal.
(f) Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers may be
reassigned to different schools and to different hours
depending on the school, its specific security needs, and the
school's specific extracurricular activity schedule.
§ 72-27 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-27
54:285
(g) Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers are also
responsible for conducting security assessments and
vulnerability studies as directed by the Chief of Police or his or
her designee.
(h) While on duty, Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers
can respond to offense or emergencies off school grounds if
they occur in the officer's presence while traveling to a school
facility, but an officer shall not otherwise be dispatched or
dedicated to any assignment off of school property.
(3) Uniforms.
(a) All Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers appointed by
the Borough of South River shall not commence their duties
until they have obtained a uniform authorized by the Borough
of South River, which uniform shall include the state insignia
issued by the New Jersey Police Training Commission.
(b) The Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officer's uniform
shall prominently display a patch that clearly indicates his or
her status as a Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officer.
(4) Employment status. All Class Three Special Law Enforcement
Officers shall be considered part-time employees of the Borough of
South River. No vacation or sick leave shall be accrued during the
period of employment as a Class Three Special Law Enforcement
Officer, nor shall the Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officer
be entitled to receive other benefits which are accrued to full-time
employees of the Borough of South River, except those required to
be provided by state law, including but not limited to workers'
compensation insurance and liability insurance.
(5) Carrying of weapons and use of authorized equipment.
(a) Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers are authorized
to carry a South River Police Department-issued handgun and
must qualify and demonstrate proficiency with the handgun
and any other authorized firearms with the same frequency as
a regular police officer, but must first comply with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6, authorizing a retired law
enforcement officer to carry a handgun.
(b) Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers are authorized
to carry batons, OC spray, handcuffs and other restraining
devices consistent with the Police Department's policies,
procedures and rules and regulations and only after
demonstrating proficiency in the use of these devices with the
same frequency as a regular police officer.
§ 72-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-27
54:286
(c) Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers are only
permitted to carry and use Department-issued and approved
firearms, ammunition, holsters and accessories.
(d) Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers are not
permitted to carry or take home the Department-issued
firearm while off duty, but said officer can possess and carry his
or her own off-duty firearm if authorized as a retired law
enforcement officer under N.J.S.A. 2C:39-6.
(6) Fingerprinting and background investigations.
(a) All applicants for the position of Class Three Special Law
Enforcement Officer must successfully pass a background
investigation conducted by the South River Police Department.
(b) As part of the background investigation, each applicant shall
have his or her fingerprints taken and forwarded to the New
Jersey State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(7) Supervision; applicable regulations.
(a) Each appointed Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officer
shall be under the supervision of the Chief of Police and shall
abide by the rules and regulations applicable to the conduct
and decorum of the regular police officers.
(b) While on duty, all Class Three Special Law Enforcement
Officers will be under the direct supervision of the patrol shift
supervisor or the senior police officer assigned to any given
event or assignment.
(c) All Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers shall
perform their duties in accordance with the policies,
procedures, rules and regulations that govern the South River
Police Department.
(d) All Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers who fail to
comply with the policies, procedures, rules and regulations of
the South River Police Department shall be subject to the
progressive discipline process.
(8) Compensation.
(a) Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers will be entitled
to receive salary compensation at a rate set by the Borough of
South River and the Chief of Police while working their
respective regular hours of employment with the Borough of
South River.
(b) All Class Three Special Law Enforcement Officers shall be paid
for all hours actually worked or the sum of two hours,
whichever is greater.
§ 72-27 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-28
54:287
§ 72-28. Police Dispatcher position created.
A. Establishment. There is hereby established by the Borough of South
River the position of full-time and part-time police dispatcher in the
Police Department for the Borough of South River. The position of
police dispatcher is a nonsworn position under the direction of the
Chief of Police that is responsible for, but not limited to, receiving and
dispatching emergency and nonemergency police, fire and EMS calls
for service by telephone, radio, and/or computer, and providing
information to the public. The position of dispatcher may be either fulltime
or part-time depending upon the needs of the department.
B. Qualifications:
(1) United States citizenship.
(2) Age of not less than 18 years. However, age restrictions shall not
conflict with current state or federal law.
(3) A minimum of a high school diploma or a GED equivalent.
(4) Vision and hearing adequate to perform essential job functions.
(5) If an applicant has a criminal conviction, other than a disqualifying
conviction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:51-2, the Police Department
shall investigate such record and consider such factors as may be
required by law to determine whether the applicant is qualified.
(6) The applicant must possess a valid motor vehicle license that is in
good standing and issued by this state.
(7) The applicant must be able to pass a comprehensive medical
examination prior to appointment as a police dispatcher.
C. Application. All applicants for appointment to the position of dispatcher
with the South River Police Department must submit a completed
application for appointment to the Chief of Police. Said application shall
be on a form promulgated by the Chief of Police.
D. Fingerprinting and background examination. Each applicant for
appointment to the position of dispatcher with the South River Police
Department shall undergo a background investigation. The items to be
considered during the background investigation will include, but not be
limited to:
(1) Applicant's criminal record.
(2) Applicant's driving history.
(3) Applicant's prior law enforcement experience.
(4) Applicant's prior work history.
(5) Applicant's current and prior credit history.
§ 72-28 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-28
54:288
§ 72-29. Domestic Violence Crisis Team.
(6) Applicant's truthfulness in completing the application.
(7) As part of the background investigation process, each applicant
shall have his or her fingerprints taken and forwarded to the New
Jersey State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
E. Duties and responsibilities. Duties and responsibilities of the dispatcher
include, but are not limited to, the following tasks and assignments:
(1) Police Dispatchers shall receive and relay messages to police patrol
vehicles or other concerned personnel in the Borough of South
River.
(2) Police Dispatchers shall operate any wireless equipment of the
Borough of South River located in the Municipal Building to
communicate with mobile wireless radio units of the Borough of
South River and such other governmental agencies as may be
necessary; shall perform responsible and clerical work of a varied
nature requiring knowledge of the related function in the Police
Department; and shall perform typing as required.
(3) Maintains a complete working knowledge of the function and
operation of the telephone, radio, computer-aided-dispatch
systems.
F. The Mayor and Council, with the recommendation of the Chief of Police,
can appoint part-time dispatchers for a period of one year, beginning
January 1 and terminating December 31 of the same year, or such part
of any year beginning upon date of appointment and terminating on
December 31 of the same year.
G. The annual salary for the position of part-time Police Dispatcher shall
be determined from time to time by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of South River and shall be paid in accordance with the terms
and provisions of the Salary Ordinance of the Borough of South River.
H. All Police Dispatchers shall be required to sign a confidentiality
agreement as promulgated by the Chief of Police.
A. There is hereby established by the Borough of South River the position
of Domestic Violence Crisis Team member in the Police Department of
the Borough of South River. There shall be as many members as
deemed necessary by the Chief of Police.
B. Duties. The duties of the Domestic Violence Crisis Team member shall
be as follows:
(1) Respond to the scene of a domestic violence situation as follows:
(a) After the assigned police officers have stabilized the violence
and the offender has been removed from the scene.
§ 72-28 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-29
54:289
(b) If the offender cannot be removed from the scene, the victim
may be transported to police headquarters to meet with a
Crisis Team member.
(c) A Crisis Team member may be contacted in the following
domestic violence circumstances:
[1] Whenever an arrest is made regardless of the offense or
degree, including the violation of a restraining order.
[2] Visible violence to person or property.
[3] Threat of violence to person or property.
[4] If the abuser is under the influence of alcohol and/or
drugs.
[5] Situations including the welfare of minor children.
[6] Custody disputes (court-controlled visitations, only if the
parties involved are unable to come to satisfactory terms).
(d) A Crisis Team member should not be contacted in the following
circumstances:
[1] Minor verbal abuse cases (name-calling).
[2] Nonviolent domestic disputes resolved by the parties at
the scene.
[3] Neighborhood disputes.
C. Domestic Violence Crisis Team members shall be dispatched as set
forth in the rules, regulations and procedures by the South River Police
Department.
D. Said Domestic Violence Crisis Team members shall be appointed for a
term of one year from the date of appointment and shall serve without
compensation.
E. Domestic Violence Crisis Team members shall have all the rights,
duties, responsibilities and protections as granted to Domestic Violence
Crisis Team members by N.J.S.A. 2C:25-17 et seq.
F. There is created a position entitled "Domestic Violence Crisis Team
Coordinator," said position to be appointed by the Mayor with advice
and consent of the Borough Council.
(1) The duties and responsibilities of Domestic Violence Crisis Team
Coordinator shall be to manage and coordinate all actions of
members of the Domestic Violence Crisis Team.
(2) The position of Domestic Violence Crisis Team Coordinator shall be
a part-time position, and the annual salary for the position shall be
determined from time to time by the Mayor and Council of the
§ 72-29 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-29
54:290
§ 72-30. School crossing guards.
There is hereby established in the Borough of South River the position
of school crossing guard. The school crossing guards shall be nonsworn
personnel under the direction and supervision of the Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police shall be responsible for determining the locations where
school crossing guards shall be utilized within the Borough of South River.
Borough of South River and shall be paid in accordance with the
terms and provisions of the Salary Ordinance of the Borough of
South River.
A. Qualifications:
(1) Age of not less than 18 years. However, age restrictions shall not
conflict with current state or federal law.
(2) A minimum of a high school diploma or a GED equivalent.
(3) Must be a citizen and resident of this state.
(4) Must be sound in body and of good health with vision and hearing
adequate to perform essential job functions.
(5) The applicant must possess a valid motor vehicle license that is in
good standing and issued by this state.
(6) Must be of good moral character, and have not been convicted of
any criminal offense involving moral turpitude.
B. Application. All applicants for appointment to the position of school
crossing guard with the South River Police Department shall be
required to submit a completed application in a form required by the
office of the Borough Administrator of the Borough of South River. This
application shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
(1) The applicant's name, address and telephone number.
(2) The applicant's social security number.
(3) The applicant's New Jersey driver's license number and date of
expiration.
(4) The applicant's employment history, listing both past and present
employers.
(5) The applicant's educational record.
(6) A minimum of three personal references.
(7) An authorization for the release of information signed by the
applicant.
§ 72-29 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-30
54:291
§ 72-31. Intermunicipal police aid.
Intermunicipal police assistance will be provided if and when the Borough
of South River has an emergency within its boundaries requiring additional
police assistance to protect life and property or to assist in suppressing a
riot or disorder and whenever another municipality, which has enacted a
similar reciprocal ordinance, may experience a similar emergency requiring
additional police assistance.
C. Fingerprinting and background examination. Each applicant for
appointment to the position of school crossing guard with the South
River Police Department shall undergo a background investigation. The
items to be considered during the background investigation will
include, but not be limited to:
(1) Applicant's criminal record.
(2) Applicant's driving history.
(3) Applicant's prior employment history.
(4) As part of the background investigation process, each applicant
shall have his or her fingerprints taken and forwarded to the New
Jersey State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
D. Appointment.
(1) Full-time school crossing guards shall be appointed by the Mayor
and Council, with the recommendation of the Chief of Police, for a
term not exceeding one year beginning January 1 and terminating
December 31 of the same year, or such part of any year beginning
upon date of appointment and terminating on December 31 of the
same year.
(2) The Mayor and Council, with the recommendation of the Chief of
Police, can also appoint part-time school crossing guards for a
period of one year, beginning January 1 and terminating December
31 of the same year, or such part of any year beginning upon date of
appointment and terminating on December 31 of the same year.
(3) The annual salary for the position of school crossing guard shall be
determined from time to time by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of South River and shall be paid in accordance with the
terms and provisions of the Salary Ordinance of the Borough of
South River.
(4) To be appointed to the position of school crossing guard, an
individual must meet the requirements established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.1.
(5) All appointed school crossing guards shall receive training in
accordance with the requirements established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-154.2.
§ 72-30 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-31
54:292
§ 72-32. Off-duty employment. [Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-12]
A. Authorization to request assistance. The Chief of Police of the Borough
of South River or the highest ranking officer on duty at the time is
hereby authorized to request assistance from the Director of Public
Safety or highest ranking officer on duty of the Police Departments of
other municipalities for intermunicipal police assistance during and/or
after an emergency situation.
B. Requests for assistance from other municipalities. The Chief of Police of
the Borough of South River or the highest ranking officer on duty at the
time shall provide assistance to another municipality or municipalities
making a valid request to supply such personnel and equipment to the
extent possible without endangering persons or property within the
Borough of South River.
C. Powers and authority. Members of the South River Police Department
supplying emergency assistance to another municipality shall have the
same powers and authority as the members of the Police Department of
the municipality in which said assistance is being rendered.
Additionally, said member shall also have, while so acting, said rights
and immunities as he/she may otherwise enjoy in the performance of
his/her normal duties within the Borough of South River.
D. Costs of assistance. The Borough of South River shall, upon providing
assistance to another municipality which has enacted a similar
intermunicipal assistance ordinance, assume the cost and expense of
providing said personnel and equipment to the requesting municipality
excepting such incidences when the requesting municipality receives
state or federal aid as reimbursement or if private concerns are
involved and the requesting municipality receives reimbursement.
Therefore, in this event, the cost incurred by the Borough shall be
submitted to the municipality which requested assistance for
reimbursement.
E. Designation of senior ranking officer. As such times as an emergency
may occur and intermunicipal police aid is requested, the Director of
Public Safety or highest ranking officer of the municipality wherein said
emergency situation exists shall be the senior ranking officer of all
members of any Police Department rendering assistance within the
boundaries of said municipality.
F. Injuries or death in performance of duties; benefits to accrue as normal.
In the event that any member of a police force summoned pursuant to
an agreement to render assistance suffers injuries or death in the
performance of his or her duties, said individual or individual's
designee or legal representative shall be entitled to such salary,
pension, rights, worker's compensation or other benefits as would have
accrued if such injury or death had occurred in the performance of his
or her normal duties.
§ 72-31 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-32
54:293
A. Purpose. For the convenience of those persons and entities which
utilize the services of off-duty law enforcement officers of the Borough
of South River Police Department, and to authorize the outside
employment of Borough police while off-duty, the Borough of South
River has established a policy regarding the use of said officers in
compliance with Attorney General Formal Opinion 1997- No. 23.
(1) Members of the South River Police Department shall be permitted
to accept police-related employment from private employers or
school districts only during off-duty hours and at such time as will
not interfere with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled
or emergency duty of the Borough.
(2) Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police shall first
obtain the approval of the Chief of Police or his or her designee,
which approval shall be granted if, in the opinion of the Chief or his
or her designee, such employment would not be inconsistent with
the efficient functioning and good reputation of the Police
Department and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the
safety of the officer or officers who are to perform the work.
B. Escrow account.
(1) To assure the timely payment of wages to police officers who
perform off-duty services and to meet the requirements of the Fair
Labor Standards Act, the Borough of South River hereby
establishes a trust fund to be known as the "Off-Duty Employment
Escrow Account," which trust fund shall be dedicated for the
receipt of fees collected from private persons or entities for the
payment of wages to police officers for off-duty or outside
employment services.
(2) Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty officer in
the South River Police Department shall execute an agreement to
be provided by the Police Department setting forth the terms and
conditions of such employment and shall also estimate the number
of hours for which law enforcement services are required, which
estimate shall be approved in writing by the Chief of Police or his or
her designee, and shall establish an escrow account with the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough of South River by depositing an
amount sufficient to cover the rates of compensation and
administrative fees set forth in Subsection D of this section for the
total estimated hours of service.
(3) In an instance where the number of hours required is unknown and
cannot be reasonably estimated or is anticipated to be in excess of
10 days, the person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty
law enforcement officer shall deposit an amount sufficient to cover
the rate of compensation and administrative fees set forth in
Subsection D for the equivalent of 10 days prior to the
§ 72-32 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-32
54:294
commencement of any work. Any unused portion of the deposit
shall be returned or credited against the final amount owed.
(4) Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers, the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall
verify that the balance in the escrow account of the person or entity
requesting services is sufficient to cover the compensation and fees
for the number of hours specified in the request for services. The
Chief of Police or his or her designee shall not post a request for
services from any person or entity unless all fees and compensation
required in the manner described above have been deposited with
the Chief Financial Officer. All payments must be remitted directly
to the Borough of South River. No officer shall provide any such
services for more hours than are specified in the request for
services.
(5) In the event that funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, service of off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease,
and requests for further or future services shall not be performed
or posted until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow
account in the manner prescribed above. In the event of an
unforeseen emergency situation that would require an officer to
remain beyond the time for which funds have been posted, the
Chief of Police or his or her designee may waive the requirements
for posting additional funds after the first 10 hours for any person
or entity exhibiting a previous satisfactory payment history.
However, payment for additional hours shall be made by the person
or entity requiring the extended service within 48 hours.
(6) The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in
order to avoid any interruption of services.
(7) Failure to pay. In the event the person or entity contracting for such
services should fail to pay any balance due for services performed
by the members of the South River Police Department, such failure
shall be forwarded to the Borough Attorney for appropriate legal
action to collect said funds.
(8) Exemption. All public utility companies that are under the
jurisdiction of and regulated by the New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities are exempt from the provisions set forth in this section
requiring advance payment to the escrow account; provided,
however, that there are no amounts previously due that are
outstanding prior to any officer engaging in any further off-duty
assignments.
C. Requests for services.
(1) All requests to the Borough for the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers in the South River Police Department for any
period shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police or his or her
§ 72-32 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-32
54:295
designee for posting at least 48 hours before such services are
required. Any law enforcement officers, when so employed by the
Borough, shall be compensated at the rates established in Chapter
155-3.2 and treated as an employee of the Borough provided,
however, the wages earned for outside employment shall not be
applied toward pension benefits of law enforcement officers so
employed.
(2) In emergency situations, request to the Borough for the services of
off-duty law enforcement officers in the South River Police
Department shall be made as necessary to the Chief of Police or his
or her designee, who shall make every effort to accommodate such
request in a reasonable manner in his or her discretion. Any law
enforcement officers, when so employed by the Borough, shall be
compensated at the following hourly rate and treated as an
employee of the Borough; provided, however, the wages earned for
outside employment shall not be applied toward pension benefits of
law enforcement officers so employed.
D. Rates of compensation; administrative fee; payment for services. Rates
of compensation and fees for contracting the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers are established in Chapter 155, § 155-3.2.
E. Cancellation. In the event that the person or entity requesting the
services of off-duty law enforcement officers fails to contact the South
River Police Department at least two hours prior to the scheduled start
time to cancel the job, or the officer works less than four hours and the
job is completed, the Borough is entitled to be paid for a minimum of
four hours at the established rate of compensation.
F. Public emergency. The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall have
the authority to order any police officer engaged in off-duty
assignments within the Borough to respond to an emergency situation
within the Borough of South River. The Chief of Police or his designee
shall also have the right to order an off-duty assignment to be
terminated whenever said assignment creates an unacceptable risk to
the health, safety and welfare of the off-duty officer and/or the citizens
of the Borough of South River. In the event that a police officer is
assigned to an emergency situation, the Police Chief or his designee
shall make note of said off-duty assignment. In any situation where an
off-duty police officer is called to an emergency situation, any
contracting person or entity shall not be responsible for the payment of
the officer's hourly rate, administrative fee or any other fees to the
Borough of South River until such time as said police officer and/or
equipment returns to the assignment with the off-duty employer.
§ 72-32 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-32
54:296
ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)45
§ 72-33. (Reserved)
§ 72-34. (Reserved)
§ 72-35. (Reserved)
45.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Special Law Enforcement Officers, adopted 5-16-1973 by
Ord. No. 1973-10 (Ch. 47, Art. V, of the 1977 Code), as amended, was repealed 9-18-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-30. See now § 72-27.
§ 72-33 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-35
54:297

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)46
§ 72-36. (Reserved)
§ 72-37. (Reserved)
§ 72-38. (Reserved)
§ 72-39. (Reserved)
46.Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Police Matron, adopted 10-11-1978 by Ord. No. 1978-28 (Ch.
47, Art. VI, of the 1977 Code), was repealed 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-30.
§ 72-36 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-39
54:299

ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)47
§ 72-40. (Reserved)
§ 72-41. (Reserved)
§ 72-42. (Reserved)
§ 72-43. (Reserved)
47.Editor's Note: Former Art. VI, Parking Enforcement Officer, adopted 6-15-1988 by Ord. No.
1988-15 (Ch. 47, Art. VII, of the 1977 Code), as amended, was repealed 9-18-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-30.
§ 72-40 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-43
54:301

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)48
§ 72-44. (Reserved)
§ 72-45. (Reserved)
§ 72-46. (Reserved)
48.Editor's Note: Former Art. VII, Police Dispatcher, adopted 8-18-1983 by Ord. No. 1993-14
(Ch. 47, Art. VII, of the 1977 Code), was repealed 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-30.
§ 72-44 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-46
54:303

ARTICLE VIII
(Reserved)49
§ 72-47. (Reserved)
§ 72-48. (Reserved)
§ 72-49. (Reserved)
49.Editor's Note: Former Art. VIII, Domestic Violence Crisis Team, adopted 2-11-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998-3 (Ch. 47, Art. IX, of the 1977 Code), was repealed 9-18-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-30. See now § 72-37.
§ 72-47 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-49
54:305

ARTICLE IX
(Reserved)50
§ 72-50. (Reserved)
§ 72-51. (Reserved)
§ 72-52. (Reserved)
§ 72-53. (Reserved)
50.Editor's Note: Former Art. IX, Intermunicipal Police Aid, adopted 4-8-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-8 (Ch. 47, Art. X, of the 1977 Code), was repealed 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-30.
See now § 72-39.
§ 72-50 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-53
54:307

ARTICLE X
Fire Cadets
[Adopted 9-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-25 (Ch. 47, Art. XI, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 72-54. Establishment of Fire Cadet Program.
It is hereby established within and under the direction of the South River
Fire Department a program to be commonly known as the "Fire Cadet
Program." Said program will be coordinated by a member of the South River
Fire Department along with specific advisors who shall also be members of
the South River Fire Department. The Fire Cadet Program shall also adhere
to the minimum requirements as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-95 et seq.
§ 72-55. Membership.
§ 72-56. Duties/restrictions.
A. Qualifications.
(1) Members of the South River Fire Cadet Program must adhere to all
minimum requirements as set forth by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-96 et seq.,
along with the following qualifications. Inasmuch as the New Jersey
State statutes are minimum qualifications, any qualifications
contained herein which are more stringent shall be the controlling
qualifications for said Fire Cadet Program.
(2) No person shall hereafter become a member of the South River
Fire Department Cadet Program unless said person shall:
(a) Be between the ages of 14 and 17 years. [Amended
11-29-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-38]
(b) Maintain a C+ grade in each individual course during each
individual marking period.
(c) Have written parental/guardian permission as required by
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-96.
A. No member of the Fire Cadet Program shall be allowed to:
(1) Be within the confines of a fire scene.
(2) Ride on any fire apparatus, except during the parade or a wetdown,
and in such incidence, in a belted position.
(3) Respond to the firehouse during school hours.
(4) Be in the firehouse unless there is a cadet advisor present, and with
the advisor's permission.
(5) Place themselves in any dangerous situation with respect to any
fire procedure.
§ 72-54 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-56
54:309
B. Members of the South River Fire Cadets shall be allowed to:
(1) Respond to the firehouse until 9:00 p.m. during school, except if
there is a fire, they may remain until 11:00 p.m. with their parent's
permission. On weekends and during summer vacation, they may
remain at the firehouse until 11:00 p.m. with parental permission.
(2) Obtain training for dispatching and truck procedures
(maintenance), and the fundamentals of fire fighting, preparing
them to become regular members of the South River Fire
Department upon attaining the age of 18 or soon thereafter as they
may wish.
C. Cadets shall listen to all fire directives given by the South River Fire
Chief, all line officers, South River Cadet Program coordinators and
advisors.
§ 72-56 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-56
54:310
ARTICLE XI
Junior Firemen
[Adopted 11-29-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-38 (Ch. 47, Art. XII, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 72-57. Establishment of program.
§ 72-58. Membership.
§ 72-59. Duties and restrictions.
A. It is hereby established within and under the direction of the South
River Fire Department a program to be commonly known as the "Junior
Firemen Program." Said program will be coordinated by a member of
the South River Fire Department along with specific advisors who shall
also be members of the South River Fire Department.
B. The Junior Firemen Program shall also adhere to the minimum
requirements as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-95 et seq.
A. Qualifications.
(1) Members of the South River Junior Firemen Program must adhere
to all minimum requirements as set forth by N.J.S.A. 40A:15-96 et
seq. along with the following qualifications. Inasmuch as the New
Jersey State statutes are minimum qualifications, any qualifications
contained herein which are more stringent shall be controlling
qualifications for said Junior Firemen Program.
(2) No person shall hereafter become a member of the South River
Junior Firemen Program unless said person shall:
(a) Be between the ages of 16 and 17 years of age.
(b) Maintain a C+ or better grade in each individual course during
each individual marking period.
(c) Have written parental/guardian permission as required by
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-96 and provided by the Borough of South River.
A. No member of the Junior Firemen Program shall be allowed to:
(1) Be within the confines of a fire scene.
(2) Be allowed to respond to the firehouse during school hours.
(3) Be allowed to ride on any fire apparatus without being in a belted
position.
(4) Be allowed in the firehouse unless there is a Junior Firemen advisor
present, and with the advisor's permission.
§ 72-57 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-59
54:311
(5) Place himself/herself in any dangerous situation with respect to any
fire procedure.
B. Members of the South River Junior Firemen shall be allowed to:
(1) Respond to the fire house until 9:00 p.m. during school, except that
if there is a fire alarm they may remain until 11:00 p.m. with their
parent's/guardian's permission. On weekends and during summer
vacations, they may remain at the firehouse until 11:00 p.m. with
parental/guardian permission.
(2) Obtain training for dispatching a truck procedures (maintenance)
and the fundamentals of fire fighting, preparing them to become
regular members of the South River Fire Department upon
obtaining the age of 18 or as soon thereafter as they may wish.
C. Junior firemen shall listen to all fire directives given by the South River
Fire Chief, all line officers, South River Junior Firemen Program
coordinators and advisors.
D. Junior firemen may be allowed to ride on fire apparatus in a belted
position to and from a fire scene. However, said junior firemen may not
fight or aid in the fighting of a fire and may not go within the confines of
the fire scene. Said junior firemen shall be allowed to stay with the
truck and perform routine maintenance on equipment and obtaining or
replacing fire apparatus from the fire truck which may be needed by
firemen at the site of said vehicle.
§ 72-59 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-59
54:312
ARTICLE XII
Administrative Assistant/Special Projects
[Adopted 9-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-28 (Ch. 47, Art. XIIA, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 72-60. Creation of position.
The position of Administrator Assistant/Special Projects is hereby created
and the employment of a person or persons trained and educated to perform
responsible and various clerical work of moderate complexity involving the
processing and keeping of various police records; assist in the Borough
departments (particularly the Department of Finance) and do related work
and typing as required. Said position shall also require the employee to
perform any and all clerical functions as directed within the scope of the
operations of the Administrative Bureau of the Division of Police within the
Department of Public Safety and assist the Department of Finance and any
other Borough departments as required.
§ 72-61. Appointment; removal.
The Administrative Assistant/Special Projects employee shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council for
an indefinite term and may not be removed except in accordance with
the statute and such case made and provided or by majority vote of the
authorizing membership of the Council.
§ 72-62. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Administrative Assistant/Special Projects shall
include but not be limited to:
A. File confidential police records pertaining to criminal matters.
B. Organize assigned clerical work and develop effective work methods.
C. Compose replies to routine correspondence.
D. Look up information.
E. Prepare payroll records.
F. Assist in the operation of certain utility functions.
G. Occasionally operate varied types of office machines and equipment.
H. Refer errors and irregularities to superiors.
I. Maintain, classify, index and cross-reference records and files.
J. Type documents from varied forms of copy.
§ 72-60 LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM § 72-62
54:313
§ 72-63. Compensation; salary.
The Administrative Assistant/Special Projects employee within the Borough
of South River shall receive as compensation for services, an annual salary,
which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance
governing the salaries.51
K. Will be required to learn to utilize various types of electronic and/or
manual recording and computerized information systems used by the
agency, office, or related units.
51.Editor's Note: Former Art. XIII, Rescue Squad, adopted 5-30-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-26
(Ch. 47, Art. XIII, of the 1977 Code), as amended, and former Art. XIV, Rescue Squad
Cadet Program, adopted 7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-31 (Ch. 47, Art. XIV, of the 1977
Code), which immediately followed this section, were repealed 1-27-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-02. Former Art. XV, Municipal Ambulance Division, adopted 12-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-46, was repealed 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-14.
§ 72-62 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 72-63
54:314
Chapter 77
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 72-63 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 72-63
77:315

ARTICLE I
Scope of Department
[Added 11-21-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-63]
§ 77-1. Municipal services.
The Department of Public Works shall encompass the following municipal
services:
A. Streets and roads.
B. Sanitation.
C. Sewer and water.
D. Water treatment plant.
E. Electric.
F. Street cleaning.
G. Recycling.
H. Mechanics.
§ 77-1 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 77-1
77:317

ARTICLE II
Office of Director
§ 77-2. Creation of position. [Added 11-21-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-63]
The position of the Director of the Department of Public Works of the
Borough of South River is hereby created, and the employment of a person
professionally trained and educated and who shall qualify by such
requirements as set forth herein in order to fill such position is hereby
authorized. In the event that the Director is employed full-time, the Director
shall devote full-time to the interests of the Borough and shall not hold any
other employment. In the event that the Director is employed part-time,
the hours of employment shall be as set forth in the Director's employment
contract.
§ 77-3. Appointment; removal. [Added 11-21-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-63]
There shall be a Director of the Department of Public Works who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council
for an indefinite term and who may not be removed except in accordance
with the statute in such case made and provided or by a majority vote
of the authorized membership of the Council. The resolution of removal
shall become effective three months after its adoption by the Council.
The Council may provide that the resolution shall have immediate effect;
provided, however, that the Council shall cause to be paid to the Director
forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary for the next three calendar
months following adoption of the resolution.
§ 77-4. Tenure of office. [Added 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-17]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6, any person holding the position
of Director of Public Works who has held that position continuously for a
period of five years or more, shall continue to hold the office, position or
employment, not withstanding he is serving for a fixed term, during good
behavior and efficiency and shall not be removed therefrom for political or
other reasons except for good cause, upon written charges filed with the
Municipal Clerk and after a public, fair and impartial hearing, except at any
such person holding that position may be retired when he or she shall have
attained 70 years of age.
§ 77-5. Powers and duties. [Added 11-21-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-63]
The Director of the Department of Public Works shall:
A. Set up and maintain adequate inventory and control thereof of all
materials and supplies needed for the maintenance and repair of all
public works under his supervision.
§ 77-2 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 77-5
77:319
§ 77-6. Qualifications; salary. [Added 11-21-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-63; amended 4-17-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-10]
B. Submit to the Chairman of the appropriate Council committee a
monthly report of all work performed and services furnished, as well as
inspections made during the previous month.
C. Submit to the appropriate Council committee his recommendations for
budget appropriations for the ensuing year.
D. Recommend for approval the expenditure of all funds by voucher
chargeable against the public works budget.
E. Inspect or be responsible for the inspection of all sewer lines,
waterlines and electric facilities in the Borough, either individually or in
conjunction with other designated officials.
F. Receive all complaints from Borough residents and taxpayers relating
to the operations under his jurisdiction, investigate the same, take
appropriate action and report the results to the Chairman of the Public
Works Committee.
G. Attend Council meetings and meetings of Council committees when
required.
H. Supervise the operation, maintenance and repair of any Boroughowned
equipment used in the performance of the work assigned to him.
I. Set up, keep and maintain all the necessary books, records, filed notes,
maps, surveys and similar records necessary to perform the duties of
his office, and turn over all such records to his successor or the
Chairman of the Committee upon the termination of his employment
with the Borough.
J. Recommend to the appropriate committee Chairman the need for any
repairs and replacements to the Borough-owned equipment, structures,
buildings or grounds.
K. Supervise the performance of the work of any personnel assigned to his
jurisdiction.
L. Take charge of and be responsible for the construction, development,
expansion, operation, maintenance and improvement of all streets,
roads, curbs, sidewalks and parks, the cutting of brush, mowing of
grass and the removal of snow, the electrical distribution system,
sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system, water distribution system
and the care of other public works in the Borough, including Boroughowned
buildings, subject to the orders and directions of the Council.
M. Prepare and supervise the work schedules of the various municipal
employees under the control and jurisdiction of the Department of
Public Works and assign said personnel where the Director deems
necessary.
§ 77-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 77-6
77:320
§ 77-7. Report to Council; political activity. [Added 11-21-1990 by
Ord. No. 1990-63]
§ 77-8. Secretary.
A. The Director of the Department of Public Works shall be chosen on the
basis of his/her qualifications and ability and shall be required to have:
(1) A bachelor's degree in electrical engineering from an approved
college or university;
(2) A bachelor's degree in engineering from an approved college or
university;
(3) At least five years' work experience and/or education within the
field of public works; or
(4) Held the position of Director of Public Works in any other New
Jersey Municipality for a period of at least five years.
B. If the individual qualifies under Subsection A(3) or (4) above, said
individual shall also be required to have taken and successfully
completed the appropriate college courses in order to obtain the
designation of Certified Public Works Manager from an approved
university or college.
C. The Director shall receive as compensation for his services an annual
salary which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of the
ordinance governing salaries.52
A. The Director of the Department of Public Works shall report to the
Mayor and Council administratively, unless the Borough of South River
employs a Business Administrator, in which case the Director shall
report to said Business Administrator.
B. Political activity shall be controlled by Article X of Chapter 68,
Personnel Regulations.53
A. Duties. The duties of the Secretary shall be as follows:
(1) Typing; filing; use of the microcomputer, word processor and
various reproductive equipment.
(2) Routing of telephone and communication matters.
(3) Scheduling appointments and handling all visitors.
(4) Assisting in preparation of reports, inventory lists and other
documents.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 54, Salaries and Compensation.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 77-6 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 77-8
77:321
B. Experience. The Secretary shall have a high school diploma and three
years' secretarial experience.
§ 77-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 77-8
77:322
ARTICLE III
Employees
[Added 3-27-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-9]
§ 77-9. Class A mechanic. [Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-6]
A. Qualifications. A gasoline and diesel engine Class A mechanic is
understood to be a person capable of providing all service and expertise
to inspect, examine and repair all Borough auto and construction
vehicles with various motive means, including diesel, gasoline, electric
or propane engines fabricated by various manufacturers.
B. Experience. The Class A mechanic shall have a minimum of four years
as a Class A mechanic in verifiable employment with a history of
progressive advancement.
C. Education. The Class A mechanic shall have a minimum of high school
education, preferably technically oriented. Supplemental training and
technical education will be considered in determining compensation.
D. Duties.
(1) The Class A mechanic is expected to repair and troubleshoot (i.e.,
inspect and determine problems and be capable of resolving the
same by repair and/or replacement) diesel engines, gasoline
engines, automotive electrical systems, ignition systems, driving
systems, transmissions, gear trains, clutches, hydraulic and
manually operated systems, including braking systems, etc., for all
types of Borough vehicles, including autos, trucks and
miscellaneous heavy equipment, including but not limited to
garbage trucks, forklifts, payloaders, graders, etc.
(2) The Class A mechanic shall be capable of maintaining vehicle in a
safe operating manner.
(3) The Class A mechanic shall have the ability to implement
preventative maintenance procedures for all vehicles.
(4) The Class A mechanic shall be capable of installing and maintaining
various truck and auto miscellaneous components, such as lights,
mirrors and accessories, including snowplows, sanders and other
auxiliary devices normally required by the Department of Public
Works.
(5) The Class A mechanic shall be capable of driving, inspecting and
road testing all types of vehicles and shall prepare reports on
conditions and aid in determining needed repairs and regular
replacement procedures.
(6) The Class A mechanic shall assist other mechanics or helpers in
effecting needed repairs or reconstruction or modifications.
§ 77-9 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 77-9
77:323
§ 77-10. Lead mechanic. [Added 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-6]
(7) The Class A mechanic shall be capable of preparing requisitions
and cost estimates for the purchase of necessary parts,
components, etc., as needed to effect repairs and safe operation.
(8) The Class A mechanic shall be capable of preparing and aiding in
the maintenance of a current status report of each Borough vehicle
on which he works, which shall be posted in the Borough garage for
inspection.
(9) The Class A mechanic shall have the ability to prepare written
reports and recommendations to his supervisors for the repair,
disposition and other relevant actions of all vehicles and garage
facilities.
(10) The Class A mechanic shall perform such other duties that may be
assigned by his superiors, including but not limited to the Director
of Public Works, the Business Administrator or their designee.
E. Working days/hours. The Class A mechanic is expected to work 40
hours per week from 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., five days per week, Monday
through Friday with 1/2 hour for lunch or said hours assigned by the
Director of Public Works or in his absence, the Business Administrator.
He shall also be required, during emergencies such as snowstorms,
hurricanes and other natural disasters, etc., to work round the clock to
maintain the Borough's vehicles in operating status.
F. Other conditions.
(1) The mechanic must have a valid driver's license.
(2) The mechanic must have a full set of his own tools to perform
requested services.
(3) He may also be required to perform other duties as directed by the
Director of Public Works or, in his absence, the Business
Administrator. These may include, but are not limited to, driving
any of the Borough vehicles or operating any of its heavy
equipment vehicles or performing any other service required by the
Borough consistent with the employee's skill, experience and
capability to operate safely.
(4) He must have an aptitude for welding and cutting, using various
systems (heli-arc, gas, etc.) as required.
A. Qualifications. A lead mechanic shall be a gasoline and diesel engine
Class A mechanic capable of providing all service and expertise to
inspect, examine and repair all Borough auto and construction vehicles
of various motive means, including diesel, gasoline, electric or propane
engines fabricated by various manufacturers. Said individual shall also
have supervisory capabilities and organizational skills allowing said
§ 77-9 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 77-10
77:324
individual to supervise other Borough mechanics and to implement
and maintain a maintenance and repair record system on all Borough
vehicles.
B. Experience. The lead mechanic shall have a minimum of four years as a
Class A mechanic and verifiable employment with a history of
progressive advancement.
C. Education. The lead mechanic shall have a minimum of high school
education, preferably technically oriented. Supplemental training,
technical education and supervisory experience shall be considered in
determining compensation.
D. Duties. The lead mechanic shall have all the duties of a Class A
mechanic and in addition to such shall also have the following duties.
(1) Shall have the ability to implement and plan preventive
maintenance procedures for all vehicles, maintain records with
respect to the same and report with respect to the same to the
Director of Public Works, or in his absence, the Business
Administrator.
(2) Shall be responsible for scheduling routine maintenance on all
vehicles.
(3) Shall prepare all requisitions and cost estimates for the purchase of
necessary parts, components, etc., as required to effect repairs and
continued safe operation.
(4) Shall prepare, maintain and host a current status report on each
Borough vehicle and provide the same to the Director of Public
Works, or in his absence, the Business Administrator.
(5) Shall prepare written reports and recommendations to
management for the repair, disposition and other relevant actions
on all vehicles and garage facilities.
(6) Shall perform such others duties that may be assigned by the
Director of Public Works, or in his absence, the Business
Administrator.
E. Working days/hours. The lead mechanic is expected to work 40 hours
per week from 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., five days per week, Monday
through Friday, with 1/2 hour for lunch or other hours as assigned by
the Director of Public Works or, in his absence, the Business
Administrator. The lead mechanic is also required, during emergencies
such as snowstorms, hurricanes, natural disasters, etc., to work if
necessary around the clock to maintain the Borough vehicles in
operating status.
F. Other conditions. The lead mechanic shall meet all requirements or
other conditions as required of a Class A mechanic.
§ 77-10 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 77-11
77:325
§ 77-11. Recycling Coordinator. [Added 10-8-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-24]
A. Position created. There shall be created within the Borough of South
River the position of Recycling Coordinator, which shall be within the
Department of Public Works and under the supervision and control of
the Superintendent of Streets and Roads.
B. Purpose. The Borough of South River, as a participant in the Middlesex
County Solid Waste Program, intends to implement a recycling center
and to provide its citizens with various recycling programs. In order to
provide these services, a Recycling Coordinator is required.
C. Responsibilities. The Recycling Coordinator shall be responsible to
plan, implement, coordinate and supervise the operation of the Borough
of South River's recycling program and operations center, including the
development of data and support facilities and personnel, as well as to
keep records and prepare applications to obtain federal and state
grants and/or loans for such.
D. Reportability. The Recycling Coordinator shall report to the appropriate
Borough official, as designated by the Mayor and Council, or his
designee.
E. Education. He shall have a minimum of a high school education. He
shall also be required to supplement his education in appropriate
disciplines, including recycling, legal restrictions and licensing
requirements for the current and anticipated programs.
F. Experience. He shall have a minimum of four years of verifiable
employment in a related field or fields, with a history of progressive
advancement through subservient classifications.
G. Duties.
(1) The Recycling Coordinator shall be in charge of all recycling
operations and facilities in the Borough of South River, including
but not limited to the following:
(a) The erection, installation, operation and maintenance of the
Borough's present and proposed recycling center.
(b) The collection, storage and disposal of all recyclable materials
within the Borough, including paper, cardboard, various types
of glass bottles, ferrous and nonferrous (primarily aluminum)
scrap, appliances (white goods), oil, tires, leaves, compost
material, wood chips, etc.
(c) The coordination and scheduling of the newspaper/cardboard
recycling effort in the Borough.
(d) The completion and filing, in a timely fashion, of the New
Jersey tonnage grant on a yearly basis.
§ 77-11 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 77-11
77:326
(e) The coordination of any other related recycling programs.
(2) The Recycling Coordinator shall plan, direct, supervise and be
responsible to the appropriate Borough official, as designated by
the Mayor and Council, for the work, efficiency, actions,
performance and conduct of all personnel assigned to the
Borough's recycling programs. His duties with respect to use by the
Borough of Middlesex County Probation Department community
service workers in conjunction with the Borough's recycling
program shall include the following:
(a) To schedule and arrange with the Middlesex County Probation
Department to have the necessary number of community
service personnel to complete projects, as required by
department heads, on a weekly basis.
(b) To supervise community service personnel on a weekly basis to
assure completion of assigned projects in a timely and orderly
fashion.
(c) To complete the necessary paperwork required by the
Middlesex County Probation Department with regard to hours
worked and type of work performed by community service
personnel.
(3) The Recycling Coordinator shall prepare and submit requisitions
for all material used in the normal operation of all recycling
activities and shall be directly responsible for an inventory control
system and its updating, covering the materials and supplies used,
on hand and on order and the cost of the same.
(4) The Recycling Coordinator shall maintain such records as may be
required to satisfy all federal, state and local laws and
requirements regarding the collection, storage, sale and disposal of
all recycled materials.
(5) The Recycling Coordinator shall be directly responsible for the
appraisal and evaluation, with and under the direction of the
Personnel Department and the appropriate Borough official, as
designated by the Mayor and Council, of the quantity and quality of
work done by the personnel assigned to him. He shall assist in the
employees evaluation report of all personnel assigned to him.
(6) The Recycling Coordinator shall be directly responsible to the
appropriate Borough official, as designated by the Mayor and
Council, for the planning and the preparation of the annual budget
to be established for the Office of Recycling Programs.
(7) The Recycling Coordinator shall maintain and certify the accuracy
of the daily time report or record and other statistical reports as
may be required.
§ 77-11 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 77-11
77:327
(8) The Recycling Coordinator shall have the authority to direct and
supervise the performance and on-the-job training of personnel
assigned to him.
(9) The Recycling Coordinator shall be responsible to keep the
governing body, various department heads and other affected
Borough offices and personnel informed as to new developments
and improved techniques in connection with his activities and
responsibilities.
(10) The Recycling Coordinator shall be directly responsible for those
other duties that may be assigned to him by the Mayor and
Borough Council from time to time.
H. Other requirements. The Recycling Coordinator shall:
(1) Have a valid New Jersey driver's license.
(2) Be able to plan and coordinate his activities and to provide
requested services to conform to the schedules and duties of
Borough departments.
(3) Have an aptitude for tactfully dealing with the public, press,
regulatory authorities and Borough officials, as required in such a
highly visible position.
I. Working days/hours. The Recycling Coordinator shall be required to
work those hours necessary to complete his duties as set forth in this
job description, and as may be assigned to him from time to time. He
shall also be required to maintain weekly time records of all work
performed by him, and to submit the same, on a monthly basis, to the
appropriate Borough official, as designated by the Mayor and Council.
§ 77-11 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 77-11
77:328
ARTICLE IV
Deputy Director
[Added 7-17-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-25]
§ 77-12. Creation of position.
The position of Deputy Director of Public Works of the Borough of South
River is hereby created, and the employment of a person professionally
trained and educated and who will qualify by such requirements as set
forth herein in order to fill such position is hereby authorized on either
a temporary or permanent basis. In the event that the Deputy Director
is employed full time, the Deputy Director shall devote full time to the
interests of the Borough and shall not hold any other employment. In
the event that the Deputy Director is employed part-time, the hours of
employment shall be as set forth in the Deputy Director's employment
contract.
§ 77-13. Appointment; removal; vacancy.
There shall be a Deputy Director of the Department of Public Works, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council for a term of one year. Said individual may not be removed except
in accordance with the statute in such case made and provided or by
a majority of vote of the authorized membership of the Council or upon
the expiration of his/her one-year term of appointment. In the event that
the Mayor fails to appoint an individual to said position within 30 days
of the vacancy of the position of Deputy Director of Public Works, said
appointment may be by nomination of a Borough Council member and with
the advice and consent of the Council.
§ 77-14. Powers and duties.
A. The Deputy Director of the Department of Public Works shall assist the
Director of the Department of Public Works with the duties of the
Director's office. The Deputy Director shall act in the capacity of the
Director in the Director's absence or if the position is vacant and in
such capacity, except as modified herein.
B. The Deputy Director of the Department of Public Works shall be
responsible for supervising the following municipal services:
(1) Streets and roads.
(2) Sanitation.
(3) Sewer and water.
(4) Water treatment plant.
(5) Electric.
(6) Street cleaning.
§ 77-12 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 77-14
77:329
(7) Recycling.
(8) Mechanics.
C. The Deputy Director of the Department of Public Works shall:
(1) Set up and maintain adequate inventory and control thereof of all
materials and supplies needed for the maintenance and repair of all
public works under his/her supervision.
(2) Submit to the chairman of the appropriate Council committee a
monthly report of all work performed and services furnished, as
well as inspections made during the previous month.
(3) Submit to the appropriate Council committee his/her
recommendations for budget appropriations for the ensuing year.
(4) Recommend for approval the expenditure of all funds by voucher
chargeable against the public works budget.
(5) Be responsible for the inspections to be performed of all sewer
lines, waterlines and electric facilities in the Borough, either
individually or in conjunction with other designated officials,
employees and/or consultants as may be necessary.
(6) Receive all complaints from Borough residents and taxpayers
relating to the operations under his/her jurisdiction, investigate the
same, take appropriate action and report the results to the
Chairman of the Public Works Committee.
(7) Attend Council business meetings and, when required, attend
Council meetings and meetings of Council committees.
(8) Supervise the operation, maintenance and repair of any Boroughowned
equipment used in the performance of the work assigned to
him/her.
(9) Set up, keep and maintain all the necessary books, records, filed
notes, maps, surveys and similar records necessary to perform the
duties of his/her office, and turn over all such records to his/her
successor or the Chairman of the Committee upon the termination
of his/her employment with the Borough.
(10) Recommend to the appropriate committee chairman the need for
any repairs and replacements to the Borough-owned equipment,
structures, buildings or grounds.
(11) Supervise the performance of the work of any personnel assigned
to his/her jurisdiction.
(12) Take charge of and be responsible for the construction,
development, expansion, operation, maintenance and improvement
of all streets, roads, curbs, sidewalks, parks, cutting of brush,
mowing of grass, removal of snow, electrical distribution system,
§ 77-14 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 77-14
77:330
§ 77-15. Qualifications; salary.
§ 77-16. Supervision; political activity.
sanitary sewer system, storm sewer system, water distribution
system and the care of other public works in the Borough, including
Borough-owned buildings, either individually or in conjunction with
other designated officials, employees and/or consultants as may be
necessary, subject to the orders and directions of the Council.
(13) Prepare and supervise the work schedules of the various municipal
employees under the control and jurisdiction of the Department of
Public Works and assign said personnel where the Director deems
necessary.
A. The Deputy Director of the Department of Public Works shall be chosen
on the basis of his/her qualifications and ability and shall be required to
have at least five years' work experience or education in the field of
public works.
B. The Deputy Director shall receive as compensation for his/her services
an annual salary which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions
of the ordinance governing salaries.
A. The Deputy Director of the Department of Public Works shall report to
the Mayor and Council administratively, unless the Borough of South
River employs a Director of the Department of Public Works or Business
Administrator, in which case the Deputy Director would report to said
Director or Business Administrator.
B. Political activity shall be controlled by Article X of Chapter 68,
Personnel Regulations.54
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 77-14 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 77-16
77:331

ARTICLE V
Office Manager
[Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-22]
§ 77-17. Position created.
The position of Office Manager in the Department of Public Works is hereby
created. This individual has primary responsibility for coordinating and
directing office operations of the Department of Public Works. The primary
focus of the work is to assure efficient office operations and meeting the
needs of the Director of Public Works, departmental staff and the public.
This individual may work under the stress of continual public and
interdepartmental contact and the pressure to meet strict deadlines and
may work with detailed, complex and sensitive materials, exercising
considerable judgment and human relation skills as a routine part of the job,
anticipating and identifying problems and where appropriate implementing
solutions.
§ 77-18. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Office Manager of the Department of Public
Works shall include but not be limited to:
A. Directs department in the absence of the Public Works Director and
Deputy Public Works Director.
B. Responsible for ensuring the internal Public Works accounting function
in managed and any other applicable rules, regulations, policies and/or
procedures.
C. Responsible for ensuring the Public Works Department complies with
all applicable rules, regulations, policies, and/or procedures in its
record keeping and retention.
D. Public Works Department budget responsibilities include: assist with
preparation of budget, coordinate submittal of all Public Works
budgets; verify figures; ensure continuity; ensure department goals are
reflected; write and/or edit all narratives; verify Department
complement; and assist in balancing within the department.
E. Responsible for ensuring the effective provision of clerical support to all
Public Works Divisions (Fleet Maintenance, Electric Utility, Road
Department, Sanitation department, Sewer Department and Water
Treatment Plant and Operations and Maintenance).
F. Responsible for ensuring the Department meets all required rules and
regulations.
G. Answers complaints and resolves problems involving the activities of
the Public Works Department.
H. Performs related duties as required.
§ 77-17 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 77-18
77:333
I. Recycling Coordinator.
J. Greet visitors and take incoming phone, fax and radio messages, and
promptly take care of a request or relay the message to the appropriate
person. Review incoming mail, refer to appropriate person, and answer
routine correspondence at the direction of the Director.
K. As directed, schedule regular and nonroutine work and organize
workload to ensure regular deadlines are met and emergencies are
handled promptly and effectively.
L. Plans, organizes, coordinates and assigns the work of assigned staff;
provides guidance as needed.
M. Coordinates the office operations of the department. Develops and
maintains office forms and procedures, and assists with administrative
tasks involving personnel, budgeting and facilities as requested by the
Director of Public Works staff. May develop and implement policies and
procedures for effective customer service.
N. For a large volume of purchase or varying complexity: prepare
requisitions for the purchase of supplies and equipment; maintain
records and files of expenditures; prepare purchase orders; get
approval signatures; verify invoices; order supplies and equipment;
check in deliveries; and do all necessary calculations.
O. Develop and implement office procedures, routines and filing systems
as necessary; assesses efficiency of department procedures and
recommends changes to management; institutes new or revised
procedures to increase office efficiency and effectiveness.
P. Provides information on departmental services and programs to the
public and departmental staff; interprets policies and explains
procedures; collects fees, provides copy of public materials, resolves
conflicts and problems.
Q. Compiles data from a variety of sources and prepares summary reports
as directed. May involve statistical calculations and tabulations in
accordance with established formulas.
R. May post and balance financial records, compile data for department
budgets, maintain records of expenditure.
S. Maintains follow-up system on reports or actions that are required on a
periodic basis, such as employee status changes.
T. Maintains records on vital departmental administrative operations such
as vendors, inventory, employee training, work orders and accounts
payable and updating operating procedures.
U. May handle the processing of new employees and volunteers, including
establishing of Department records and providing basic information
regarding office policies and benefits.
§ 77-18 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 77-18
77:334
§ 77-19. Required knowledge, abilities and skills.
The Office Manager of the Department of Public Works shall have the
following knowledge, abilities and skills including but not limited to:
V. May prepare and maintain employee time cards for department, obtain
approval for all sick leave, overtime etc., and prepare payroll report for
Finance department's use. Perform regular tasks including:
maintaining fuel card system, type or otherwise prepare a variety of
correspondence, bid documents, contracts, forms and reports.
W. Prepares required purchase requisitions for supplies, equipment,
contract personnel, expense reimbursement; responsible for
replenishment of office supplies; processes and maintain records on
invoices monthly.
X. May perform portions of the work of higher classified positions
occasionally, as assigned.
Y. May perform duties of similar complexity in any Borough Department
as required or assigned.
A. Considerable knowledge of department services, programs, policies
and procedures.
B. Knowledge of effective principles and practices of office management
and work organization.
C. Knowledge of effective supervisory methods, practices and techniques.
D. Knowledge of business English, composition, spelling, grammar and
punctuation.
E. Knowledge of bookkeeping principles and practices.
F. Ability to plan, organize, coordinate, assign and evaluate the work of
assigned staff.
G. Ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing.
H. Ability to prioritize tasks, meshes numerous tasks assignments from
various sources, cope with interruptions and meet rigid deadlines.
I. Ability to analyze complex office problems and develop and implement
sound solutions.
J. Ability to establish effective working relationship with other employees,
elected officials and the general public. Respond courteously to
inquiries, provide information within scope of responsibility and refer
calls as appropriate to other parties.
K. Ability to maintain confidentiality and to work in a sometimes stressful
environment.
§ 77-18 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 77-19
77:335
§ 77-20. Education, experience and training.
The Office Manager of the Department of Public Works shall have the
following education, experience and training:
§ 77-21. Dress code.
Business Professional. Attire must be suitable for the position in order to
maintain the professional image of the Public Works Department (no jeans,
shorts, T-shirts).
§ 77-22. Compensation; salary.
The Office of the department of public Works shall receive as compensation
for services an annual salary, which shall be fixed in accordance with the
provisions of the ordinances governing the salaries.
L. Ability to operate a personal computer and various application software
as well as other standard office equipment.
M. Ability to communicate effectively with diverse and sometimes irate
individuals and to handle calmly and efficiently situations ranging from
routine to emergency.
A. An Associate's Degree in office management or related field (or
equivalent experience) and five years office experience, including
supervisory experience; or any combination of education and
experience which would provide the applicant with the desired skills,
knowledge and ability required to perform the job.
B. Must possess a valid New Jersey driver's license.
§ 77-19 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 77-22
77:336
ARTICLE VI
Supervising Groundskeeper
[Added 6-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-22]
§ 77-23. Position created.
There is created within the Department of Public Works the position of
Supervising Groundskeeper shall under the direction of Department of
Public Works supervise and works with a group of employees engaged in
the care and maintenance of grounds and athletic fields and shall perform
any other related duties as required.
§ 77-24. Power and duties.
The powers and duties of the Supervising Groundskeeper shall include but
not be limited to:
§ 77-25. Required knowledge, ability and skills.
A. Supervises and works with the group of employees engaged in the care
and maintenance of grounds and athletic fields. Shall perform building
and grounds duties as assigned.
B. Supervises the cutting of grass, weeding of lawn areas, raking of leaves
and debris, and disposal of refuse.
C. Plans and supervises the planting of flowers, trees and shrubs, the
pruning of trees and shrubs, and the fertilizing of lawns.
D. Supervised snow shoveling, salting and sanding of walk areas. Shall
also assist the road department with icy/snow control.
E. Plans and lays out athletic fields, and repairing of goal posts, soccer
nets, baskets and other recreational equipment.
F. Requisitions, receives and inventories materials required to maintain
grounds such as lawn mowers, shrubs, plants, paints, etc.
G. Give assignments and instructions to employees.
H. Prepares and maintains records of personnel, work accomplished,
equipment and materials used, and time spent on operations.
I. Able to or willing to learn to utilize various types of electronic and/or
manual recording and information system used by the agency, office
and related units.
J. Perform any other duties assigned other than that of groundskeeper.
A. Knowledge of processes used in grounds maintenance. Knowledge of
methods used in cutting grass, raking leaves and weeds, and planting
flowers, trees and shrubs.
§ 77-23 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 77-25
77:337
§ 77-26. Education, experience and training.
The Supervising Groundskeeper shall have the following education,
experience and training:
§ 77-27. Compensation; salary.
The Supervising Groundskeeper shall receive as compensation for services
an annual salary, which shall be fixed in accordance with the provisions of
the ordinances governing the salaries.
B. Knowledge of how to mark athletic fields and care for equipment,
materials and supplies.
C. Ability to direct subordinates in procedures of maintenance and care of
grounds.
D. Ability to provide subordinates with advice and assistance when
difficult and unusual problems arise.
E. Ability to check subordinates work to see that proper procedures are
followed, that reasonable standards of workmanship and output are
maintained and that desired objectives are achieved.
F. Ability to prepare work schedules and develop effective work methods.
G. Ability to obtain, store, safeguard and use equipment, materials and
supplies.
H. Ability to keep records and files.
I. Ability to utilize various types of electronic and/or manual recording
and information systems used by the agency, office or related units.
J. Ability to read, write, speak, understand and communicate in English
sufficiently to perform the duties of this position. American Sign
Language or Braille may also be considered as acceptable forms of
communication.
A. Three years experience in the care and maintenance of grounds.
B. Must possess a valid Commercial Driver's License (CDL) and applicable
endorsements for the class (Class BO and type of vehicle being
operated.
C. May be required to possess a valid Registered Commercial Pesticide
Applicator Certification issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection and valid in the State of New Jersey.
§ 77-25 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 77-27
77:338
Chapter 86
UTILITIES DEPARTMENT
§ 77-27 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 77-27
86:339

ARTICLE I
Scope of Department
[Adopted 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6 (Ch. 57, Art. I, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 86-1. Organization and authority.
There shall be a Utilities Department in the Borough of South River under
the supervision and control of the Utilities Committee of the Borough
Council. The Utilities Department shall exercise supervision and control
over the Borough Engineer, the Borough Building Inspector and such other
officers, agencies or employees as may be designated from time to time by
the Borough Council.
§ 86-1 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 86-1
86:341

ARTICLE II
Borough Engineer
[Adopted 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6 (Ch. 57, Art. II, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 86-2. Creation of office; compensation.
In the Utilities Department there shall be a Borough Engineer, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council. The term
of office of the Borough Engineer shall be three years, and he shall receive
such compensation as may be determined and agreed upon by the Council.55
§ 86-3. Qualifications; duties.
The Borough Engineer shall be a duly licensed civil engineer of the State of
New Jersey. He shall perform such duties as are prescribed by general law
and ordinance and, in addition, shall:
§ 86-4. Records and papers.
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating to
the administration of engineering duties of the Borough Engineer shall be
and remain the property of the Borough. Upon termination of his services
with the Borough, the Engineer shall forthwith surrender to any successor
all such property.
A. Prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs and specifications for
public works and improvements undertaken by the Borough.
B. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and control
records with respect to public works and facilities owned or operated
by the Borough.
C. Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other
Borough departments as needed.
55.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 86-2 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 86-4
86:343

ARTICLE III
Building Inspector
[Adopted 2-18-1970 as portion of Ord. No. 1970-2 (Ch. 57, Art. III,
of the 1977 Code)]
§ 86-5. Continuation of office; Acting and Assistant Inspector.
§ 86-6. Qualifications for office.
To be eligible to appointment as Building Inspector, the candidate for the
position shall have had experience as an architect, structural engineer,
carpenter, mason or superintendent of building construction.
§ 86-7. Powers and duties.
A. The office of Building Inspector shall continue as heretofore, and he
shall be the executive official in charge of building administration and
shall be known as the "Building Inspector."
B. The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council. His appointment shall continue during good
behavior and satisfactory service, and he shall not be removed from
office except on specific charges after a hearing. The present Inspector
shall continue as such until the end of his term. His term of office shall
be for one year.
C. During temporary absence or disability of the Building Inspector, the
appointing authority shall designate an Acting Building Inspector.
D. An Assistant Building Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council.
A. The Building Inspector shall receive all applications required by the
Building Code,56 issue permits and furnish the prescribed certificates.
He shall examine premises for which permits have been issued and
shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are
complied with and the construction is prosecuted properly and safely.
He shall enforce all provisions of the Building Code. He shall, when
requested by proper authority or when the public interest so requires,
make investigations in connection with the matters referred to in the
Building Code and render written reports on the same. To enforce
compliance with the law, to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to
secure the necessary safeguards during construction or to require
adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall issue such
notices or orders as may be necessary.
B. Inspections required under the provisions of the Building Code shall be
made by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector may accept
reports from other qualified or recognized inspection services after
56.Editor's Note: See Ch. 129, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 86-5 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 86-7
86:345
§ 86-8. Cooperation of other officials.
The Building Inspector may request and shall receive, so far as may be
necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of
other officials of the municipality.
§ 86-9. Right of entry.
The Building Inspector, in the discharge of his duties and upon proper
identification, shall have the authority to enter any building, structure or
premises at any reasonable hour.
§ 86-10. Receipts for funds; deposits.
The Inspector shall issue a receipt for all funds received, which funds shall
be deposited monthly with the Borough Treasurer.
§ 86-11. Deputy Building Inspector.
There is hereby created the office of Deputy Building Inspector, which shall
be filled by the Borough Clerk and who shall have the power to issue
building permits only in connection with applications which do not require
the submission and approval of plans and specifications. The salaries of the
Building Inspector, the Deputy Building Inspector and Assistant Building
Inspector shall be determined annually by the Mayor and Council.57
investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificates called
for by any provision of the Building Code shall be issued on such reports
unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible person of
such service.
C. The Building Inspector shall keep comprehensive reports of
applications, of permits issued, of inspections made or reports rendered
and of notices or orders issued. He shall retain on file copies of required
plans and all documents relating to building work so long as any part of
the building or structure to which they relate may be in existence. All
such records shall be open to public inspection, for good and sufficient
reasons, at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the
office of the Building Inspector without his written consent.
D. The Building Inspector shall make written reports to his immediate
superior once each month, including statements of permits, certificates
issued and orders promulgated.
57.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 86-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 86-11
86:346
ARTICLE IV
Mechanic
[Adopted 3-24-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-8 (Ch. 57, Art. IV, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 86-12. Establishment.
There shall be created within the Borough of South River the position of
Mechanic under the direct supervision of the Department head.
§ 86-13. Qualifications for appointment.
Any person to be appointed to the position of Mechanic shall be qualified
to repair any type of gasoline and diesel combustion engine for automobile
and trucks and related items.
§ 86-14. Duties.
Any person classified as a Mechanic shall be responsible for:
A. Mechanical upkeep of all vehicles and equipment.
B. Maintaining a preventive maintenance program for all vehicles and
equipment.
C. Supervising the work of lesser grade mechanics.
D. Nontechnical work, i.e., grease jobs, tire changes, engine tuneups, etc.
E. Performing other duties as may be assigned.
§ 86-12 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 86-14
86:347

ARTICLE V
Clerk Meter Reader
[Adopted 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-58]
§ 86-15. Establishment.
There shall be created within the Borough of South River the position
of clerk meter reader under the direct supervision of the Electrical
Department Supervisor and/or Borough Administrator.
§ 86-16. Qualifications for appointment.
Any person to be appointed to the position of clerk meter reader must
possess a high school diploma or its equivalent and have at least one year
experience in utility meter reading.
§ 86-17. Appointment.
The clerk meter reader shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Borough Council pursuant to the collective bargaining
agreement.
§ 86-18. Primary job duties.
Any individual hired as clerk meter reader shall perform the following
primary duties:
A. Investigate customer complaints.
B. Schedule turn-on and turn-off of electric meters.
C. Prepare and maintain utility shutoff lists and records as assigned by
supervisor.
D. Ability to read all electric and water meters.
E. Work with the Utility Collector to coordinate the readings of meters
with billings.
F. Assist the Collector with the opening and closing of water and electric
accounts.
G. Ability to read, write, speak, understand or communicate in English
sufficiently to perform the duties of this position.
H. Knowledge of the proper methods of readings meters and of the basic
principles underlying their operations.
I. Knowledge of the methods used for computing electric consumption.
J. Knowledge of the basic principles underlying the operation of electric
and water meters commonly used for making accurate readings that
are the basics for making computations.
§ 86-15 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 86-18
86:349
§ 86-19. Salary.
The salary of the clerk meter reader shall be as set forth in the appropriate
collective bargaining agreement.
§ 86-20. Dress code.
The appointee shall dress in business professional attire suitable for the
position in order to maintain the professional image of the Utility
Department. No jeans, shorts or T-shirts are allowed.
K. Ability to handle consumer inquires and complaints in a courteous
manner.
L. Ability to understand, remember and carry out oral and written
directions.
M. Ability to keep necessary records.
N. Knowledge of office procedures, typing and computers including
knowledge of computer programs including Excel, Access, Power Point
and Web-based applications.
O. Knowledge and skill in correspondence, written and oral phone
communications.
§ 86-18 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 86-20
86:350
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 99
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Fire insurance — See Ch. 165.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 169.
§ 99-1. Purpose and findings; applicability.
§ 99-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm system actuating a noise device heard
outside of the alarm premises and/or activating a call to the South River
Police Department from a centrally monitored station, providing warning of
intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other peril.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence or
unintentional act of someone other than an intruder, in which the police
respond and shall include, as well, alarms caused by malfunctioning of the
alarm device or other relevant equipment.
ALARM REGISTRANT — The person registering the alarm device.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm device which, when actuated, produces a
signal or noise outside of the premises and/or a phone call to the South
River Police Department from a central monitored station.
A. To ensure efficient public safety, there is a need in the Borough to
maintain a Borough registry of security alarm systems. This Code
section is designed to assist in creating this registry while ensuring any
costs associated with such a registration are not intrusive. The
provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm device or local alarm designed to summon
the Police or Fire Department or other municipal agencies to any
location in response to any type of alarm signal, including but not
limited to central monitored alarms.
B. False alarms have a cost on all Borough residents due to the time public
safety officials must commit to investigating all alarm calls. While we
understand that accidents do happen, repeated false alarms create the
potential for an unsafe situation to occur. This chapter is designed to
discourage repeated false alarms.
§ 86-20 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 99-3
86:351
§ 99-3. Application for and issuance of permits; fees. [Amended
9-24-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-27]
§ 99-4. False alarms. [Amended 6-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-11;
9-24-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-27]
§ 99-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-24-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-27]
A. Every person installing an alarm system within the Borough shall make
application to the Borough Clerk for a permit to do so. The application
shall be in such form as the Borough Council shall prescribe and shall
include all information required by the Chief of Police to enable him to
effectively carry out his public safety responsibilities. The same form
shall be used for registration.
B. Every alarm device shall be registered with the Borough Clerk within
30 days of September 24, 2018, for existing alarms, and prior to
becoming operative for new systems. The alarm registrant shall abide
by the fee schedule prescribed in § 155-4 of the Borough Code.
C. Every registrant shall accept the responsibility for the proper operation
of the alarm system, by himself/herself, his/her employees, residents,
tenants, guests or other licensees, up to and including the line
connection.
A. If registered:
(1) On the first false alarm: A warning shall be issued.
(2) On the second and third false alarm: $25.
(3) On every subsequent false alarm: $100.
B. If unregistered: A penalty shall be assessed at a premium rate of $25
over the penalty assessed on registered false alarms.
C. These penalties shall accrue on a rolling twelve-month basis.
A. Violations.
(1) A person shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter if the
following has been found:
(a) For false alarms, the penalties provided in § 99-4, False alarms,
shall apply.
(b) Operating an unregistered alarm device.
(2) Each and every day that such alarm device is in operation
subsequent to the compliance date for a cited violation of this
chapter shall be considered a separate violation.
§ 99-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 99-5
86:352
Chapter 103
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Entertainment — See Ch. 151.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 253.
B. A person shall be excused from liability for a false alarm if it can be
demonstrated that the alarm occurred because of telephone line
interference or other similar reason beyond the control of the licensee
and/or permittee. Failure to make necessary repairs to an alarm system
shall not be an adequate excuse for a false alarm; nor shall the
negligence of employees, residents, tenants, guests or other licensees
in setting or disarming the system be considered an adequate excuse
for false alarms.
§ 99-5 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 99-5
86:353

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Regulation
[Adopted 7-23-1934 (Ch. 67, Art. I, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 103-1. Purpose.
This article is for the purpose of regulating the sale of and transportation
of alcoholic beverages in the Borough of South River, in the County of
Middlesex, in accordance with the provisions of the Act of the Legislature
entitled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," being Chapter 436 of the
Laws of 1933 (N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.), its supplements and amendments,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations issued or to be
promulgated by the State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control
applicable thereto.
§ 103-2. Applicable statutes and rules.
All applications for licenses under this article and all licenses issued
thereunder and proceedings in connection therewith shall be subject to said
Act and said rules and regulations of said State Commissioner of Alcoholic
Beverage Control of New Jersey applicable thereto, and shall be subject
to any other statutes of New Jersey or of the United States now extant or
hereafter enacted affecting said subject matters.
§ 103-3. Administrative authority.
The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of South River, being the
governing body of said municipality, shall constitute the authority for the
administration of issuance of licenses under this article and shall forthwith
report the issuance of all such licenses to said State Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 103-4. Application for license.
No license shall be issued except after written application presented by the
proposed licensee, upon forms approved by the governing body, and after
conformity with publication of notice and otherwise as required by said Act
and this article.
§ 103-5. Sales without license prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in the Borough
of South River, in the County of Middlesex, without a license previously
applied for and granted pursuant to the provisions of this article and said
Act.
§ 103-6. Plenary retail consumption license; fee. [Amended 3-14-49,
effective 7-1-49; 2-25-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-4]
The fee for a plenary retail consumption license shall be as provided in
Chapter 155, Fees, and the holder of such license shall be entitled, subject
§ 103-1 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 103-6
86:355
to rules and regulations, to sell for consumption on the licensed premises
any alcoholic beverages by the glass or other open receptacles and also to
sell all other alcoholic beverages in original containers for consumption off
the licensed premises. Such license shall not permit the sale of alcoholic
beverages in or upon any premises in which a grocery, delicatessen,
drugstore or other mercantile business is carried on, except the keeping
of a hotel or restaurant or the sale of cigars or cigarettes at retail as an
accommodation to patrons or the retail sale of nonalcoholic beverages as an
accessory beverage to alcoholic beverages.
§ 103-7. Increase in license fee. [Added 4-9-1981 by Ord. No.
1981-18]
§ 103-8. Plenary retail distribution license; fee. [Amended
7-11-1955; 2-25-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-4; 2-9-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-2]
The fee for a plenary retail distribution license shall be the sum as provided
in Chapter 155, Fees, and the holder of such license shall be entitled,
subject to the rules and regulations, to sell any alcoholic beverages for
consumption off the licensed premises, but only in original containers.
§ 103-9. Limited retail distribution license unauthorized.
There shall be no limited retail distribution licenses issued within the
Borough of South River.
§ 103-10. Club license; fee. [Amended 3-14-1949, effective
7-1-1949]
A. Commencing in the licensing year 1982-1983, and thereafter as
permitted by law, the Borough Clerk is authorized and directed to
increase the annual licensing fee for retail consumption licenses by the
sum of $200 over the existing fee. [Amended 11-12-1981 by Ord. No.
1981-53]
B. The aforementioned increase of $200 in the fee for retail consumption
licenses is to be used for the acquisition and retirement by the Borough
of licenses in excess of the limitation permitted by law, which licenses to
be retired shall be noted by the governing body, by resolution, from
time to time. [Amended 11-12-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-53]
C. The proper Borough officials are authorized to enter into contracts of
purchase with licensees in an amount not greater than $30,000, said
contracts to be entered into only after an appropriate resolution shall
have been passed by the governing body for purchase of a specific
license, and for which the increased annual licensing fee shall be
collected only for such period as prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.42.
[Amended 3-8-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-5]
§ 103-6 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 103-10
86:356
§ 103-11. Contents of application.
All applications for licenses shall set forth in full the answers to questions
prescribed by the aforesaid Act and by the rules and regulations of said
State Commissioner and shall include declarations called for by said
provisions.
§ 103-12. Qualifications for license.
No license shall be issued to any person, firm, corporation, group or
partnership not fully qualified under the provisions of said Act and said
rules and regulations.
§ 103-13. Term of license; surrender. [Amended 8-11-1976 by Ord.
No. 1976-22]
A. The fee for a club license shall be as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, and
the holder of such license shall be entitled, subject to rules and
regulations, to sell only to bona fide club members and their guests
alcoholic beverages intended for immediate consumption on the
licensed premises. [Amended 2-25-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-4]
B. Club licenses shall be issued only to such corporations, associations and
organizations as are operated for benevolent, charitable, fraternal,
social, religious, recreational, athletic or similar purposes and not for
private gain, and such licenses shall set forth in full the qualifications,
conditions and restrictions imposed by said State Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
C. Each application for a club license shall set forth the names and
addresses of all the officers, trustees, directors or other governing
officials, together with the names and addresses of all the members, of
the applying club, corporation or association.
D. Not more than 11 club licenses shall be issued and outstanding in the
Borough of South River. [Added 6-22-1959; amended 9-18-1967,
2-7-1973 by Ord. No. 1973-2, 11-26-1975 by Ord. No. 1975-15;
2-25-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-5; 2-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-5]
A. All licenses shall be for a term of one year from the first day of July in
each year, and all fees shall be paid in advance upon presentation of the
application; provided, however, that any licensee, except a seasonal
retail consumption licensee, who shall voluntarily surrender his license
and who shall not have committed any violation of this article or of any
rule or regulation and who shall have paid fill taxes, setoffs or
counterclaims that may have become due to the State of New Jersey or
to the Borough of South River, shall be entitled, after deduction of 50%
of said fee, as a surrender fee, to the prorated fee for the unexpired
term.
§ 103-10 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 103-13
86:357
§ 103-14. Separate license for each place of business; transfer.
A separate license shall be required for each specific place of business, and
each license shall be effectual only for the licensed premises mentioned
therein; provided, however, that upon an application for a transfer in the
same manner as for an original application and upon publication of
intention to transfer in the same manner as in the case of an original
application, the governing body may issue a transfer of such license to a
different place of business by endorsing such permission on such license
and upon payment of a fee as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, for such
transfer.
§ 103-15. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 103-16. Access of light to licensed premises.
All premises in which said alcoholic beverages shall be sold or otherwise
dispensed, excepting those which hold club licenses, shall have reasonable
access of light from the public highway, and such premises shall be deemed
to have reasonable access of light when a normal-sized adult can, on
inspection from the exterior, view the interior of said premises.
§ 103-17. Hours of sale. [Amended 12-26-1944; 8-9-1978 by Ord.
No. 1978-20]
B. Any licensee who shall not have actively engaged in the sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages in the Borough of South River for a
period of at least 180 days annually shall forthwith surrender his
license upon demand of the governing body of the Borough, after
proceedings for revocation shall be held in accordance with § 103-15.
A. Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this article or any of the provisions
of said Act or said statutes heretofore mentioned or of any of the
regulations and rules prescribed by said State Commissioner of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of said Act, by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee, as provided in said Act, and by the
affording of a reasonable opportunity for a hearing, and such
suspension or revocation shall carry the penalties and prohibitions
provided for in said Act.
A. No plenary retail consumption licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, or
allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery of, any alcoholic
beverage on licensed premises on weekdays between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 7:00 a.m. and on Sundays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon, with the exception of January 1 of each year, when the
hours during which no such sales shall be made, as set forth above,
shall be between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except when
§ 103-13 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 103-17
86:358
§ 103-18. Unaccompanied persons under legal age excluded.
[Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6; 7-16-1981 by Ord. No.
1981-33; 4-8-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-11; 7-12-1989 by Ord. No.
1989-19]
No plenary retail consumption licensee shall permit any patron who is
under the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages or to
be within any room in which any bar is located, unless said patron is
accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or spouse, provided that said
parent, legal guardian or spouse shall have attained the age at which a
person may purchase and consume alcoholic beverages. This section shall
not apply to the dining area of any bona fide restaurant, whose principal
business is the service of food, provided that said dining area is separate
and apart from any room in which a bar, other than a service bar, is located.
§ 103-19. Restrictions on sales. [Amended 4-8-1982 by Ord. No.
1982-11]
No sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed premises
shall be made on credit, nor shall sales of any alcoholic beverages be made
to any person under the legal age, mental defective or habitual drunkard,
provided that such prohibition against sales on credit shall not apply to club
licenses.
§ 103-20. Restrictions on place of service.
No person shall be served in any back room or side room which is not open
to the use of the public generally, except that in hotels guests may be served
January 1 shall fall on a Sunday, in which case the closing hours shall
be from 4:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon.
B. No plenary retail distribution licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or
allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic
beverage on the licensed premises during the prohibited hours set forth
in Subsection A above. [Amended 5-14-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-19]
C. A plenary retail distribution licensee shall be authorized to sell, serve or
deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery of wine
and malt alcoholic beverage in the original bottle or can containers for
consumption off the licensed premises on the same days and during the
same hours as the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on
premises is permitted and authorized herein. [Amended 5-14-1981 by
Ord. No. 1981-19]
D. For holders of plenary retail consumption licenses, during the hours
that sales are hereinabove prohibited, the entire licensed premises
shall be closed. This subsection shall not apply to plenary retail
distribution licensees who engage in any other mercantile business on
the licensed premises. [Added 5-14-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-19;
amended 2-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-2]
§ 103-17 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 103-20
86:359
in their rooms or in private or public dining rooms, and provided also that
this prohibition shall not apply to club licenses.
§ 103-21. Restrictions on location.
No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages within 200
feet of any church or public school or private schoolhouse not conducted
for pecuniary profit, except to manufacturers, wholesalers, hotels, clubs
and fraternal organizations which own or are actually in possession of the
licensed premises at the time of the effectiveness of the aforesaid Act, the
said 200 feet to be measured in the normal way that a pedestrian would
properly walk from the nearest entrance of said church or school to the
nearest entrance of the premises sought to be licensed; provided, however,
that this prohibition may be waived at the issuance or renewal of such
license by the duly authorized governing body or authority of such school or
church, and such waiver shall be effective until the date of the next renewal
of said license, and provided also that this prohibition shall not apply to
the renewal of any license where no such school or church was located
within said prohibited distance of said licensed premises at the time of the
issuance of said license, or as otherwise excepted by the provisions of said
Act.
§ 103-22. Purchase of illicit beverages. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord.
No. 1977-6]
No person, except an officer or other person authorized by and acting
pursuant to instructions from such officer, so doing in the course of and
for the purpose of enforcing said Act, shall knowingly purchase, receive or
procure any illicit beverage.
§ 103-23. Prohibited manufacture and sale. [Amended 2-9-1977 by
Ord. No. 1977-6]
No person shall manufacture, sell, distribute, bottle, blend, rectify, treat,
fortify, mix, process, warehouse or transport any alcoholic beverage in
violation of this article and of said Act; nor shall any person import, own,
possess, keep or store in said Borough of South River alcoholic beverages
with intent to manufacture, sell, distribute, bottle, rectify, blend, treat,
fortify, mix, process, warehouse or transport alcoholic beverages in
violation of the provisions of this article and of said Act; nor shall any person
own, possess, keep or store in said Borough of South River any implement
or paraphernalia for the manufacture, sale, distribution, bottling, rectifying,
warehousing, blending, treating, fortifying, mixing, processing or
transportation of alcoholic beverages with intent to use the same in the
manufacture, sale, distribution, bottling, rectifying, blending, treating,
fortifying, mixing, processing, warehousing or transportation of alcoholic
beverages in violation of this article and of said Act, or to aid or abet
another in the manufacture, sale, distribution, bottling, rectifying, blending,
treating, fortifying, mixing, processing, warehousing or transportation of
alcoholic beverages in violation of this article and of said Act.
§ 103-20 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 103-24
86:360
§ 103-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6; 7-12-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-19]
Any person who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, General Penalty.
§ 103-24 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 103-24
86:361

ARTICLE II
Purchases by Persons Under Legal Age
[Adopted 12-22-1958 (Ch. 67, Art. II, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 103-25. (Reserved)58
§ 103-26. (Reserved)59
§ 103-27. (Reserved)60
§ 103-28. Possession or consumption by person under legal age.
[Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6; 4-8-1982 by Ord. No.
1982-11; 5-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-10]
A. (Reserved)61
B. It is hereby unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without
legal authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic
beverage on private property.
C. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this section shall
be subject to a fine of $250 for a first offense and a fine of $350 for
any subsequent offense.
(2) In addition, the court may, upon a finding a guilty, in addition to the
fine authorized for this offense, suspend or postpone for six months
the driving privileges of the defendant. Upon the conviction of any
person and the suspension or postponement of that person's
driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the Division of
Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of the suspension or
postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to this section.
(3) If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less than 17
years of age, the period of license postponement, including a
suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a
motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is
imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the person
reaches the age of 17 years.
(4) If the defendant at the time of the imposition of the sentence has a
valid driver's license issued by this state, the court shall
58.Editor's Note: Former § 103-25, Purchase by person under legal age, as amended, was
repealed 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-20.
59.Editor's Note: Former § 103-26, Purchase for person under legal age, as amended, was
repealed 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-20.
60.Editor's Note: Former § 103-27, Misrepresentation of age, as amended, was repealed
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-20.
61.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, regarding possession by persons under legal age, was
repealed 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-20.
§ 103-25 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 103-28
86:363
immediately collect the license and forward it to the Division of
Motor Vehicles along with the report. If for any reason the license
cannot be collected, the court shall include in the report the
complete name, address, date of birth, eye color and sex of the
person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the court.
(5) The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period
of license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. The defendant shall be
required to acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing.
Failure to acknowledge receipt of the written notice shall not be a
defense to a subsequent charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
(6) If the person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey
resident, the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the
nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Division the required report. The court
shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this
article. Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Division shall
notify the appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the
suspension or postponement.
D. Exceptions.
(1) This section shall not prohibit an underage person from consuming
or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony or rite or consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a
parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to
purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
(2) This section shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages
by any underaged person while actually engaged in the
performance of employment by a person who was licensed under
Title 33 of the revised statutes or while actively engaged in the
preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel
management program at a county vocational school or
postsecondary educational institution; however, this section shall
not be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under this
section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law against a
person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on
or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
E. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
§ 103-28 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 103-28
86:364
§ 103-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6; 7-12-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-19; 5-7-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-10]
Any person who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, General Penalty, except as provided in § 103-28 above..
RELATIVE — The underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 103-28 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 103-29
86:365

ARTICLE III
Consumption in Public Places
[Adopted 8-1-1973 by Ord. No. 1973-23 (Ch. 67, Art. III, of the 1977
Code)]
§ 103-30. Consumption in certain places prohibited. [Amended
6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-20]
No person shall drink, imbibe or consume any alcoholic beverage in or
upon:
§ 103-31. Permit for consumption at special events.
Notwithstanding anything herewith to the contrary contained, the
governing body of the Borough may, by resolution, permit the possession or
consumption of alcoholic beverages in a designated park, recreation area or
other public place at a designated time or times in connection with a special
event, series of events or observance which has been authorized by the
governing body, which possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages
shall, in addition, comply with any applicable ordinances, statutes or
regulations.
§ 103-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6; 7-12-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-19]
Any person who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, General Penalty.
A. Any private property not his or her own without the express permission
of the owner or other person having authority to grant such permission.
§ 103-30 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 103-32
86:367

ARTICLE IV
Teen Night
[Adopted 10-3-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-51 (Ch. 67, Art. IV, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 103-33. Limitations of minors.
§ 103-34. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TEEN NIGHT — The use of facilities, businesses or establishments
commonly licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages
upon premises which shall be utilized by individuals for entertainment,
amusement, socializing and/or dancing.
§ 103-35. Age restrictions.
The use of a facility as set forth above shall be limited to individuals
between the ages of 15 years old and 20 years old, with proof of age being
a requirement for admittance into the same.
§ 103-36. Times of operation.
The time of operation for a teen night by a facility or business as defined
herein shall be limited within the Borough of South River as follows:
§ 103-37. Rules and regulations.
A. No minor shall enter any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, except
as provided for herein. Said limitation shall not apply to minors who are
guests at a bona fide hotel, motel or restaurant or who are required to
enter a licensed premises in the course of their business or occupation.
B. Minors shall also be permitted to enter premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic beverages consumption, provided that the persons or entities
to which the license is issued have received prior approval by formal
resolution adopted by the Borough Council and complied with the terms
herein.
A. Teen night for individuals from ages 15 through 17, inclusive, shall be
limited to Sundays from 3:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
B. Teen night for individuals from ages 18 through 20, inclusive, shall be
limited to Wednesdays from 7:00 p.m. to 11:30 p.m.
A. At all times during a teen night activity, there shall be no alcoholic
beverages within the public area utilized by the parties.
§ 103-33 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 103-37
86:369
§ 103-38. Fees.
All licenses for a teen night event shall require a fee to be paid as provided
in Chapter 155, Fees.
B. Any and all alcoholic beverages maintained on said premises during a
teen night activity shall be stored in a separate area, location or room,
which shall be locked and not accessible by the parties at the teen night
activity. Said alcoholic beverages shall be secured in such a manner so
as to assure that the same shall not be either visible or accessible to the
public.
C. The dates and times of conducting teen night activities by a business,
establishment or facility within the Borough of South River shall be
provided to the South River Police Department and Borough Clerk, in
writing, at least seven days prior to the same and only after receiving
approval for the same by resolution from the Borough Council, which
resolution shall contain such terms and conditions that are deemed
appropriate by the Borough Council.
D. There shall be no sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off
premises during the hours of said teen night activity as well as for one
hour prior to the opening of said business, facility or establishment for
use as a teen night as well as for one hour after said teen night activity
has ended.
E. Except as set forth herein, all existing local, county, state and federal
rules and regulations, including but not limited to the Alcohol Beverage
Commission, shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 103-37 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 103-38
86:370
Chapter 108
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 246.
Nuisances — See Ch. 373.
§ 103-38 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 103-38
86:371

ARTICLE I
Dog Licensing
[Adopted 2-14-1939 (Ch. 87, Art. I, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 108-1. Collar and registration tag required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation to
own, keep, harbor or permit to run at large any dog or dogs, male or
female, within the Borough of South River unless such dog or dogs shall
be registered and licensed as hereinafter provided, and unless a collar or
harness shall be placed about the neck or body of such dog or dogs and the
metallic tag of registration, referred to in this article, affixed to such collar
or harness.
§ 108-2. Removal of tag.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to remove any registration tag
from any dog or dogs registered or licensed hereunder or to use such tag in
any manner other than as herein provided.
§ 108-3. License fees; exemption. [Amended 12-19-1966; 2-11-1976
by Ord. No. 1976-3; 2-25-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-4; 8-18-1983 by
Ord. No. 1983-36; 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-43; 9-18-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-31]
A. License fees:
(1) The license fee for each male or female dog shall be in the sum
provided in Chapter 155, Fee, for the purpose of regulation and
raising revenue for the cost involved for the collecting of dogs
liable to seizure pursuant to the terms of this article, for local
prevention and control of rabies and for providing of antirabies
treatment of such dogs under the direction of the local Board of
Health.
(2) The sum provided in Chapter 155, Fees, shall be charged for a
replacement metal tag.
(3) In addition to the annual dog license fee, a sum as provided in
Chapter 155, Fees, shall be charged, and the Borough Clerk shall
forward such additional fee to the State Department of Health by
the 10th day of each month following such issuance of said
registration or licensing, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq. on
forms so provided by the State Health Department.
(4) The sum as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, shall be charged for
each dog license for the Pilot Clinic Fund for the State of New
Jersey. Said funds shall be remitted in accordance with Subsection
C of this § 108-3.
§ 108-1 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-3
86:373
§ 108-4. Expiration and renewal of license.
All certificates of registration or licenses granted hereunder shall be issued
for the current year in which such registration shall take place, and shall
expire on December 31 of such year and be renewed annually.
§ 108-5. Lost registration tags. [Amended 2-11-1976 by Ord. No.
1976-3]
Whenever the metallic tag of registration has been lost, such tag may be
replaced by the Borough Clerk with a new number tag, together with a new
certificate of registration, upon the payment of a fee as provided in Chapter
155, Fees, provided that the old certificate of registration is presented at
the same time.
§ 108-6. Duties and compensation of Animal Control Officer;
reports.
(5) The sum as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, shall be charged for
each license issued to a nonspayed and nonneutered dog for the
Animal Population Control Program of the State of New Jersey. Said
funds shall be permitted in accordance with Subsection C above.
(6) The sum as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, shall be charged for
each license issued after the annual renewal period.
B. Exemption. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3, persons owning Seeing Eye
dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known as
"service dogs" and dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly
known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be exempt from the paying the
license fee but must obtain a license for the dog.62
A. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article, there shall
be appointed by the Borough Council an Animal Control Officer. It shall
be the duty of the said Animal Control Officer or any member of the
Police Department of the Borough of South River to seize any
unlicensed dog or dogs found running at large and to impound the same
in the dog pound, to remain there seven days and then be offered for
adoption or humanely destroyed unless reclaimed during said time.
[Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-663]
B. The Animal Control Officer shall submit a monthly report to the Chief of
Police, which report shall contain a description of each animal seized,
the reason for seizure and the disposition made of such animal.64
62.Editor's Note: Original § 87-4, Application for license, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 108-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 108-6
86:374
§ 108-7. Segregation of registered and unregistered dogs.
The Animal Control Officer shall segregate all unregistered dogs in the
pound from the registered dogs pending redemption.
§ 108-8. Notice of impounding; redemption. [Amended 2-9-1977 by
Ord. No. 1977-6]
The Animal Control Officer shall promptly notify the owner or owners of any
dog bearing a registration tag of the Borough of South River that such dog
has been caught running at large contrary to the provisions of this article
and that the said dog will be destroyed if not reclaimed within seven days
from the date stated in the notice mailed. Such dog may be reclaimed by
the payment of a reclamation fee as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, besides
the registration fee of such dog pursuant to the terms of this article. The
Animal Control Officer shall immediately submit the registration fee to the
Borough Clerk, who shall deliver to the owner or the person claiming such
dog a certificate of registry, together with a metallic number tag for same.
The Borough Clerk shall report all such fees in his regular report to the
Borough Council.
§ 108-9. Duties of police.
It shall be the duty of each member of the Police Department of the Borough
of South River to assist in carrying out the provisions of this article.
§ 108-10. Proclamation requiring muzzling.
The Council, when in its opinion the public safety may require, may issue a
proclamation authorizing the destruction of all dogs, male or female, found
running at large without being properly muzzled with a muzzle about the
nose, securely fastened, or all dogs on leash not being properly muzzled
with a muzzle about the nose, securely fastened; provided that nothing in
said proclamation shall apply to dogs of nonresidents passing through the
Borough accompanied by the owner of such dog or dogs.65
C. The Chief of Police shall render a quarterly report to the Mayor and
Council, which report shall contain the following information:
(1) The number of dogs captured.
(2) The number of dogs destroyed.
(3) The number of dogs redeemed.
65.Editor's Note: Original § 87-12, Interference with authorized personnel, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 108-6 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-11
86:375
§ 108-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-666]
Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19, any person or persons, firm or
corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article
I, General Penalty.
§ 108-12. Purpose.
This article is adopted for the purpose of raising revenue as well as for
regulations.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 108-11 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 108-12
86:376
ARTICLE II
Dog Control Regulations
[Adopted 6-11-1956 (Ch. 87, Art. II, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 108-13. Definitions and usage.
§ 108-14. Proclamation requiring muzzling.
Whenever a proclamation shall be made by the Mayor, pursuant to a
resolution of the municipal governing body, requiring the muzzling of dogs,
no person owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any dog shall permit
or suffer such dog to run at large in any of the streets, alleys, highways or
public places of the Borough of South River during the time provided for in
such proclamation unless such dog is securely muzzled.
§ 108-15. Leashing required.
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
be upon the public streets or in any public places of the Borough of South
River unless such dog is securely confined by a person over the age of 12
years and is securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more
than six feet long.
A. Definitions. The words hereinafter defined shall have the meaning
herein indicated for the purpose of this article, as follows:67
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of
seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation or association of persons.
B. Usage.
(1) The words "and" and "or" may be used interchangeably, and either
of the two may be applicable, whichever is more conducive towards
the effectuating of this article.
(2) Personal pronouns shall mean either the singular or plural,
whichever is applicable and conducive towards the effectuating of
this article.
(3) The masculine, feminine or the neuter gender shall be implied,
whichever is appropriate and conducive for the effectuating of this
article.68
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
68.Editor's Note: Original §§ 87-16, Unlicensed dogs at large; 87-17, Vicious dogs; 87-18,
Barking dogs; 87-20, Nuisances by dogs; and 87-24, Dog Warden, which formerly appeared
in this Article II, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II).
§ 108-13 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-16
86:377
§ 108-16. Right of entry.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize or impound when
such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs.
§ 108-17. Interference with authorized personnel.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this article.
§ 108-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
Any person who shall fail to comply with or who violates or offends against
any provisions of this article or any section thereof or the rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Department of Health governing
kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, to preserve sanitation therein and
prevent the spread of rabies and other diseases of dogs within and from
such establishments, shall be liable to a penalty as provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, General Penalty.
§ 108-19. Complaints; service of process; trial.
A. The Municipal Judge of the Borough of South River is empowered, upon
the filing of a complaint in writing by any person authorized by the local
Board of Health when the complainant is the local Board of Health, or
by the Borough Clerk or duly designated Animal Control Officer or
other official when the complainant is the Borough, alleging that a
violation of this article has occurred, which complaint may be made
upon information and belief, to issue a process at the suit of the local
Board of Health or of the Borough, as the case may be, as complainant.
The process shall be in the nature of either a summons or warrant,
which warrant may issue without any order of the court first being
obtained against the person so charged, which process when in the
nature of a summons shall be returnable in not less than five days nor
more than 15 entire days and, when in the nature of a warrant, shall be
returnable forthwith. The process shall state what provision of this
article or of any statute pertaining to the subject matter hereof has
been violated by the defendants or defendant. The court having
jurisdiction may at all times amend all defects and errors in the
complaint and process issued hereunder.
B. Any officer authorized by law to serve and execute process in the court
in which the proceedings are brought hereunder may serve and execute
all process in proceedings for violation of any of the provisions of this
article or of the laws and statutes relating thereto.
C. Upon the return of process issued pursuant to this section or at any
time to which the trial shall be adjourned, the court, without the filing
§ 108-16 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 108-19
86:378
of any pleadings, may proceed to hear the testimony without a jury and
give judgment for the complainant for the penalty and costs or for the
defendant if the facts warrant an acquittal.
§ 108-19 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-19
86:379

ARTICLE III
Vaccination Against Rabies
[Adopted 4-23-1962; amended in its entirety 4-17-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-9 (Ch. 87, Art. III, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 108-20. Vaccination required.
No person, firm or corporation in the Borough of South River shall own,
possess, harbor or have in custody any dog or cat over six months of age
unless such dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies by a duly licensed
veterinarian of the State of New Jersey. Such vaccination shall be repeated
annually and is to consist of antirabies vaccine of standard and accepted
formula and manufactured under a license of the United States Bureau of
Animal Industry of the Department of Agriculture; provided, however, that
any dog or cat may be exempt from the requirement of such vaccination
for a specified period of time upon the presentation of a certificate from a
duly licensed veterinarian stating than by reason of age, infirmity or other
physical condition the vaccination of such dog or cat for such specified
period of time is contraindicated, and provided further that nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to require the vaccination of any dogs or cats
located in and confined to duly recognized and licensed kennels, pounds,
pet shops, etc., where dogs or cats are offered for sale, as provided by the
laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 108-21. Certificate of vaccination.
Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring or having custody of said
dog or cat or shall obtain from the veterinarian who vaccinates said dogs
or cats against rabies a certificate on a form supplied by the Health Officer
and available at the Borough Clerk's office and shall, within 10 days of such
vaccination or within 10 days after bringing the dog or cat into the Borough
of South River if the dog or cat was vaccinated before being brought into
the Borough Clerk's office, file the same with the Health Officer.
§ 108-22. Vaccination certificate required for licensing.
No license required for the owning and keeping of dogs or cats by virtue
of any law of the State of New Jersey or ordinance of the Borough of
South River shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation unless a
certificate issued by a duly licensed veterinarian of the State of New Jersey,
as hereinabove provided, is presented to and filed with the Borough Clerk,
showing that such dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies in the
manner provided herein. Such certificate shall show and certify that said
vaccination has been made within six months from the date of the filing of
the application for such license.
§ 108-23. Vaccination clinics; rules and regulations.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to provide free
vaccination of such dogs or cats at a suitable clinic and place designated by
§ 108-20 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-23
86:381
him, to be conducted by a licensed veterinarian of the State of New Jersey.
Said Health Officer is hereby further authorized and empowered to make
and adopt such rules and regulations, not inconsistent or in conflict with the
terms and provisions of this article, as he may deem proper and necessary
for the enforcement of this article.
§ 108-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, General Penalty, and each violation of any of the provisions of this
article and each day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 108-23 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 108-24
86:382
ARTICLE IV
Nuisances Committed by Animals
[Adopted 9-9-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-16 (§ 87-26.1 of the 1977
Code)]
§ 108-25. Removal of feces required; conditions.
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dogs, cats and
other domestic animals shall cause, suffer or allow such dogs, cats and
other domestic animals to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance
on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area,
park, school ground or any space where the public congregate or walk or
upon any public property or place whatsoever or upon any private property
without the permission of the owner of said property. This restriction in
this article shall not apply to that portion of the street lying between the
curblines, which shall be used to curb such dogs, cats and other domestic
animals under the following conditions:
§ 108-26. Exemptions for blind persons.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to blind persons who may use
dogs as guides.
§ 108-27. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Board of Health, the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer and the South River Police Department.
§ 108-28. Term defined.
As used in this article, the phrase "curbline" means the actual curbs of a
public street, or if there be no curbs, the edges of the improved portion of
the public street.
§ 108-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dogs, cats and
other domestic animals not curbed in accordance with the provisions of this
article shall be deemed to be in violation of this article and subject to the
penalty provisions contained in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
A. The person who so curbs such dogs, cats and other domestic animals
shall immediately remove all feces deposited by such dogs, cats and
other domestic animals by any sanitary method approved by the Board
of Health.
B. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall be
disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
any dogs, cats and other domestic animals curbed in accordance with
the provisions of this article in a sanitary method approved by the
Board of Health.
§ 108-25 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-29
86:383

ARTICLE V
Disposal of Pet Waste
[Adopted 8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-24]
§ 108-30. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the Borough of South River so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to
comply.
§ 108-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 108-32. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 108-30 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-33
86:385
§ 108-33. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 108-34. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Borough of South
River Police Department and/or the South River Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 108-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 108-33 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 108-35
86:386
ARTICLE VI
Feeding of Wildlife
[Adopted 8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-26]
§ 108-36. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in
any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the Borough
of South River, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 108-37. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 108-38. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Borough of South River, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 108-39. Enforcement.
§ 108-40. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Borough of South River Police
Department.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 108-36 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-40
86:387

ARTICLE VII
Feral Cats
[Adopted 12-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-45]
§ 108-41. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning
set forth in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular, words in the singular number include the plural, and words in
the male gender include the female gender.
ABANDONED — An owner or caregiver has forsaken a domesticated cat
entirely, or has neglected or refused to provide care and support of the cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person employed or appointed by the
Borough who is authorized to investigate violations of laws and regulations
concerning animals, and to issue citations in accordance with New Jersey
law and this Code.
CAREGIVER — Any person who provides food, water or shelter to or
otherwise cares for a cat; a volunteer, uncompensated person who agrees
to serve to facilitate the TNR program within the Borough in accordance
with this article and any rules and regulations that may be established
by the Board of Health. A caregiver shall not be deemed an employee of
the Borough and shall hold such volunteer position at the pleasure of the
Board of Health and may be removed from or precluded from holding such
volunteer position in the sole discretion of the Board of Health.
DOMESTICATED CAT — A cat that is socialized to humans and is
appropriate as a companion for humans.
EARTIPPING — Straight-line cutting of the tip of the left ear of a cat
while the cat is anesthetized; the marking of a cat's ear through a surgical
procedure performed by qualified personnel.
FERAL CAT — A cat that exists in a wild or untamed state, either due
to birth or reversion to a wild state from domestication. The usual and
consistent temperament of a feral cat is extreme fear and resistance to
contact with humans. Feral cats are completely or substantially unsocialized
to humans.
FERAL CAT COLONY — A group of cats that congregates, more or less,
together as a unit. Although not every cat in a colony may be feral, any
nonferal cats that congregate with a colony shall be deemed to be a part of
it.
FERAL CAT COMMITTEE (FCC) — A committee appointed by the Board
of Health to serve as a sponsor of a trap-neuter-return program.[Added
9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-38]
NUISANCE — Disturbing the peace by:
A. Habitually or continually howling, crying or screaming; or
§ 108-41 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-41
86:389
OWNER — Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust,
estate, or any other legal entity.
RESCUE GROUP — A for-profit or not-for-profit entity, or a collaboration of
individuals with at least one of its purposes being the adoption or placement
of cats in homes with humans to serve as companion animals.
STRAY CAT — A cat that is regularly off the property of the owner, is not
under the physical control and restraint of the owner and is not regularly
provided with food by its owner.
SUITABLE SHELTER — Shelter that provides protection from rain, sun, and
other elements that is adequate to protect the health of the cat.
TNR — Trap, neuter, and return.
TNR PROGRAM — A program pursuant to which feral and stray cats are
trapped, neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies and returned to the
location where they congregate.
ZOONOTIC DISEASE — Those diseases transmittable to humans from
animals, including parasitic, bacterial, fungal and viral diseases.
§ 108-42. Responsibilities of owners of domesticated cats.
§ 108-43. Feral cat colonies. [Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-38]
The habitual and significant destruction, desecration or soiling of
property against the wishes of the owner of the property.
B.
A. Owners of domesticated cats shall provide appropriate and adequate
food, water and shelter for their cats.
B. The owner of a domesticated cat shall exercise reasonable care to
guard against the cat creating a nuisance.
C. The owner of a sexually intact (not spayed or neutered) domesticated
cat shall not permit his/her cat to roam unsupervised.
D. An owner shall not under any circumstances abandon a domesticated
cat.
A. Feral cat colonies shall be permitted and caregivers shall be entitled to
maintain them in accordance with the terms and conditions of this
article. The Board of Health may appoint a committee (Feral Cat
Committee) of residents and other interested parties to specifically
sponsor feral cat colonies and implement the provisions of this article.
B. The Board of Health or Feral Cat Committee (FCC) requirements. It
shall be the duty of the Board of Health or Feral Cat Committee to:
(1) Review and approve of colony caregivers;
§ 108-41 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 108-43
86:390
§ 108-44. Feral cat caregiver requirements. [Amended 9-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-38]
(2) Help to resolve any complaints over the conduct of a colony
caregiver or of cats within a colony;
(3) Maintain records provided by colony caregivers on the size and
location of the colonies as well as the vaccination and spay/neuter
records of cats in the sponsor's colonies;
(4) Report annually to the Borough of South River on the following:
(a) Number of colonies in the Borough;
(b) Total number of cats in colonies;
(c) Number of cats and kittens spayed and neutered pursuant to
the TNR program; and
(d) Number of cats and kittens placed in permanent homes;
(5) Use due consideration to avoid the taking of rare, threatened or
endangered species under the Endangered and Nongame Species
Conservation Act, N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1, et seq.
C. Each feral cat colony will be registered by the caregivers with either
the Board of Health or Feral Cat Committee if one has been formed,
which will serve as a clearinghouse for information on current
caregivers, education for new caregivers, and assistance for persons
found in violation of this article.
D. The Board of Health may establish a fund to provide services to offset
the costs of trapping, neutering, and vaccinating captured feral cats
that can be returned to an appropriate, controlled, protected, and
registered colony site. Caregivers for such colonies, whether one or
several animals, may be aided by the Board of Health in providing traps
for the capture of the cat, transportation to a spay/neuter facility and
offsetting costs, to the extent that funding is available.
E. The Board of Health may also provide funds to support educational
programs related to feral cat populations.
F. The Board of Health and/or Feral Cat Committee may apply for grants
as available to support TNR programs.
A. Caregivers are responsible for the following:
(1) Registering the feral cat colony with the Board of Heath (BOH) or
Feral Cat Committee;
(2) Taking steps that are reasonably likely to result in the vaccination
of the colony population for rabies (three-year vaccine) and any
other infectious disease as mandated by law and making
§ 108-43 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-44
86:391
§ 108-45. Colony cat requirements.
§ 108-46. Disposition of colony cats.
reasonable efforts to update the vaccination on cats that can be
recaptured;
(3) Taking steps that are reasonably likely to result in the spay/neuter,
by a licensed veterinarian, of at least 90% of the colony population;
(4) Providing the Board of Health (BOH) or Feral Cat Committee with a
description of each cat in the colony and copies of documents
evidencing that the cats have been vaccinated and spayed/
neutered;
(5) Providing food, water, and, if feasible, shelter for colony cats
through the year;
(6) Observing the colony cats at least twice per week and keeping a
record of any illnesses or unusual behavior noticed in any colony
cats;
(7) Obtaining the approval of the owner of any property to which the
caregiver requires access to provide colony care;
(8) In the event that kittens are born to a colony cat, the caregiver shall
take reasonable steps likely to result in the removal of the kittens
from the colony after they have been weaned, and the placement of
the kittens in homes or foster homes for the purpose of subsequent
permanent placement;
(9) Reporting annually in writing to the Board of Health (BOH) or Feral
Cat Committee on the status of the colony, including data on the
number and gender of all cats in the colony; the number of cats that
died or otherwise ceased being a part of the colony during the year;
the number of kittens born to colony cats and their disposition; and
the number of cats and kittens placed in permanent homes as
companion cats; and
(10) Obtaining proper medical attention to any colony cat that appears
to require it; make every attempt to "ear tip" all cats with a single
cut preferably on the left ear for each cat in the colony. If this is not
practicable under the circumstances, photographic documentation
adequate to identify the cat shall be obtained.
B. If, for any reason, a caregiver can no longer perform the duties as
stated in this section, it shall be the responsibility of that individual to
find a replacement caregiver for the colony in question, who will then
manage the colony in compliance with this section.
A. The left ear of a colony cat that has been spayed or neutered and
vaccinated shall be eartipped.
§ 108-44 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 108-46
86:392
§ 108-47. Enforcement.
The Borough shall have the following rights:
§ 108-48. Additional rights. [Amended 9-14-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-38]
Borough health officers and police officers may investigate any nuisance
complaint despite the requirements of this article.
§ 108-49. Other provisions. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-38]
A. An Animal Control Officer who has trapped a cat whose left ear has
been tipped or which bears some other distinguished mark indicating
that it belongs to a feral cat colony shall notify the Board of Health or
Feral Cat Committee, as the case may be. [Amended 9-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-38]
B. If the caregiver is not able to immediately take custody of the cat, the
officer shall transport the cat to the Sayrebrook Veterinary Hospital
Animal Shelter. The caregiver shall be responsible for retrieving the cat
from the shelter within three business days or advising the shelter if the
caregiver does not intend to retrieve the cat.
A. The right to seize or remove cats from a colony that have not been
vaccinated against rabies and which are demonstrating signs of the
disease.
B. The right to seize/remove a cat from a colony that is creating a nuisance
as defined above after the caregiver has been given 60 days to remove
and relocate the cat and has failed to do so.
C. The right to seize/remove a colony of cats when the caregiver regularly
fails to comply with the requirements of § 108-44.
A. Managed feral colonies registered with the Board of Health or Feral Cat
Committee shall be exempt from licensing.
B. It shall be unlawful to feed feral cats unless they are spayed/neutered
and vaccinated in accordance with this article. Animal Control Officers
shall be empowered to give warning notices to individuals feeding feral
cats outside the guidelines of this article requiring them to contact the
Board of Health or Feral Cat Committee, within 30 days, to obtain help
getting the cats neutered and vaccinated and otherwise brought into
compliance with this article. Failure to make such contact within 30
days and cooperate with the Committee may result in fines of up to
$100 per cat.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to actually abuse, threaten to abuse
or interfere in any way with the management or operation of any
registered feral cat colony.
§ 108-46 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-50
86:393
§ 108-50. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-14-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-38]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1,
Article 1, General Penalty, and each violation of any of the provisions of this
article and each day the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a
separate and distinct offense.
§ 108-50 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 108-50
86:394
ARTICLE VIII
Cat Licensing and Control
[Adopted 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-51]
§ 108-51. Title.
This article may be cited as the "Borough of South River Cat Licensing and
Rabies Vaccination Ordinance."
§ 108-52. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated and/
or certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this
article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male or female, whether
neutered or not.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, includes every
person having a right of property or custody in such cat and every person
who has a cat in his or her keeping, or who harbors or maintains a cat or
who knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied
by that person.
VICIOUS CAT — Any cat which has attacked or bitten any human being
without provocation.
§ 108-53. Vaccination requirements.
A. Vaccination required; exception. No person shall own, keep, harbor or
maintain a cat within the Borough of South River unless such cat is
vaccinated and licensed. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of
Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization,
published by the National Association of State Public Health
Veterinarians, except as provided for in Subsection C below. The
provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a kennel, pound,
licensed animal shelter, pet shop, state or federal licensed research
facility or veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept for
diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatment.
B. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each cat vaccinated. This certificate shall be in the form
recommended by the State of New Jersey.
§ 108-51 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-53
86:395
§ 108-54. Licensing requirements.
C. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted by the Borough Clerk from the
requirements of such vaccination for a specified period of time upon
presentation to the Borough Clerk of a veterinarian certificate stating
that because of an infirmity or other physical condition, or regimen or
therapy, the inoculation of such cat should be deemed inadvisable.
A. License and registration tag required; exception.
(1) No person shall own, keep or harbor any cat within the Borough of
South River without obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by the
Borough Clerk upon application by the person owning, keeping or
harboring the cat and upon payment of the prescribed fee.
(2) Any person who owns, keeps or harbors a cat shall, in the month of
January, with renewal thereof expiring on January 31 of the
following year, apply for and receive from the Borough Clerk a
license and official metal registration tag for each cat owned, kept
or harbored and shall place upon each such cat a collar with the
registration tag securely fastened thereto.
(3) The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing age or of any cat
which attains licensing age shall make application for a license and
registration tag for that cat within 10 days of acquiring the cat or of
the cat attaining licensing age. Any person who shall bring or cause
to be brought into the Borough of South River any cat licensed in
another state for the current year and bearing a registration tag
and who shall keep the cat within the Borough for a period of more
than 90 days shall immediately apply for a license and registration
tag for that cat. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought
into the Borough any unlicensed cat and who shall keep the cat
within the Borough for more than 10 days shall immediately apply
for a license and registration tag for that cat.
(4) The requirements of this section shall not apply to feral cats that
are members of a managed colony.
B. Removal of tag prohibited. No person except an officer in the
performance of his duty shall remove a registration tag from the collar
of any cat without the consent of the owner, nor shall any person attach
a registration tag to a cat for which it was not issued.
C. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat upon the request of
any health official, police officer, Animal Control Officer or other
authorized person.
D. Fees; renewal. A person applying for license and registration tags or
renewal thereof shall pay the fees required by § 155-6.69 Each cat
69.Editor's Note: See Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 108-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 108-54
86:396
§ 108-55. Disposition of fees.
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions
of this article shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the Borough of South
River and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of the
other accounts of the Borough of South River and shall be used for the
following purposes only: collecting, keeping and disposing of cats liable
to seizure; local prevention and control of rabies; providing anti-rabies
treatment under the direction of the Board of Health for any person known
or suspected to have been exposed to rabies; or administering the
provisions of this article. Any unexpended balance remaining in such special
account shall be retained until the end of the third fiscal year following and
may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of
the third fiscal year following and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter,
there shall be transferred from said special account to the general funds of
the Borough any amount then in such account which is in excess of the total
amount paid into the special account during the last two fiscal years next
preceding.
§ 108-56. Access to premises.
The provisions of § 108-16 of Article II, regarding right of entry to premises,
are hereby made applicable to cats.
§ 108-57. Removal of feces and disposition of pet waste.
The removal of animal feces required by Articles IV and V of this chapter is
hereby made applicable to cats other than feral cats that are members of a
managed colony.
license and registration tag shall expire on the last day of January of
the calendar year following the calendar year in which it was issued.
Accordingly, all license fees shall be due and payable no later than the
last day of January. The license fee shall not be prorated for a portion
of the year of initial licensing. Persons who fail to obtain licenses as
required within the time period specified in this section will be subject
to a delinquent fee as set forth in § 155-6, in addition to any penalty
previously set forth below.
E. Application. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and
markings of the cat for which the license and registration are sought
and whether it is of a long- or short-haired variety, as well as the name,
street and post office address of the owner and the person who shall
keep or harbor such cat. The information on said application and the
registration number issued for the cat shall be preserved for a period of
three years by the Borough Clerk.
F. Any valid New Jersey license tag issued by a New Jersey municipality
shall be accepted by the Borough as evidence of compliance.
§ 108-54 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 108-58
86:397
§ 108-58. Responsibilities of owners of domesticated cats.
The provisions of § 108-42 of Article VII of this chapter shall apply to all cats
licensed hereunder.
§ 108-59. Enforcement.
The Chief of Police and the Animal Control Officer shall have the primary
duty of enforcing this article.
§ 108-60. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who violates or
who fails or refuses to comply with this article shall be liable to a penalty
as prescribed in Chapter 1, § 1-1, General Penalty, of this Code, for each
offense, to be recovered by and in the name of the municipality.
§ 108-58 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 108-60
86:398
Chapter 110
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Fees — See Ch. 155.
§ 110-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare and is passed in furtherance of the
specific objective to properly establish, regulate and control amusement
devices within the Borough of South River and, in so doing, to protect
the established character and the social and economic well-being of both
private and public property.
§ 110-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who supplies any mechanical amusement
device to another for use in his place of business, whether under lease or
any similar arrangement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which may be
operated by the public for entertainment or amusement, whether the
machine is coin-operated or not and whether or not it registers scores or
tallies. Examples of mechanical amusement devices are pinball machines,
bowling machines, mechanical grab machines, Skee-Ball machines,
pokerino machines, juke boxes, electronic video games, electronic video
games and similar devices. The enumeration is intended to be typical and
shall not be construed as exclusive. All "mechanical amusement devices"
are subject to Chapter 350, Zoning, of the South River Code. Such devices
are permitted uses only in the B-2 Zone. The installation of "mechanical
amusement devices" shall be considered to be an amusement facility subject
to the remaining provisions of the Code of the Borough of South River.70
OPERATOR — Any person in whose place of business or upon whose
premises any mechanical amusement device is placed or kept for operation
by the public, whether or not such device is owned by said person.
§ 110-3. License required.
No person shall distribute or operate a mechanical amusement device
within the Borough of South River without having first obtained a license
and paid the required license fee.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 108-60 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 110-4
86:399
§ 110-4. License applications.
Applicants for distributor's or operator's licenses shall supply the
information required on forms available at the office of the Borough Clerk.
Applicants which are corporations shall supply the information required for
all officers and directors and for all stockholders of the corporation who own
more than 10% of its issued and outstanding capital stock. Corporations
shall also supply the name and address of their registered agent. Applicants
for licenses under this chapter shall be required to supply a description of
the machine or device sought to be licensed.
§ 110-5. Fees.
§ 110-6. Transfer of license.
A license may be transferred from one machine to another by giving notice
to the Borough Clerk to that effect and giving a description of the new
machine. A license may be transferred from one place to another by giving
notice to the Borough Clerk to that effect and supplying the required
information as to the new premises.
§ 110-7. Location restrictions. [Amended 6-16-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-21]
No mechanical amusement device shall be located in any premises within
300 feet of a church or religious institution or a public or private school.
The distance shall be measured from the nearest entrance of the church
or school to the nearest entrance of the premises on which the mechanical
amusement devise is located or is sought to be located along the route
that a pedestrian would normally walk. Mechanical amusement devices are
permitted in B-2 Zones and premises licensed for retail consumption of
alcoholic beverages and are specifically prohibited in all other zones.
A. Distributors shall be charged the fees provided for in Chapter 155,
Fees.
B. Operators shall be charged fees as provided in Chapter 155, Fees. An
operator who uses machines owned by him in his own place of business
shall not be required to possess a distributor's license.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A and B of this section,
the sole fee for jukeboxes and similar music-producing devices shall be
as provided in Chapter 155 and shall be charged to the operator.
D. The fees shall be paid annually by March 31 of each year. [Added
8-8-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-21]
§ 110-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 110-8
86:400
§ 110-8. Review and enforcement. [Amended 9-9-1982 by Ord. No.
1982-32; 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-31; 7-12-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-23]
A copy of the application shall be referred immediately to the Zoning
Officer of the Borough of South River, who shall determine if the proposed
location of said amusement device shall be in compliance with Chapter 350,
Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of South River. Both the Zoning Officer
and the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of South River shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the terms and provisions of this chapter.
§ 110-9. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all mechanical amusement devices:
A. The premises shall be so arranged as to permit a clear view of each
mechanical amusement device from the exterior at all times.
B. No operator shall knowingly permit any person convicted of a crime
involving moral turpitude to be associated with him in the ownership or
management of the business or to be in his employ or to loiter on the
premises.
C. No operator shall offer or permit to be offered any prizes or awards,
whether in cash or otherwise, as an inducement to use mechanical
amusement devices except for trophies, plaques or items of a similar
nature of nominal value.
D. No operator shall permit any minor under the age of 16 years,
unaccompanied by a parent or guardian, to remain on the premises
after 10:00 p.m.
E. No operator shall permit any activity which is illegal or immoral or
which creates an undue amount of noise or a danger of a breach of the
peace to occur on the premises.
F. No operator shall permit the operation of his premises between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 9:00 a.m.
G. There shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises in capital
letters six inches in height a notice stating:
(1) The prohibited hours of operation.
(2) The fact that no minor under the age of 16 years, unaccompanied
by a parent or adult guardian, may remain on the premises after
10:00 p.m.
H. Applicability of other regulations; open space requirements. [Amended
9-23-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-36]
(1) Erection and installation of coin-operated or non-coin-operated
mechanical amusement devices shall comply with all local, state
§ 110-8 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT § 110-9
86:401
§ 110-10. Issuance of license.
Each license shall be granted only after a determination by the Borough
Council that the issuance of the license will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizenry of the Borough of South
River. The Borough Council may, if it so desires, in its sole discretion,
hold public hearings regarding the issuance of any license requested in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Borough Council may
consider such factors as the number of such devices or machines previously
approved for the same premises; the degree to which the grant of license
may create a tendency toward crowding or loitering and such other factors
as the Council deems in accordance with the public interest in deciding
whether to grant any license requested or whether to hold a hearing with
regard to any application for such license.
§ 110-11. Gambling use prohibited.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize any gambling device
of any kind whatsoever, including any device that dispenses any kind of
payoff or reward or any device that has been judicially determined to be a
gambling device under any law of the State of New Jersey. If the Chief of
Police has reason to believe any mechanical amusement device is used as a
gambling device, he shall cause that machine to be seized and impounded.
If after trial it is determined that the machine was in fact being used as a
gambling device, it shall be destroyed, and the license of the operator or
distributor shall be revoked. Revocation of license and seizure of machine
and federal fire and safety regulations, statutes and codes. In
addition, for each one square foot of floor space occupied, taken
up or covered by a machine (to be measured at its widest, deepest
and longest points whether touching the surface of the floor or
not) there shall be a minimum of three square feet of open space
in order to provide an established ratio between occupied space
and space for the unobstructed flow of customers. If machines are
located along an aisleway, the minimum width of aisles between the
machines shall be eight feet.
(2) In computing open space as used in this section, any and all interior
sections of the structure reserved for an office, rest room,
operation, storage or other facilities shall be deducted and only the
actual open unobstructed floor space shall be considered open for
purposes of this calculation.
I. During the hours of operation, the premises must be supervised at all
times by at least one responsible adult individual, who shall be an
employee of the owner or operator of the premises and who shall be
responsible for the supervision, maintenance and operation of the
premises. At least one such individual shall be visibly present on the
premises during all hours of operation.
§ 110-9 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 110-11
86:402
are in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed for a violation of
this chapter.
§ 110-12. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough.
§ 110-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction for such violation, be punished as provided
in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, at the discretion of this court. Each
and every day in which a violation of any provision of this chapter exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 112
BILLIARD ROOMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Entertainment — See Ch. 151.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Licensed trades and occupations — See Ch.
209.
§ 112-1. License required; exceptions.
§ 112-2. Licensing procedure. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
The Borough Council is hereby authorized to license any person or persons
to keep a billiard saloon at any regular meeting of the Council. Before any
license so granted shall be delivered to the applicant or applicants for the
A. No person or persons shall keep a billiard saloon within the limits of the
Borough of South River unless such person or persons shall have first
obtained a license for such purpose.
B. The keeping of any table upon which billiards, pocket billiards, the
game called "pool" or any other similar game is allowed to be played
shall constitute the keeping of a billiard saloon under this chapter;
provided, however, that this chapter shall not prohibit any person
without license from keeping, using and maintaining a table upon which
billiards, pocket billiards, the game called "pool" or any other similar
game is played in or upon his residence or place of abode for his own
use; and provided further that this chapter shall not apply to any
corporation, association or club not established or existing for
pecuniary profit and not affording admission to the public.
§ 110-11 BILLIARD ROOMS § 112-2
112:403
same, the license fee and costs shall be paid to the Borough Clerk, who shall
pay the same to the Borough Treasurer. All licenses granted hereunder shall
be signed by the Mayor and Clerk. Every license granted under this chapter
shall bear even date with the day when the same is signed by the Mayor and
Clerk, and unless sooner revoked by lawful authority, all licenses granted
under the provisions of this chapter shall expire and be utterly void and of
no effect on the first day of May in each year.
§ 112-3. Requisites for licensing.
No license to keep a billiard saloon shall be granted unless the applicant
therefor is a citizen of the United States and unless there is presented to the
Borough Council a written application signed by the applicant or applicants,
setting forth the place or premises where they wish to keep their table and
the number and kind of tables which they propose to use. Each application
shall also be signed by at least 10 reputable citizens and freeholders of
the Borough of South River recommending the granting of such license
and certifying that the applicant is of good repute and is in their judgment
a proper and fit person to have such license. There shall be attached
to the said application, and form a part thereof, an oath or affirmation
of the applicant, before some person authorized to administer the same,
setting forth that the applicant is a citizen of the United States and that
each and every person who has signed recommending the granting of a
license is a citizen and freeholder of the Borough of South River; provided,
however, that where the application is for a renewal or continuation of such
license, then such application may be signed by the applicant only and the
recommendation of the citizens and freeholders and the oath relating to the
freeholders shall be dispensed with.
§ 112-4. License fee. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6]
The fee for a license to keep a billiard room wherein billiards, pocket
billiards, the game called "pool" or any other similar game is played shall be
as provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 112-5. Hours of operation. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6; 4-18-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-27]
Every person who may be granted a license hereunder shall close his
billiard saloon on weekdays and Saturdays at 2:00 a.m. and shall remain
closed until 7:00 a.m. of the same day except on Sundays when the billiard
saloon shall close at 2:00 a.m. and remain closed until 12:00 noon on
the same day. The entire interior of such billiard saloon, during all of the
prohibited hours, shall be opened to full view from the public street.
§ 112-6. License not transferable.
No license shall entitle any licensee to keep a billiard saloon in any other
place than that which is designated in said license, nor shall such license be
assignable or transferable.
§ 112-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 112-7
112:404
§ 112-7. Display of license.
Any person or persons granted a license under this chapter shall cause the
license certificate issued to be kept in a conspicuous part of the licensed
place of business.
§ 112-8. Exclusion of minors; gambling prohibited. [Amended
10-4-1989 by Ord. No. 1989-26]
§ 112-9. Record of licenses.
A true and correct list of all licenses which shall be granted under this
chapter shall be kept by the Borough Clerk in a book to be provided for that
purpose, which book shall at all times be open to the public for inspection.
§ 112-10. Form of license; renewal.
A. No person or persons licensed under this chapter to keep a billiard
saloon shall suffer or permit any person under the age of 18 years to
frequent or loiter in, upon or about such licensed premises, unless said
person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or spouse who has
attained the age of 18 years. This prohibition shall not apply to persons
who are bona fide employees of the licensee, during the hours of their
employment.
B. No licensee shall suffer or permit any dice throwing, crap shooting,
gambling or disorderly conduct of any kind whatsoever in, upon or
about such licensed premises.
A. Every license to keep a billiard saloon shall be substantially in the
following words: "License to keep a Billiard Saloon. This license expires
May 1, 20___. The Borough Council of the Borough of South River, by
virtue of the laws of the State of New Jersey and the ordinance of the
Borough of South River relating thereto, and by these presents, does
grant to __________________________ a license to keep a billiard saloon in
the house located on _______________ Street in said Borough of South
River, from the date hereof to May 1, 20___, unless sooner revoked,
wherein the said licensee may keep, use and maintain ______ tables
upon which billiards, pocket billiards, the game called 'pool' or any
other similar game is played, upon condition nevertheless that the said
licensee shall, during the said term, keep and observe all the laws of the
State of New Jersey and ordinances of the Borough of South River of the
Borough Council relating to the license and regulation of billiard
saloons in said Borough of South River, now existing or that may be
passed during the term. Dated at South River, N.J._________ 20___,
Borough Clerk __________________ Mayor."
B. Licenses shall be renewable annually on or before the first day of May.
[Added 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6]
§ 112-7 BILLIARD ROOMS § 112-11
112:405
§ 112-11. Complaints and prosecutions.
All complaints of violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be made
before the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Borough of South River, and
the fine or penalty arising under this chapter, as hereinafter prescribed,
may be recovered before such Judge in the manner provided by law, and
when recovered, shall be paid into the Borough treasury.
§ 112-12. Revocation of license.
In addition to the fine or penalties hereinabove mentioned and prescribed
for a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Borough Council may
revoke the license so issued, if it deems it proper so to do, if, after due notice
to the licensee and an opportunity is given to said licensee to be heard
thereon, the Council is satisfied that the said licensee has offended against
any law of the state applicable to such licensed place or that the provisions
of this chapter or any section or part thereof have been violated.
§ 112-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I,
General Penalty.
Chapter 116
BINGO
§ 116-1. Statutory provisions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq., games of chance, inclusive of bingo, are
prohibited on Sunday unless provided for by ordinance to be adopted by the
governing body.
§ 116-2. Legislative declaration.
Bingo is deemed to be a significant source of revenue to bona fide veterans,
charitable, educational, religious or fraternal organizations, civic and
service clubs, volunteer fire companies and first aid or rescue squads.
§ 116-3. Sunday bingo permitted.
Bingo shall be permitted within the Borough on Sunday of each week, not
to commence earlier than 2:00 p.m., prevailing time.
§ 116-4. Regulation of applications and licenses.
All applications and licenses to hold Sunday bingo shall be subject to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq. and to the rules and regulations issued or
to be promulgated by the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission
§ 112-11 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 116-4
116:406
in the Department of State of the State of New Jersey, and to laws, rules and
regulations hereinafter enacted by the governing body.
Chapter 122
CHECKS, RETURNED
§ 122-1. Returned check charge.71
Any individual who shall pay any charges, fees or taxes to the Borough of
South River for any charges which shall accrue shall be responsible for an
additional fee of $20, in the event said payment is made by check and said
check is returned to the Borough of South River dishonored for any reason,
including but not limited to not sufficient funds.
Chapter 124
(RESERVED)
Chapter 127
COMMEMORATIVE BENCH AND TREE PROGRAM
§ 127-1. Establishment.
The Borough of South River Commemorative Bench and Tree Program be
and is hereby established.
§ 127-2. Purpose.
The general purposes for the Commemorative Bench and Tree Program
include but are not limited to:
§ 127-3. Mission statement.
A. To provide local citizens and businesses the opportunity to
commemorate or honor individuals of the Borough of South River;
B. To solicit and evaluate environmental ideas and suggestions from the
community; and
C. To promote the causes of sustainability within the Borough.
A. In the hope to promote sustainability, as well as to honor individuals or
businesses that choose to join the Borough in its promotion, this
program will allow for commemorative plaques to be placed on existing
park benches, benches currently located in public places and on newly
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 116-4 CHECKS, RETURNED § 127-3
122:407
§ 127-4. Administrative departments.
§ 127-5. Fees.
§ 127-6. Application procedure.
planted trees throughout the Borough ["hereinafter "designated
site(s)"].
B. Any applicant wishing to participate in this program will be guided and
restricted by the policies and procedures enumerated herein. All
applications, inquiries and administrative decisions regarding the
Commemorative Bench and Tree Program will be handled by
designated Borough departments also enumerated herein.
C. The cost for participating in this program will be set at a fixed price and
will include the creation of a commemorative plaque to be placed at a
designated site. The applicant will be able to choose the type of
designated site he or she wishes to commemorate. The applicant will
also be able to apply for the insertion of the name of an individual
honoree or business name to be transcribed on the plaques. These
transcriptions will be reviewed during the application process and may
be denied in accordance with the standards set forth herein while, at
the same time, promoting free and unfettered speech in accordance
with the United States Constitution.
D. As it is of the upmost importance, and a major concern for the Borough
of South River, sustainability and aesthetic preservation will be
promoted through this program. This program will also allow the
Borough to honor its citizens that desire to join the Borough in its
endeavor to promote community and environmental values on a
collaborative scale.
A. All applications, requests and administrative decisions regarding
commemorative plaques on new benches and existing benches in public
places throughout the Borough shall be submitted to and handled by
the Recreation Department;
B. All applications, requests and administrative decisions regarding
commemorative plaques on newly planted trees throughout the
Borough shall be submitted to and handled by the South River Shade
Tree Commission.
A. The fee for a commemorative bench will be $350 per application.
B. The fee for a commemorative tree will be $150 per application.
A. All citizens and business owners wishing to participate in this program
will be required to complete and submit an application with the
designated departments enumerated herein;
B. The application fee must be paid at the time of submission;
§ 127-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 127-6
122:408
§ 127-7. Commemorative plaques and transcription of names.
The donor will be able to choose from a list of approved potential wording to
be placed on a plaque on the initial application for departmental approval.
§ 127-8. Bench installation.
C. If the applicant chooses to provide a name of an individual to be
transcribed on a commemorative plaque, same must be provided in the
initial application;
D. Once an application is received, the review process will commence;
E. Upon approval, the applicant will be contacted and provided with
prospective designated sites where the commemorative bench or tree
will be located;
F. If an applicant chooses to dedicate a tree located in the Borough, it will
be the choice of the applicant to provide a tree to be planted or to leave
the selection and planting of the tree to the South River Shade Tree
Commission;
G. If an applicant wishes to donate the tree, the species of tree must be
specified and chosen from the list of approved tree species;
H. If an application is denied, the applicant will be contacted and will
receive a full refund of the initial application fee;
I. Once a designated site is approved by the Borough and an applicant,
the commemorative plaque will be placed at a designated site.
A. Once the plaque is received, the designated departments will contact
the donor, and timing for installation of the bench will be determined by
crew availability. Based on the time of year and weather permitting, this
may be subject to some delay.
B. Installation will be coordinated with the donor's schedule whenever
possible.
C. Once installed, any subsequent repair or replacement of the plaque will
be the responsibility of the donor.
§ 127-6 CHECKS, RETURNED § 127-8
122:409
Chapter 129
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 50.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 169.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
295.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 129-1. Adoption of standards.
That certain code known and designated as the "State Uniform Construction
Code," P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.), is hereby adopted as
the Construction and Building Code of the Borough of South River, for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the aforesaid
documents are hereby adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this chapter, except where contrary to the additions, insertions, deletions,
amendments and changes.
§ 129-2. Copies on file as public record.
Three copies of the Construction and Building Code adopted by this chapter,
with any additions, insertions, deletions and amendments clearly marked,
have been placed on file in the office of the Borough Clerk and shall remain
on file in such office for use and examination by the public.
§ 129-3. Enforcing agency established; subcode officials designated.
An enforcing agency is hereby established in the Borough of South River,
New Jersey, as required by the State of New Jersey, P.L. 1975, c. 217, in the
Department of Administration of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
The enforcing agency shall be further known and designated as the "South
River, New Jersey, Building Department," located at 48 Washington Street,
South River, New Jersey 08882.
A. Construction Official. A new title and position is hereby established in
the Building Department of Construction Official, who shall be the Chief
Administrator of the enforcing agency, and he shall be certified by the
Department of Community Affairs as provided in the regulations.72
Further, the Construction Official shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council and shall hold such office for a period of four years.
B. Subcode officials.
72.Editor's Note: "The regulations" refers to the regulations established by the Commissioner
of the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 127-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 129-3
129:410
§ 129-4. Organization of enforcing agency; central permit office.
(1) The following subcode officials shall constitute the enforcing
agency under the Act: Construction Official, Plumbing Inspector,
Electrical Inspector and Chief Combustible Inspector, and their
assistants, who are appointed for four-year terms with the
exception of assistants or trainees for whom the Commissioner of
Community Affairs may establish separate requirements.
(2) The subcode officials as provided in the Act shall be appointed by
the Mayor and Council and shall be certified as provided in the
regulations promulgated by the Department of Community Affairs.
Their appointments are for four-year terms under the Act (P.L.
1975, c. 217, Section 8c; N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126c).
(3) In lieu of the appointment of an Electrical Subcode Official or a
contract with an electrical on-site inspection agency, the existing
electrical inspection authorities may continue to operate as per
N.J.A.C. 14:5-71.1 et seq. until the Borough of South River directly
contracts with same, but in no case shall such existing electrical
inspection authorities continue after January 1, 1978, except in
conformity with Article 36 of the Regulations of the New Jersey
Administrative Code. The Plumbing Inspector currently employed
by the South River Board of Health shall be removed therefrom and
shall assume the position of Plumbing Subcode Official pursuant to
the law made and provided therefor and under the terms and
conditions hereof.
(4) Nothing shall prevent one person from serving in more than one
position for which he is certified and qualified. However, more than
one person shall not be appointed concurrently to the same
position.
(5) In lieu of any particular subcode official created in Subsection B, an
on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:23.
A. Construction Official.
(1) The Construction Official shall serve as the chief administrator of
the enforcing agency. He shall establish the day-to-day operating
routines of the agency.
(2) The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode
officials, prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council, biannually,
a report recommending a fee schedule based on the operating
expenses of the agency and any other expenses of the municipality
fairly attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act.
B. Subcode officials shall enforce the provisions of those subcodes for
which they are responsible, in accordance with Part II of the
§ 129-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 129-4
129:411
§ 129-5. Duties of Construction Official.
regulations, and for which they are qualified in accordance with Part
IV of the regulations and for which they have been appointed by the
Mayor and Council. Each subcode official shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of the appropriate subcode, subject
to the Construction Official. However, each subcode official shall have
exclusive decision-making authority with respect to the technical
provisions of his subcode.
C. The enforcing agency shall report annually, at the end of each fiscal
year, to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July 31,
the total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year. In the
fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said report
shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
D. Central permit office. There shall be maintained, under the direction
and supervision of the Construction Official, a central permit office at
48 Washington Street. This office shall receive applications for
construction permits and plan review; issue construction permits and
certificates of occupancy; collect fees, penalties and fines; and issue
notices and orders. The office shall be open during normal business
hours at times to be determined by the Construction Official.
E. Schedule of hours and records of Construction Official. The
Construction Official shall be available for consultation and discussion
during normal business hours at scheduled times to be determined by
the Construction Official. All inspections shall take place between 8:30
a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on business days, or while construction is taking
place, or in cases of emergency, or with the permission of the owner or
his representative. Further, there shall be maintained in this office a
central file system for each property in the municipality for which a
permit has been issued or requested or for which an action has been
taken by the municipal enforcing agency. The files shall contain all
information, including inspection reports, correspondence, etc.,
relevant to each application for a construction permit, certificate of
occupancy, variance, and so forth, as may be directed by the
Department of Community Affairs and/or the governing body of the
Borough of South River, New Jersey. The files shall contain and indicate
the storage location of all plans and specifications too bulky for storage
in said file, and still further, are public records. The Borough will
maintain all files unless the Department shall rule otherwise.
A. The Construction Official shall:
(1) Provide that applications are available and assist the public in
preparing the applications, whenever necessary.
(2) Upon receipt of the application, review the application and
determine the proper fee for the work required.
§ 129-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 129-5
129:412
§ 129-6. Duties of subcode officials.
The subcode officials shall:
(3) Collect all fees and penalties and ensure that funds are properly
accounted for.
(4) Review all applications for completeness as to form and for
verification of prior approvals. He may request additional
documentation concerning prior approvals whenever it is deemed
necessary.
(5) Ensure that the proper subcode official shall have an adequate time
period to review appropriate applications, plans and specifications.
(6) Ensure that all requests for variation are properly prepared,
documented and referred to the appropriate subcode officials.
(7) Issue the construction permit upon reviewing the approval of all
appropriate subcode officials.
(8) Record all notices of violations upon receiving notification of the
appropriate subcode official, and determine all penalties for
noncompliance with the penalty notices.
(9) Ensure that all required inspections are scheduled and performed.
(10) Ensure that the reports of all inspections are completed and
properly filed.
(11) Record stop-work orders, upon notification of the appropriate
subcode official.
(12) Ensure that all final inspections have been completed prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(13) Issue the certificate of occupancy upon receiving the approval of all
appropriate subcode officials.
(14) Ensure, in the case of a change of use, or upon a request for a new
certificate of occupancy, that each subcode official gives an
approval based on an inspection and the review of all submitted
data before issuing a new certificate of occupancy.
(15) Prepare and obtain reports required in the regulations.
B. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Construction Official from
overruling a decision of a subcode official if he is qualified and certified
in that subcode pursuant to Part IV of the regulations.
A. Review those aspects of the application, plans and specifications
appropriate to his subcode for approval and release to the Construction
Official for issuance of the permit.
§ 129-5 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 129-6
129:413
§ 129-7. Fees.
B. Receive, directly from the applicant, and review applications for minor
or emergency work for approval and release to the Construction Official
for issuance of the permit.
C. Comply with the time limitations for review as determined by the
Construction Official.
D. Review requests for variations as necessary.
E. Perform all required inspections.
F. Issue notices of violation in the name of the enforcing agency and notify
the Construction Official of same. The subcode official may issue verbal
orders at the job site and shall record such orders in his inspection
report.
G. Complete reports of all inspections performed.
H. Issue stop-work orders in the name of the enforcing agency and notify
the Construction Official of same.
I. Perform final inspection and notify the Construction Official of approval
in order that he may issue certificates of occupancy.
J. Make inspections, review submitted data and notify the Construction
Official of approval in the case of a change of use or a request for a new
certificate of occupancy.
K. Assist the Construction Official in the preparation of all reports
required in the regulations.
L. Attend meetings and hearings as required by the regulations.
M. Issue documentation and certification, such as cut-in cards of utilities
and/or public agencies if required by the code, the Commissioner and
by law.73
A. Construction permits. All construction fees shall be payable to the
Construction Official at the central office at 48 Washington Street. The
fees are calculated to reasonably cover the municipal cost as required
in the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs and will be
the sum of the subcode fees as follows:
(1) Plan review. Twenty percent of the construction fee shall be the
plan review fee paid at the time of submission of an application for
a permit. The amount of this fee shall then be deducted from the
amount of the fee due for a construction permit when same is
issued. Plan review fees are not refundable.
73.Editor's Note: Original § 81-7, Adoption of subcodes by reference, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
§ 129-6 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 129-7
129:414
(2) Plan review waiver. The construction permit shall be reduced 20%
when a plan review is waived.
(3) Partial plan review. For projects that do not require plan review for
all subcodes, the fee shall be the appropriate percentage of the
subcodes which are applicable.
B. Volume computations for building fees. For the determination of the
permit fees, the volume of the structures shall be computed as follows:
(1) Structures with a basement or cellar. The volume of the structure
shall include all enclosed dormers, porches, penthouses and other
enclosed portions of the structure extending from the basement or
cellar floor to the mean height of a pitched roof or the average
height to the top of the roof beams of a flat roof.
(2) Structures without a basement or cellar. For structures without a
basement or cellar, the volume shall be based on the height
measured to a level located 1/5 the distance from the first-floor
level to the bottom of the footings, but not to exceed 2 1/2 feet
below the first-floor level.
(3) Open sheds. For open sheds and structures of a similar character,
the volume shall be measured within the perimeter of the roof for a
height from grade line to the mean roof level.
C. Building, plumbing, electrical and other fees shall be as provided in
Chapter 155, Fees. [Amended 12-13-1978 by Ord. No. 1978-32;
7-28-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-35; 11-12-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-52;
11-14-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-30; 5-6-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-14;
11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-42]
D. State of New Jersey surcharge fees. [Amended 5-6-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-14]
(1) The surcharge is based on the volume of the structure as computed
in Subsection B above and shall be at the rate provided in Chapter
155, Fees.
(2) Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing
Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis
for the fiscal quarters ending September 30, December 31, March
31 and June 30, and not later than one month next succeeding the
end of the quarter for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the
regulations first become effective, said fee shall be collected and
remitted for the third and fourth quarters only.
E. The fee for pursuing an application to the Middle Department
Inspection Agency, Inc., or any private third-party on-site inspection
agency shall be 15% of the permit fee for the subcodes being enforced
by the private inspection agency. [Added 11-14-1985 by Ord. No.
§ 129-7 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 129-7
129:415
§ 129-8. Right of entry for inspection.
§ 129-9. Notice of violation; order to terminate.
1985-30; amended 5-6-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-14; 5-10-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-15; 11-29-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-40]
F. All fees pursuant to this chapter shall be rounded to the nearest dollar.
[Added 11-29-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-40]
A. The owner of any premises upon which a building or structure is being
constructed shall be deemed to have consented to the inspection, by the
enforcing agency and the Department, of the entire premises and of any
and all construction being performed on it until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued.
B. An inspector or team of inspectors, on presentation of proper
credentials, shall have the right to enter and inspect such premises and
any and all construction thereon for purposes of ensuring compliance
with the provisions of this chapter and code or to require the removal or
termination of the unlawful use of the building or structure in violation
of the provisions of the code or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
A. The Construction Official shall serve, either personally or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a notice of violation and orders to
terminate on the person responsible for the erection, construction,
alteration, extension, repair, removal, demolition or use of a building or
structure in violation of the provisions of the code, or in violation of a
detailed statement or a plan approved thereunder, or in violation of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of the code; and such
order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition
and the correction of the violation.
B. The notice and orders shall contain at least the following information;
the name and address of the owner or lessee; the address at which the
violation has occurred; the name and business address of the person
upon whom service is made if it is other than the owner; the name and
address of the person to whom the order is directed; a citation to the
sections of the code violated; an order to terminate violations within a
time specified in the order; and the amount of the penalty assessed, if
any, and a citation to its statutory and regulatory source and, if
cumulative, an explanation of the method of computation; and shall be
signed by the appropriate subcode official and the Construction Official.
C. Unless an immediate hazard to health and safety is posed, the
Construction Official shall permit such time period for correction as is
reasonable within the context of the violation.
D. Extensions. The Construction Official may grant extensions of time
specified whenever he shall determine that, despite diligent effort,
§ 129-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 129-9
129:416
§ 129-10. Violations and penalties.74
compliance cannot be accomplished within the time specified in the
notice. If, however, such extension shall be for a period in excess of
three working days, the Construction Official shall require a written
application of extension stating the need upon which he shall rule, in
writing, and which shall be made a part of the permanent file of the
project.
E. Corrections. If the notice of violation and orders to terminate have been
complied with, the Construction Official, in addition to any other
available remedies likely to bring about compliance, may request the
legal counsel of the Borough to institute the appropriate proceeding at
law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate.
A. Any person or corporation, including any officer, director or employee
of a corporation shall be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article I,
General Penalty, for the following:
(1) Violation of any of the provisions of the Act or the code for each
such violation after expiration of the time period delineated in the
notice and order to terminate and shall be subject to a further
penalty for each week in which he fails to comply with any such
order. The time period for such weekly penalty assessment shall
begin to run from the day after the date set for compliance in the
notice and orders to abate. Though all violations may, for purposes
of administration, be sent in one form of notice and orders, each
shall be considered a separate order and shall be computed as such
for purposes of this subsection.
(2) Failure to comply with a stop-construction order for each day of
failure to comply.
(3) Construction of a structure or building in violation of a condition of
the construction permit for each violation and any further violation
of the construction permit occurring after receipt of the notice and
orders to terminate the original violations of the construction
permit.
(4) Making a false or misleading written statement or omitting any
required information or statement in any application or request for
approval to an enforcing agency or the Department for each such
false or misleading statement or omission unless the Construction
Official shall determine, in writing and as part of the permanent
file, that such was of no consequence or the result of inadvertence.
B. Anyone who knowingly refuses entry or access to an inspector lawfully
authorized to inspect any premises, building or structure pursuant to
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 129-9 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 129-10
129:417
§ 129-11. Notice of penalty assessment; order to pay; collection.
§ 129-12. Stop-construction orders.
If the construction of a structure or building is being undertaken contrary
to the provisions of the code, or other applicable laws or ordinances, the
enforcing agency may issue a stop-construction order in writing, which
shall state the conditions upon which construction may be resumed and
which shall be given to the owner or the holder of the construction permit
or to the person performing the construction. If the person doing the
construction is not known, or cannot be located with reasonable effort,
the notice may be delivered to the person in charge of or apparently in
charge of the construction. No person shall continue, or cause or allow to
be continued, the construction of a building or structure in violation of a
stop-construction order, except with the permission of the enforcing agency
to abate a dangerous condition or remove a violation, or except by court
order. If an order to stop construction is not obeyed, the enforcing agency
may apply to the appropriate court as otherwise established by law for an
order enjoining the violation of the stop-construction order. The remedy for
this Act or who unreasonably interferes with such inspection shall be
subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
A. The Construction Official shall serve, either personally or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a notice of penalty assessment and an
order to pay a penalty, whenever he shall not have done so in the
original orders and notice.
B. The notice and order shall contain at least the following information:
the name and address of the owner or lessee; the address at which the
violation has occurred; the name and business address of the person
upon whom service is made if it is other than the owner; the name and
address of the person to whom the order is directed; in the case of a
violation of any of the subsections of this chapter, a statement of the
subsection violated and the specifics of that violation; and a statement
of the total amount of the penalty due or, in the case of a weekly
assessment, accruing each week that the violation remains.
C. The penalties pursuant to this section may be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1
et seq.). Jurisdiction to enforce such penalties is conferred upon Judges
of the Municipal Court in addition to the courts specified by N.J.S.A.
2A:58-2. Suit may be brought by the Borough or the State of New
Jersey. Payments of a money judgment pursuant hereto shall be
remitted, in the case of a suit brought by the Borough, to the Municipal
Treasurer and, in the case of a suit brought by the State of New Jersey,
to the State Treasurer.
D. The Construction Official may avail himself of the monetary penalty
assessment provisions hereinabove described, whenever such shall be
likely to assist in bringing about compliance.
§ 129-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 129-12
129:418
violation of such an order provided in this subsection shall be in addition to
and not in limitation of any other remedies provided by these regulations or
the law or ordinance.
§ 129-13. Unsafe structures.
A. All buildings or structures that shall become unsafe or unsanitary or
which contain deficient or blocked exitway facilities or which constitute
a fire hazard or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public
welfare or which, by reason of illegal or improper use or occupancy,
shall be deemed unsafe buildings or structures shall be taken down and
removed or made safe and secure. A vacant building unguarded or open
at a door or window shall be deemed a fire hazard and unsafe within the
meaning of the code.
B. Examination and record of damaged structures. The Construction
Official shall examine every building or structure reported as
dangerous, unsafe structurally or constituting a fire hazard; and he
shall cause the report to be filed in a docket of unsafe structures and
premises, stating the use of the structure and the nature and estimated
amount of damages, if any, caused by collapse or failure. He shall cause
to be noted all violations of the applicable construction permit, the code
and other applicable laws and regulations. All inspections pursuant to
this section shall be between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on
business days, or when construction is actually being undertaken;
provided, however, that inspections may be conducted at other times if
the enforcing agency has reasonable cause to believe that an immediate
danger to life, limb or property exists or if permission is given by an
owner or his agent, architect, engineer or builder. No person shall
accompany an inspector or team of inspectors on any inspection
pursuant to the code, unless his presence is necessary for the
enforcement of the code or unless consent is given by an owner or his
agent, architect, engineer or builder.
C. Notice of unsafe structure. If an unsafe condition is found in a building
or structure, the Construction Official shall serve on the owner, agent or
person in control of the building or structure a written notice
describing the building or structure deemed unsafe and specifying the
required repairs or improvements to be made to render the building or
structure safe and secure, or requiring the safe building or structure or
portion thereof to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice
shall require the person thus notified to immediately declare to the
Building Official his acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.
D. Restoration of unsafe structure. A building or structure condemned by
the Construction Official may be restored to a safe condition, provided
that change of use or occupancy is not contemplated or compelled by
reason of such reconstruction or restoration, except that if the damage
or cost of reconstruction or restoration is in excess of 50% of its
replacement value, exclusive of foundations, such structure shall be
§ 129-12 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 129-13
129:419
§ 129-14. Emergency measures.
made to comply in all respects with the requirements for materials and
methods of construction of structures hereafter erected.
E. Posting unsafe notice. If the person addressed with an unsafe notice
cannot be found within the Borough after diligent search, then such
notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the last known
address of such person, and a copy of the unsafe notice shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on the premises and such procedure shall be
deemed the equivalent of personal notice.
F. Upon refusal or neglect of the person served with an unsafe notice to
comply with the requirements of the order to abate the unsafe
condition, the Construction Official shall, in addition to any other
remedies herein provided, forward the matter to the legal counsel of
the jurisdiction, or, in the case of the state, to the Attorney General, for
an action to compel compliance.
G. Nothing herein is intended to limit the right of the Borough of South
River to adopt Housing, Property Maintenance or Public Health Code
enforcement rules pursuant to any other law, ordinance or judicial
decision of this state.
A. When, in the opinion of the Construction Official, there is actual and
immediate danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any
part thereof which would endanger life, or when any structure or part
of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the
building or structure, the Construction Official is hereby authorized and
empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the same
forthwith. He shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building
a notice reading as follows: "This structure is unsafe and its use or
occupancy has been prohibited by the Construction Official, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to enter such building or structure except
for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the
same."
B. Temporary safeguards. When, in the opinion of the Construction
Official, there is actual and immediate danger of collapse or failure of a
building or structure or any part thereof which would endanger life, he
shall cause the necessary work to be done to render such building or
structure or part thereof temporarily safe, whether or not the legal
procedure herein described has been instituted.
C. Closing streets. When necessary for the public safety, the Building
Official may temporarily close sidewalks, streets, buildings and
structures and places adjacent to such unsafe structures and prohibit
the same from being used.
§ 129-13 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 129-14
129:420
§ 129-15. Effect on other regulations and previously issued permits.
Chapter 133
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 253. Skateboards — See Ch. 279.
D. Emergency repairs. For the purpose of this action, the Building Official
shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required
work as expeditiously as possible.
E. Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid from the treasury of the jurisdiction, on
certificate of the Construction Official, and the legal authority of the
jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the
premises where the unsafe building or structure was located for the
recovery of such costs.
A. Nothing contained in this chapter or the code shall be deemed to affect,
repeal or invalidate the Borough's Zoning Ordinances or the regulation
or licensing of any trade or profession engaged in construction work.
B. A building, plumbing or electrical permit issued under valid
construction regulations prior to the promulgation of the code and this
chapter shall remain valid, and the construction of any building or
structure may be completed pursuant to and in accordance with said
permit. The construction of any building or structure stated before the
promulgation of the code and this chapter that did not, as of the date of
the beginning of the construction, require a construction permit may be
completed without a construction permit.
C. All construction regulations incorporated in any act of the State of New
Jersey or of the Borough presently in effect or validly promulgated or
enacted by any board, department, commission or agency thereof shall
be superseded and of no other force and effect from and after the
effective date of this chapter and the State Uniform Construction Code,
namely, January 1, 1977.
D. Any law or regulation addressing areas for which the Commissioner of
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs shall not have
promulgated a subcode may continue in effect until such time as a
subcode therefor is adopted.
§ 129-14 CURFEW § 133-1
133:421
§ 133-1. Authority of Mayor.
When there exists in the Borough of South River a state of disaster or
emergency brought about by natural causes or by the action of any person
or persons, and such state of disaster or emergency causes or may cause
violence and injury to be inflicted upon people in the Borough of South
River and causes or may cause damages and destruction to property in
the Borough of South River, both public and private, all being against the
health, safety and welfare of the people of the Borough of South River, then
and in that event the Mayor of the Borough shall have the authority to
declare that a state of disaster or emergency exists and he shall have the
authority and be empowered to do the following:
§ 133-2. Notice through information media.
The Mayor of the Borough, upon declaring that a state of disaster or
emergency exists in the Borough of South River, shall forthwith advise any
newspaper and radio station located within the Borough of South River and
request that the announced state of disaster or emergency be published at
once.
§ 133-3. Finality of Mayor's decision.
The judgment of the Mayor of the Borough that a state of disaster or
Emergency exists within the Borough of South River and that it has caused
or is likely to cause injury and damage to persons and property within
the Borough of South River shall be final and absolute. This authority is
conferred upon the Mayor of the Borough by virtue of the authority of
N.J.S.A. 40:87-31.
§ 133-4. Observance of curfew required.
After the Mayor of the Borough has declared that a state of disaster or
Emergency exists in the Borough of South River and has issued an order
or proclamation regulating the movements of persons or vehicles in or
about the Borough of South River or the dispensing by licensed persons
A. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which
persons shall be prohibited from remaining upon the public streets,
ways and places in the Borough of South River.
B. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which
vehicular traffic shall be prohibited or restricted from traveling over the
streets in the Borough of South River.
C. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which all
businesses licensed by the Borough of South River to dispense in any
way alcoholic beverages shall be closed to business.
D. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which all
sales of gasoline by gasoline service stations in the Borough of South
River shall be prohibited.
§ 133-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 133-4
133:422
of alcoholic beverages therein or the sale of gasoline by gasoline service
stations in the Borough of South River, it shall be unlawful and a violation
of this chapter for any person to be upon the streets, ways or places
in the Borough of South River, to drive vehicles over the streets in the
Borough of South River, to dispense alcoholic beverages or to sell gasoline
at any gasoline service station during the hours prohibited by said order or
proclamation, unless otherwise permitted by the Borough of South River.
§ 133-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of an order or
proclamation issued by the Mayor of the Borough shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
Chapter 136
DONATION BINS
§ 136-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BIN — A box, frame, crib, or enclosure placed at an outdoor location.
BONA FIDE OFFICE — A location where a representative of the person or
entity responsible for a donation bin can be reached during normal business
hours. An answering machine or answering service does not constitute a
bona fide office.
PERSON — Any individual, business entity or organization whether forprofit
or not-for-profit who is the registrant, owner and is responsible for
the donation bin.
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, for money,
credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of any kind or value
in conjunction with the maintenance of a donation bin. Solicitation shall
include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of canisters, cards,
receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money or other thing of
value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not the person making the
solicitation receives any contribution or is present to receive donated items.
§ 136-2. Permit required.
A. No person shall be permitted to place, use or employ a donation bin for
solicitation of clothing or any other thing of value on any property
located in the Borough unless a permit is first obtained.
B. In applying for a permit, the person shall set forth on the application:
(1) The location of that bin described as precisely as possible.
§ 133-4 CURFEW § 136-2
133:423
(2) The manner in which the donations collected will be used, sold, or
dispensed, to whom the donations will be provided, and the method
by which the proceeds of collected donations will be allocated or
spent.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the bona fide office of
all persons who may share or profit from any donations collected.
(4) Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on the
property.
C. The applicant shall provide a fee in the amount provided in Chapter
155, Fees, with the application.
D. Each permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall be valid:
(1) For a single donation bin, to which the permit must be affixed.
(2) For the specific location described in the permit application.
(3) For a period of 12 months from the date of the issuance.
E. The Borough shall not grant an application for a permit to place, use or
employ a donation bin if it determines that the placement of the bin
could constitute a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the public.
Such hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the placement of a
donation bin within 100 yards of any area where fuels or other
flammable liquids or gases are stored or sold, within a site triangle area
or closer than 50 feet to a residential use.
F. An expiring permit may be renewed upon submission of an application
for renewal and payment of the renewal fee in the amount provided in
Chapter 155, Fees. Such renewal application shall include:
(1) The location where the bin is currently situated. If it is intended
that the bin will be relocated, the new location of the bin after the
renewal is granted.
(2) Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his
property.
(3) The manner in which the person has used, sold, or dispensed any
clothing or other donations collected, the method by which the
proceeds of collected donations have been allocated or spent, and
any changes the person anticipates being made in the use, sale or
dispensation of any donations collected during the period covered
by the renewal.
(4) The address and telephone number of the bona fide office of any
person that shared or profited from any clothing or other donations
collected, and of any persons which may do so during the period
covered by the renewal.
§ 136-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 136-2
133:424
§ 136-3. Complaints; violation and penalties.
G. Upon granting of the permit, the following information shall be clearly
and conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation bin:
(1) The permit number and the date of expiration;
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the bona fide office of
the applicant;
(3) A list of all entities, including name, address and telephone
number, which may share or profit from any donations collected;
and
(4) A statement indicating the manner in which donations will be used,
sold, or dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of the
donations will be allocated or spent.
A. The Borough Zoning Officer shall investigate any complaints about a
donation bin within 30 days of the receipt of the complaint. Whenever it
appears that a violation of Borough ordinances has occurred, the
person who placed the bin shall be issued a warning, stating that if the
violation is not rectified or a hearing before the governing body is not
requested within 45 days of the notice being issued, the Borough may
seize the bin, remove it, or have it removed, at the expense of the
person who placed the bin, and sell at public auction or otherwise
dispose of any clothing or other donations collected via the bin as well
as the bin itself. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations or bin shall
be paid to the Borough's General Fund.
B. Notice shall be deemed to have been made on the date that the violation
notice is affixed to the exterior of the bin. The Borough may, in its sole
discretion, make notice by any other additional means.
C. In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of
this state or the Code of the Borough, any person who violates any
provision of this chapter which results in seizure of the donation bin
shall be:
(1) Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The
Borough Zoning Officer may bring this action in the municipal
court or Superior Court as a summary proceeding under the
Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, and any penalty monies
collected shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough
and deposited to the Borough's General Fund.
(2) Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation bin pursuant
to this chapter. A person disqualified from placing, using, or
employing a donation bin may apply to the Borough to have
eligibility restored. The Borough may restore the eligibility of a
person who:
§ 136-2 CURFEW § 136-3
133:425
Chapter 140
DRUG-FREE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 103.
§ 140-1. Approval and adoption of map. [Amended 2-24-1999 by
Ord. No. 1999-7; 7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-30; 2-4-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-2]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 et
seq., the Drug-Free Zone Map produced on or about June 2001 by David J.
Samuel, Municipal Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an official
finding and record of the location and areas within the municipality of
property which is used for school purposes, public parks, public buildings
or public housing facility property and of the areas within 1,000 feet or 500
feet of said properties, respectively.
§ 140-2. Map of official record. [Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No.
1999-7]
The Drug-Free Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 140-1 of
this chapter shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of school
properties and 500 feet of public parks, public buildings or public housing
facility property, and this chapter shall be amended to reflect any additions
or deletions with respect to the location and boundaries of said Drug-Free
Zones.
§ 140-3. Map changes; notification.
The School Board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Attorney of any changes, or contemplated changes, in the locations and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or School Board and which is used for school purposes.
(a) Acts within the public interest; and
(b) Demonstrates that he/she made a good faith effort to comply
with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws
and regulations, or had no fraudulent intentions.
§ 136-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 140-4
140:426
§ 140-4. Map to be kept on file; copies.
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 140-1 of
this chapter and to provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this chapter shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Middlesex County Prosecutor.
§ 140-5. Declarations.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 140-1
of this chapter was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a School Board.
(3) That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
(5) The location and boundaries of areas which are within 500 feet of
public parks, public buildings or public housing facility properties.
[Added 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-7]
B. All the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by or leased to a school or school board or
being used for public purposes as of the effective date of this chapter;
all the properties depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
public parks, public buildings or public housing facility property was
being used for said purposes as of the effective date of this chapter as
amended. [Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-7; 7-16-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-30; 2-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2]
C. Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44, (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7) a
prosecutor is not precluded from introducing or relying upon any other
evidence or testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in
that statute, including use of a map or diagram other than the one
approved and adopted pursuant to § 140-1 of this chapter. The failure of
§ 140-4 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 140-5
140:427
Chapter 147
ELECTRICAL CONNECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Utilities Department — See Ch. 86.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 129.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
the map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or School Board,
whether the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent
omission or the result of any changes in the location and boundaries
of such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised
approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record
that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or School Board
or that such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All the requirements set forth above concerning the preparation,
approval and adoption of a Drug-Free Zone Map have been complied
with. [Amended 2-24-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-7]
E. From time to time, as additional properties are obtained or removed or
no longer used for school purposes, public parks, public buildings or
public housing facilities as set forth in state statute, an amended map
may be adopted by the governing body of the Borough of South River as
the official map with respect to this chapter, said map to be adopted by
reference. Said map shall be kept on file by the Clerk of the
municipality. [Added 7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-30; amended
2-4-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-2]
§ 140-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 140-5
140:428
ARTICLE I
Regulations and Rates
[Adopted 1-28-193075 (Ch. 93 of the 1977 Code)]
§ 147-1. General provisions.
The following rates shall be charged to and paid by each and every person,
firm or corporation for current furnished and supplied by the Borough for
electric lighting and power purposes for private use and that such current
supplied and used shall be under and subject to the following firm and
regulations, which shall apply to and be binding upon each and every
consumer of current.
§ 147-2. Application authority.
All applications for connection with the electric lighting system shall be
made to the Utility Engineer, who is hereby empowered to grant the same.
§ 147-3. Electric energy consumption rates. [Last amended
9-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-25]
A. Electric energy rates, hereinafter referred to as "base rates," shall be as
provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
B. Annual power cost adjustment (APCA).
(1) The annual power cost adjustment is an amount per kilowatt-hour
(kwh) to be added to or subtracted from each customer's base rates
each month so that annual increases or decreases in the power cost
can be recovered. The purpose of the APCA is to reconcile actual
costs incurred and collections from customers over time.
(2) For any twelve-month period ending October 31 of each year, the
APCA factor shall equal the total power cost divided by the total
kwh sales for such period, adjusted for the actual power cost
recovered through base rates.
(3) The APCA is calculated as the power cost recovered in base rates
for the twelve months ending October 31 of each year, less the
actual power cost for the twelve months ending October 31 of each
year. This difference is divided by kwh sales expected in the
subsequent calendar year and applied as a credit or debit per kwh
in monthly bills rendered during the subsequent calendar year.
75.Editor's Note: These regulations were established by an ordinance of the Board of Public
Works of the Borough of South River on 1-28-1930, and were amended from time to time
by the Board of Public Works. However, the Board of Public Works was abolished on
3-7-1973, by Ord. No. 1973-5. Currently there is a Utilities Department in the Borough
under the direction of the Utilities Committee of the Borough Council, and amendments
to the regulations are now adopted by the Mayor and Council.
§ 147-1 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 147-3
140:429
§ 147-4. Private lighting applications.
Applications for private lighting in buildings situated on streets or avenues
located 1/3 of a mile distant from the nearest commercial lighting circuit in
use must be signed by at least four property owners residing on such streets
and who shall agree to become regular consumers of the current supplied
on such street or avenue.
§ 147-5. Service connections.
The Borough reserves the right to make all service connections. No service
will be connected until the installation has been inspected and approved by
an authorized inspector of the National Board of Fire Underwriters. Under
no circumstances will current be supplied to an unfinished installation.
§ 147-6. Meters. [Amended 2-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-11]
(4) The formula for the APCA for each twelve-month period ending
October 31 is as follows: (Power Costs/Sales in kwh) minus (Power
Cost recovered in Base Rates).
(5) "Power Cost" means all costs incurred for the purchase of energy,
capacity, transmission, losses, congestion, and ancillary services,
including PJM Interconnection, LLC fees, Public Power Association
of New Jersey fees, and American PowerNet fees.
(6) The power cost recovered in base rates is $0.10/kwh.
(7) During November of each year the Business Administrator shall
prepare a report for the Council presenting the APCA calculation
and recommending an APCA factor to be applied with bills
rendered in the subsequent calendar year. By the first Council
meeting in December of each year, the Council shall decide the
APCA factor. Any APCA factor adopted by the Council shall be
incorporated with electric bills rendered for the subsequent
calendar year January 1 through December 31. Each APCA factor is
valid for one calendar-year period only. If the Council does not
enact an APCA factor within these timelines, the prior year's APCA
factor reverts to zero and the unadjusted base rates shall be
collected with bills rendered for the subsequent calendar year
January 1 through December 31.
(8) The cost per kilowatt-hour for all calculations shall be carried out
to the nearest one thousandth of a mill. The minimum bill in base
rates shall not be reduced by reason of this APCA, but the
adjustment, when positive, will be billed to all kilowatt-hours
delivered.
A. All meters used in connection with the system shall be supplied by the
Borough of South River Electric Department.
§ 147-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 147-6
140:430
§ 147-7. Nonpayment of bills; discontinuance of service. [Amended
2-9-1967; 5-28-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-25; 3-6-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-5; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-21]
§ 147-8. Connection permit required. [Amended 8-19-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-14]
B. Upon reasonable notice all existing and new customers must permit the
Borough, its employees or contractors to install new, replacement and/
or automated meter reading equipment.
A. All electric bills of consumers shall be payable at the office of the
Utilities Department by the due date. In the event that any such bill is
not paid on or before 40 days from the date of the first past-due
balance, then the service to the premises owned or occupied by the
person or persons in arrears shall be shut off. Such service shall not be
turned on until all arrearages have been paid, together with the fees to
cover the cost of turning on this service as provided in Chapter 155,
Fees. This shall be in addition to and not in limitation of any other
statute or ordinance. [Amended 12-1-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-36;
11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-25]
B. In the case of electric service being required for building purposes, the
applicant therefor shall pay a service fee equivalent to the current
residential quarterly minimum rate charged in advance. The balance
due for such service shall be paid in full as outlined above, immediately
upon completion of said building.
C. In the event that an electric consumer is unable to pay any electrical
charges as billed by the Borough of South River, said consumer may
request to be placed on an installment payment plan to allow any
arrearages and charges to be brought current. Said installment
agreement shall be liberally granted by the Business Administrator;
however, all future charges at the time said agreement is entered are
due and payable upon receipt. In addition, upon the entering of any
installment agreement, said electrical consumer shall pay an
administrative fee in the amount provided in Chapter 155, Fees, to
cover the cost of preparing any agreement by the Business
Administrator. Said administrative charge shall be in addition to any
other charges which may accrue according to Borough Code. Failure to
comply with the payment plan will result in immediate discontinuance
of service. [Amended 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-25]
D. The option of a duplicate mailing of tenant water and electric bills is
available to owners as provided in Ch. 155, Fees. [Added 11-25-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-25]
A. No building or other structure shall be connected with the Borough
lighting system nor shall any current be used or taken in any building or
other structure without a permit being obtained from the
Superintendent.
§ 147-6 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 147-8
140:431
§ 147-9. Conditions of permit.
Every permit granted shall be upon the express condition that the Borough
shall not be liable for any loss or damage suffered or sustained by anyone
in his person or to property caused by the installation of electric lighting
or for any other cause or in any manner from the Borough lighting system;
nor shall any liability attach to the Borough because of its failure to furnish
current from any cause at any time to the consumers of such current.
§ 147-10. Equipment to be Borough property.
All wires and insulators used on the building of any consumer of electric
current from the Borough lighting system shall belong to the Borough, and
the Utility Engineer shall have full power and authority to change or alter
the same if it is deemed necessary or desirable, but the Borough shall not
be responsible for such defective wire or insulator.
§ 147-11. Location of meters.
§ 147-12. Extension of service wires.
The service wire from the main switch and cutout is to extend at least
two feet outside of the wall of the building. The service wires from the
B. In the event a connection permit requires a determination that a
property may need an increase in electrical capacity, an escrow deposit
of $2,500 shall be paid to the South River Electric Utility. The escrow
shall be utilized for the professional services of the Utility Engineer in
conducting a review and analysis of the potential increase in capacity
for the development. The escrow shall be deposited by the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough, or his/her designee, in an account for
such purposes under the sole control of the Borough. Said escrow may
be commingled with similar escrows from other applicants, but
accurate accounts and records shall be kept so as to identify particular
escrows and charges made against the same. At the conclusion of the
Utility Engineer’s report and analysis, the applicant shall be entitled to
the return of the balance of the escrow.
A. All meters must be located in the cellar as near as possible to the point
of entrance of the service in a clean, dry, safe place free from vibration,
not more than six feet nor less than three feet from the floor where they
will be easily accessible for reading and testing. In case where
buildings have no cellar or have very damp cellars that are not
accessible, the meter should be installed on the first floor. Under no
circumstances are meters to be erected on flimsy partitions or supports.
B. Meter boards 17 inches by 12 inches by one inch furnished by the
contractor shall be securely fastened to some substantial support
entirely free from shock or vibration and shall be covered with an
additional coat of weatherproof paint. A liberal loop of not less than 18
inches must be left on each leg of the circuit.
§ 147-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 147-12
140:432
switch to the outside of the wall of the building must be run in an approved
iron conduit or flexible armored cable, and all necessary arrangements for
meters shall be provided as heretofore stated.
§ 147-13. Location of service wires.
Service wires are to be brought to the outside of the building at a location
most convenient to the lines of the Borough. Lines will not be carried over
housetops to reach outlets.
§ 147-14. Installation of wires.
All wiring and apparatus must be installed in accordance with and conform
to the rules and requirements of the National Board of Fire Underwriters in
force at the time of beginning work.
§ 147-15. Minimum wire service. [Added 10-23-1958]
The minimum of one-hundred-ampere three-wire service to each house shall
be required.
§ 147-16. Deposit; interest. [Added 1-9-1964]
§ 147-17. Delinquent depositors; authority to notify. [Added
6-25-1964]
The Utility Engineer shall be and he is hereby authorized and directed to
notify such delinquent depositors that upon failure to make the required
deposit within seven days from the date of the second notification, the
electrical service to such account(s) will be discontinued forthwith.
§ 147-18. Application fee for opening an account. [Added 12-1-1999
by Ord. No. 1999-36; amended 2-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-11;
4-3-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-6]
Each and every individual, business or corporation who files an application
with the Utilities Department to open an account for electrical service shall
be charged an application fee as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, such fee
A. A deposit shall be required for customers who are tenants when the
application is filed with the Utilities Department for electrical service as
provided in Chapter 155, Fees. [Amended 9-18-1992; 10-19-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994-35; 12-1-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-36; 2-23-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-11; 7-19-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-33; 4-3-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-6; 3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-14]
B. Interest on said deposit shall be paid to the applicant or customer upon
the termination of said electrical account at 1/2 the current rate of
interest the Board so receives from such trust account at simple
interest from the time of deposit.
§ 147-12 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 147-18
140:433
to help offset the administrative costs of creating an account and clerical
duties with respect thereto.
§ 147-19. Final read fee for closing an existing account. [Added
2-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-11; amended 4-3-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-6]
Each and every individual, business or corporation who closes an existing
account with the Utilities Department for electrical service shall be charged
a final reading fee as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, such fee to help
offset the administrative costs of closing an account and clerical duties with
respect thereto.
§ 147-20. Overhead and underground lines. [Added 1-23-1964]
The Utilities Department will utilize overhead construction for all
distribution lines. When underground distribution lines are requested by
the customer, and approved by the Board, installation and maintenance
shall be at the customer's expense. The responsibility of said Board shall
terminate at the point of connection to secondary mains.
§ 147-21. Residential extension rates. [Added 1-23-1964]
§ 147-22. Regulations governing residential developers. [Added
1-23-1964]
A. The Board will make extensions to serve individual permanent
residential customers without charge when the cost of making such
extension is less than three times the annual revenue to be received
from the extension.
B. When the cost of the extension exceeds the amount which the Board
will install without charge to the customer as noted above, the excess
cost shall be deposited and remain with the Board, without interest,
until such time as the actual revenue from the extension in a calendar
year exceeds the estimated revenue, when refund of deposit shall be
governed by the following:
(1) Three dollars of the deposit shall be refunded for each $1 of
revenue by which the actual revenue exceeds the estimated
revenue per calendar year.
(2) Additional refunds shall be made in succeeding years at the same
rate, $3 for each $1 of revenue by which the actual revenue is in
excess of the amount of annual revenue upon which the preceding
refund was based.
C. In no event shall more than the original deposit be returned to the
depositor nor shall any part of the deposit remaining after 10 years
from the date of the original deposit is made be returned.
§ 147-18 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 147-22
140:434
§ 147-23. Commercial and industrial regulations. [Added
1-23-1964]
A. Where application for extensions into newly developed tracts of land
are made by individuals, partnerships or corporations interested in
development or sale of land, but not as ultimate residents, the Board
will require a deposit from the applicant covering the entire cost of the
extension required to serve the tract. [Amended 3-12-1964]
B. Extension deposits shall not carry any interest.
C. Extension deposits are to be returned to the depositor as hereby
provided when new houses abutting on the extended facilities are
completed, the prospective permanent customer's equipment such as
wiring, piping, etc., is installed and the home is occupied by a bona fide
owner, or responsible tenant, who has entered into a contract for use of
the Board's services.
D. Upon such completion and occupation, there shall be returned to the
depositor an amount equal to the estimated charge for three years'
service, but not in excess of the amount deposited. No part of the
deposit remaining after 10 years from the date of the original deposit
shall be returned.
A. The Utilities Department will require from the customer the amount to
be equal to the total cost of the extending of the lines and furnishing
and installing equipment necessary to provide service. [Amended
3-12-1964]
B. The deposit shall be refunded without interest as follows:
(1) An amount equal to 10% of the total charge shall be paid by the
customer for power for the first year of service. Refund shall be
made at the end of said service year.
(2) Refunds will be made by the same method at the end of each
subsequent service year until the total refunds are equal to but do
not exceed the original deposit.
(3) The customer will not be entitled to any refund if service is
discontinued before the end of the first service year.
(4) Any part of the deposit remaining with the Utilities Department
after 10 years from the beginning of service shall not be refunded.
C. Where it is necessary to provide additional facilities to serve increased
requirements of an existing customer, the Board may require the
customer to deposit an amount equal to the cost of such additional
facilities. This amount shall be subject to refund as in the preceding
subsections, except that refunds shall be calculated at 10% of the
excess revenue for the previous service years.
§ 147-22 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 147-23
140:435
§ 147-24. Makeup of costs. [Added 1-23-1964]
Extension of line costs shall include all materials, supplies and labor
involved in both primary and secondary circuits. Transformer costs shall be
included. Service drops to 100 feet in length are not to be included.
§ 147-25. Right of entry. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-21]
If the Business Administrator of the Borough of South River shall have
reason to believe that there is actual or probable evasion of or disregard to
the provisions of this chapter, or any other rules or regulations relating to
the electric lighting system in any building, lot, ground or premises, it shall
and may be lawful for said Business Administrator or any person authorized
by him or them to enter at all reasonable times into such building, lot
or premises for the purpose of examining meters and/or wiring and to
ascertain whether the same are in proper order or repair, or of cutting
off of meters or wiring where delinquencies occur in the payment of the
electric light charges as aforesaid or, where the meter is out of repair and
the owners refuse to have the same repaired, to cut off the connections
with the electric lighting system. Said Business Administrator or any person
authorized by him shall have the right to enter said premises or building
at all reasonable hours for the purpose of reading said meters, for the
purpose of determining the amount of current use or to determine if said
service lines and/or meters are creating a dangerous or unsafe situation;
and any person who shall obstruct or oppose the aforesaid persons making
such examination, reading or inspection or shall reconnect with the lighting
system, after the same has been cut off, shall forfeit and pay the fine of not
exceeding $1,000, plus costs, at the discretion of the Municipal Court.
§ 147-26. Disconnection. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-21]
Any violation of any provision of this chapter by a consumer from the
Borough lighting system shall subject the offender to disconnection of his
system at the discretion of the Business Administrator; and the premises of
such offender, if disconnected, shall not be again connected until such fees,
as set forth above for reconnection, shall have been paid to the Borough of
South River.
§ 147-27. Violation and penalties. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-21]
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person other than the
consumer from the Borough lighting system shall subject the offender to the
penalties in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, in the discretion of the
court before whom the complaint of such violation is made.
D. The making of a deposit under any of the above cases shall not give the
customer any interest in facilities, the ownership being retained
exclusively by the Utilities Department.
§ 147-23 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 147-27
140:436
ARTICLE II
Municipal Lifeline Credit Program
[Adopted 4-9-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-15]
§ 147-28. Establishment.
The Borough of South River shall administer a program, which shall be
known as the "Municipal Lifeline Credit Program."
§ 147-29. Eligibility.
Any residential electric customer who, on July 1 of any year or anytime
during the succeeding six months, is enrolled in the Lifeline Credit Program
administered by the Commissioner of the Department of Human Services of
the State of New Jersey shall be eligible for the Municipal Lifeline Credit
Program.
§ 147-30. Credit against electric utility bills.
The Municipal Lifeline Credit Program shall consist of an annual credit
against the electric utility bill of each eligible residential electric customer
at his principal residence. Such credit shall be applied to the electric utility
bill of such customer as soon as may be practicable, but in no case later than
the bills issued in October of each year or as soon thereafter as eligibility
is determined and shall be applied to each subsequent utility bill after the
first until the full amount of the credit is exhausted. No household shall
receive more than one annual credit. The annual credit shall be as provided
in Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 147-31. Administration of program.
The Finance Department of the Borough of South River shall, upon
receiving the names and addresses of those individuals qualified under the
State Lifeline Credit Program, cause said households to be credited under
the Municipal Lifeline Credit Program in the amounts as set forth above.
§ 147-32. Annual report.
The Finance Department shall make an annual report with respect to the
Municipal Lifeline Credit Program to the Mayor and Borough Council
annually, said report to take place during the first meeting in October of
each year.
§ 147-28 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 147-32
140:437

ARTICLE III
Interconnection with Self-Generating Electric Systems
[Adopted 6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-16]
§ 147-33. Consultation with municipal utility.
To assure safety and the optimum value for both the customer and the
municipal utility, it is essential for the customer to consult with the utility
before purchasing, constructing, operating, or interconnecting any selfgeneration
equipment to the system. No self-generating equipment may
be connected to the municipal utility unless the customer notifies the
municipal utility and all necessary equipment, in the opinion of the
municipal utility, is properly installed to isolate the generating equipment
from the municipal utility system.
§ 147-34. General requirements.
A. No self-generating equipment or facility may be connected to the
municipal utility without express authorization from the municipal
utility and unless the requirements contained in this rule are fully and
completely satisfied.
B. The customer must provide complete plans and specifications of the
proposed equipment, including a single-line diagram and details of
proposed protective schemes. Plans must be certified by a registered
New Jersey professional engineer. Upon receipt of the certified plans
and a fee as set forth in Chapter 155, Fees, as provided in Subsection G
below to compensate the municipal utility for the cost of engineering
services provided herein, the municipal utility will provide specific
switching, breaker, and isolation plans for installation at the customer's
expense. Any review of plans by the municipal utility does not constitute
approval of the correctness of customer's plans.
C. Installation must be in compliance with the National Electrical Code
and all applicable municipal, County, and federal codes or regulations.
D. Prior to connection to the municipal utility system, the equipment and
interconnection shall be inspected by the municipal utility or its
qualified representative. Inspections undertaken by the municipal
utility shall be undertaken solely for the purpose of determining
compliance with the proposed plans and for the safety and integrity of
the municipal utility system. Nothing done by the municipality utility
inspector shall constitute approval or waiver by any other inspector
who may be authorized to inspect such facility and interconnection.
E. Prior to interconnection with the municipal utility system, customer
shall enter into a written agreement with the municipal utility. In
addition to the operating provisions contained in these rules, this
agreement shall permit unlimited right of entry to the customer's
property for safety reasons or to disconnect whenever the municipal
utility believes that continued operation of the self-generation
§ 147-33 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 147-34
140:439
§ 147-35. Electrical requirements.
equipment could result in harm to the municipal utility system or to
a customer of the municipal utility. Municipal utility employees shall
have the right to inspect and test the interconnection facilities during
reasonable hours. This agreement also shall require the safe operation
of the equipment or facility, indemnification of the municipal utility
for damages of any type, including, but not limited to, direct,
consequential, punitive damages, to the municipal utility or any other
customer as a result of the operation of the self-generation equipment
or facility. The agreement shall contain such other provisions as are
appropriate for the protection and safe operation of the municipal
utility.
F. The customer shall be responsible for the safe operation of the selfgeneration
equipment and shall be responsible for all costs of repairs,
corrections, or updating of interconnection facilities.
G. The customer shall be financially responsible for all costs of
interconnection, including, but not limited to, review of the plans for
equipment and the proposed isolation scheme, voltage regulation,
wiring, labor, special metering, and inspection. The municipal utility
shall provide a good faith estimate of the cost of reviewing the plans,
inspections, and for the cost of all equipment that may be necessary to
interconnect the self-generating equipment with the municipal utility,
and the customer shall pay the municipal utility the full amount of the
good faith estimate. Any amounts not expended shall be returned to the
customer. Any additional costs reasonably incurred by the municipal
utility to complete the interconnection with the customer shall be paid
to the municipal utility prior to interconnection. The customer shall be
responsible for the cost of periodic testing of the interconnection
facilities.
H. The customer shall not change any aspect of the operation, the wiring,
the controls, or the interconnection of the self-generation equipment
without first providing prior written notice to the municipal utility of all
proposed changes to the plans or the as-built drawings, as the case may
be. All changes or proposed changes shall be certified by an electrical
engineer, in the same manner as provided in Subsection B above. This
information is essential for determining whether the existing
interconnection equipment is adequate for the requirements and for
safety reasons in the event of emergency cut-off. The customer shall pay
all reasonable engineering fees incurred by the municipal utility to
review and inspect the proposed installation.
I. Self-generating equipment that is intended to operate in parallel with
the municipal utility shall be subject to a contract that provides for such
interconnected parallel operation.
A. For facilities intended to operate in synchronization with the municipal
utility:
§ 147-34 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 147-35
140:440
§ 147-36. Meter requirements.
§ 147-37. Purchase of excess generation.
(1) The interconnection point between the self-generator and the
municipal utility shall be on the customer's side of the designated
metering location. It shall operate in synchronization with the
municipal system.
(2) Electrical quality must be 60 Hz, alternating current having voltage
and phase characteristics acceptable to the municipal utility.
Operation of the self-generating unit shall not result in flicker,
voltage fluctuations, interference with electronic equipment, or
damage to municipal utility or customer-owned equipment.
(3) Equipment shall be capable of being manually and automatically
isolated from the municipal utility system within a maximum of 10
seconds, and provide for automatic disconnection from utility lines
that have been deenergized.
(4) All costs incurred to interconnect the self-generation equipment
shall be the responsibility of the customer.
B. For generating equipment not intended to operate as interconnected
generating facilities:
(1) The customer shall install all equipment, switches and devices
necessary to allow such facility that is capable of being served by
the generating equipment to be electrically isolated from the
municipal utility.
(2) All generating equipment subject to this subsection shall be
designed so that it is incapable of being operated unless it is
isolated and disconnected from the municipal utility.
A. All metering costs associated with the interconnection or the
interconnected operation of the equipment shall be the responsibility of
the customer.
B. Any deliveries to the municipal utility shall be through a separate billing
meter. Reversing meters are not permitted.
A. The municipal utility and customer shall enter into an agreement that
addresses all purchase and payment obligations. The municipal utility
shall only be required to purchase from PURPA-qualifying facilities,
pursuant to 18 CFR 292.300.
B. Rates for the purchase of excess energy from the PURPA-qualifying
facility shall be based upon the municipal utility's avoided cost. The
avoided cost shall be calculated so that it takes into account the allinclusive
cost of energy, including capacity costs, availability,
dispatchability, load limitations, operating contingencies or limitation,
§ 147-35 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 147-37
140:441
energy costs, and administrative costs. If the municipal utility does
not require capacity and would receive no benefit from the addition
of capacity, the municipal utility shall only pay for the avoided cost of
energy, excluding all capacity costs.
§ 147-37 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 147-37
140:442
ARTICLE IV
Electricity Demand Response Regulation
[Adopted 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-9]
§ 147-38. Aggregation of retail customer demand response.
§ 147-39. Ancillary services provided by demand response
resources.
A. The Borough of South River or its authorized designee is the sole entity
permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served
by the Borough of South River directly into any Commission-approved
independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's
organized electric markets.
B. Retail customers served by the Borough of South River wishing to bid
their demand response into a Commission-approved independent
system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized
electric markets may do so by participating in the program established
by the Borough of South River or its authorized designee. Retail
customers are not permitted to participate in the demand response
program of any other entity without the express prior authorization of
the Borough of South River.
A. The Borough of South River or its authorized designee is the sole entity
permitted to bid demand response on behalf of retail customers served
by Borough of South River directly into any Commission-approved
independent system operator's or regional transmission organization's
organized markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves,
supplemental reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or
regulation and frequency response ancillary services (or its functional
equivalent in the Commission-approved independent system operator's
or regional transmission organization's tariff).
B. Retail customers served by the Borough of South River wishing to bid
their demand response into a Commission-approved independent
system operator's or regional transmission organization's organized
markets for energy imbalance, spinning reserves, supplemental
reserves, reactive power and voltage control, or regulation and
frequency response ancillary services (or its junctional equivalent in the
Commission-approved independent system operator's or regional
transmission organization's tariff) may do so by participating in the
program established by the Borough of South River or its authorized
designee. Retail customers are not permitted to participate in the
demand response program of any other entity without the express prior
authorization of the Borough of South River
§ 147-38 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 147-39
140:443

ARTICLE V
Electric Utility Identity Theft Policy
[Adopted 6-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-21]
§ 147-40. Adoption of policy.
A certain policy to be known as the “Identity Theft Policy of the South
River Electric Utility,” as required by the Fair and Accurate Transactions
Act of 2003, as amended, is hereby adopted for the regulation of employees,
contractors, consultants, temporary workers and any other workers of the
South River Electric Utility, including all personnel affiliated with third
parties; each and all of the provisions, conditions and terms of said policy
are hereby adopted and made a part hereof as fully set out in a copy of the
policy manual on file with the Borough Clerk and the Collector of Utility
Revenue.
§ 147-40 DRUG-FREE ZONES § 147-40
140:445
Chapter 151
ENTERTAINMENT
§ 147-40 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 147-40
151:446
ARTICLE I
Dancing and Exhibitions
[Adopted 6-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-34 (Ch. 85 of the 1977 Code)
§ 151-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOTTOMLESS — Having the genital area beneath the waist unclothed or
clothed by a transparent material.
EXHIBIT or EXHIBITION — To show oneself in any capacity, whether while
employed in the performance of work or entertainment or whether simply
at leisure or otherwise.
TOPLESS — Having the breasts unclothed or clothed by a transparent
material.
§ 151-2. Restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or association of persons of
any kind to permit or employ a person in any place open to the public or to
which the public is invited, within the limits of the Borough of South River,
to perform the following:
§ 151-3. Female exhibition.
It shall be unlawful for any female person to exhibit herself topless or
bottomless within the limits of the Borough of South River in any public
place or any place open to the public or to which the public is invited.
§ 151-4. Male exhibition.
It shall be unlawful for any male person to exhibit himself bottomless within
the limits of the Borough of South River in any public place or any place
open to the public or to which the public is invited.
§ 151-5. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
A. Topless or bottomless exhibitions or dancing by a female person or
persons.
B. Bottomless exhibitions or dancing by male persons.
§ 151-1 ENTERTAINMENT § 151-5
151:447
Chapter 155
FEES
§ 155-1. Chapter 36, Court.
Fee for Municipal Public Defender: not more than $200.
§ 155-2. Chapter 50, Land Use Procedures.
List of property owners: $10 or $0.25 per name, whichever is greater.
§ 155-3. Chapter 62, Aging, Office on
The following fee schedule shall be in effect with respect to all of the listed
activities and shall be due and payable at the time said individual registered
to attend the activity:
Event Senior Fee PAAD Fee
Yearly membership $5.00 $2.50
Senior prom $10.00 $5.00
Picnic $3.00 $1.50
Holiday party $5.00 $2.50
Exercise class $2.00 $1.00
Ad for newsletter Bus card ad/1 year $350.00
Gym equipment training
session
$10.00 $5.00
§ 155-3.1. (Reserved)76
§ 155-3.2. Chapter 72, Department of Public Safety, Article III - Offduty
police officer compensation. [Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-13; amended 3-26-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
Off-duty police officer compensation and fees:
A. Regular police officers at an hourly rate of $70, or the specific officer's
overtime rate, whichever is greater, per hour for a four-hour minimum.
B. Special police officers at an hourly rate of $32 per hour for a four-hour
minimum.
C. Minimum hours of work defined:
(1) If an off-duty assignment is less than four hours, the assigned
officer will be compensated for four hours.
76.Editor's Note: Former § 155-3.1, Chapter 72, Department of Public Safety, Article XV,
added 12-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-46, was repealed 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-14.
§ 151-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-3.2
151:448
§ 155-4. Chapter 99, Alarm Systems. [Amended 10-27-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-32; 4-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-9]
Registration fees for all alarm devices, as required by Chapter 99, shall be
$0.
§ 155-5. Chapter 103, Alcoholic Beverages. [Amended 10-12-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-30; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12; 4-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-06]
(2) If an off-duty assignment is in excess of four hours but less than
eight hours, the officer will be compensated for eight hours.
(3) If an off-duty assignment is in excess of eight hours but less than 12
hours, the officer will be compensated for 12 hours.
D. An administrative fee of 6% of the total wages paid to cover
administrative costs, overhead and out-of-pocket expenses of the
Borough of South River.
E. Fee for police vehicle and fuel: $100 per vehicle for one to four hours or
any part thereof; $12 per hour or any part thereof for each hour beyond
the first four hours in any twenty-four-hour period.
F. Vehicle barricades: $5 per hour for each barricade.
G. Flares: $2 each.
H. Any returned check: $35.
A. Plenary retail consumption license:
Year Fee
2019 $792
2020 $950.40
2021 $1,140.48
2022 $1,368.58
2023 $1,642.29
2024 $1,970.75
2025 $2,364.90
2026 $2,500
2027 $2,500
2028 $2,500
B. Plenary retail distribution license:
§ 155-3.2 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-5
151:449
Year Fee
2019 $504.40
2020 $604.80
2021 $725.76
2022 $870.91
2023 $1,045.09
2024 $1,254.11
2025 $1,504.94
2026 $1,805.92
2027 $2,167.11
2028 $2,500
C. Club license:
Year Fee
2019 $144
2020 $172.80
2021 $188
2022 $188
2023 $188
2024 $188
2025 $188
2026 $188
2027 $188
2028 $188
D. Transfer of license:
(1) Place to place or person to person: 10% of annual renew fee.
(2) Place to place and person to person: 20% of annual renewal fee.
E. Teen night events:
(1) For an individual permit to cover a single teen night event, the fee
shall be $50 per event.
(2) For a yearly permit, the fee shall be $500 for the first year and $750
for each subsequent yearly permit.
(3) Any other types of permits, i.e., monthly, quarterly, etc., shall be
reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the Borough Council for the
establishment of the appropriate fees.
§ 155-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-6
151:450
§ 155-6. Chapter 108, Animals. [Amended 12-14-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-52]
§ 155-7. Chapter 110, Amusement Devices.
A. Article I, Dog Licensing.
(1) License fee: $9.80.
(2) Replacement metal tag: $3.
(3) Additional charge for New Jersey registration: $1.
(4) Pilot Clinic Fund: $0.20.
(5) License for nonspayed/nonneutered dog: $3.
(6) License issued after annual renewal period: [Amended 1-24-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-1]
(a) February 1 to February 28/29: additional $5.
(b) March 1 to March 31: additional $10.
(c) April 1 to December 31: additional $15.
(7) Reclamation fee: $40.
B. Article VIII, Cat Licensing and Control.
(1) License fee: $5.
(2) Replacement metal tag: $3.
(3) License for nonspayed/nonneutered cat: $5.
(4) License issued after annual renewal period: [Amended 1-24-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-1]
(a) February 1 to February 28/29: additional $5.
(b) March 1 to March 31: additional $10.
(c) April 1 to December 31: additional $15.
(5) Reclamation fee: $40.
(6) Households with three or more cats spayed/neutered: $15.
(7) Households with three or more cats nonspayed/nonneutered: $30.
A. Distributors.
Number of Machines Fee
Less than 10 $75
10 or more but less than 20 $100
§ 155-6 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-7
151:451
§ 155-8. Chapter 112, Billiard Rooms.
License fee: $25 per table.
§ 155-9. (Reserved)77
§ 155-10. Chapter 129, Construction Codes, Uniform. [Amended
7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-16; 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-25;
3-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-8; 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-12;
4-22-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-06]
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees below
and shall be paid before the permit is issued.
Number of Machines Fee
20 or more but less than 30 $125
30 or more but less than 40 $150
40 or more but less than 50 $175
50 or more $225
B. Operators: $50 for the first machine; $25 for each additional machine.
C. Jukeboxes and music-producing devices: $25 per year.
A. Building subcode fees.
(1) For new construction and additions, the fees shall be calculated as
follows:
(a) For all zoning districts in the Borough of South River: $0.050
per cubic foot.
(b) There will be a minimum fee of $250 for new construction
permits or for additions.
(c) Engineering review fee.
[1] There shall be an engineering review fee of $250 for a plat
or plan required under § 350-25 where no escrow is
otherwise required.
[2] There shall be a fee of $125 for any such plat or plan
requiring resubmission.
(2) For renovations, alterations and repairs, the fees shall be based on
the estimated cost of construction and shall be based on $25 per
$1,000. Fees shall be rounded to the nearest dollar amounts.
77.Editor’s Note: Former § 155-9, Chapter 124, Circuses and Carnivals, was repealed
10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30. See now § 155-23.1, Chapter 288A, Special Events.
§ 155-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-10
151:452
(3) For a combination of renovations and additions, the sum of the fees
shall be computed separately as renovations and alterations.
(4) Establishment of fees for installation of:
(a) In-ground swimming pools and spas: $165.
(b) Aboveground pools: $100.
(c) Fence for swimming pool: $50.
(d) Wood-burning stove or prefabricated fireplace: $125.
(e) Masonry fireplaces: $125.
(f) Windows: $75.
(g) Temporary structures: $100.
(h) Wooden deck (Use Group R), flat fee any size: $125.
(i) Satellite (dish-type) antennas over 40 inches: $75.
(j) (Reserved)
(k) Commercial roof and siding replacement based on renovations
and repair schedule: minimum $200.
(l) (Reserved)
(m) Demolition of structure:
[1] Under 5,000 square feet/30 feet height: $200.
[2] All others: $250.
[3] Interior demolition: $125.
(n) Sign: $4 per square foot of surface area.
(o) Elevator: $100 per car.
(p) Asbestos removal permit: $100.
(q) Lead abatement: $100.
(r) Sheds over 200 square feet: $75.
(s) Aluminum three-season rooms:
[1] On existing deck: $20 per $1,000.
[2] On new deck: $100, plus $20 per $1,000.
(5) The training fee shall be collected at the rate in effect at the time of
permit issuances as per N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19(b).
(6) Prototype processing shall receive a plan review credit of 20%.
§ 155-10 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-10
151:453
(7) Minimum building subcode shall be $75.
(8) Certificate fees shall be as follows:
(a) Certificate of occupancy (CO): $175.
(b) Certificate of clearance (lead): $75.
(c) Use group change: $150.
(d) Annual permit fee shall be as specified in N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20(c)5.
(e) Variation application: $375 (building codes).
(f) Temporary certificate of occupancy: $200.
(9) A nonrefundable deposit of $100 shall be submitted with all permit
applications for new construction, additions or major renovations
as per N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.18(a)(1).
B. Plumbing subcode fees.
(1) Installation of the following:
(a) Water closet: $25.
(b) Urinal/bidet: $25.
(c) Bathtub: $25.
(d) Lavatory: $25.
(e) Shower: $25.
(f) Floor drain: $25.
(g) Sink: $25.
(h) Dishwasher: $25.
(i) Drinking fountain: $25.
(j) Washing machine: $25.
(k) Hose bib: $25.
(l) Gas piping: $40 per unit.
(m) Fuel oil piping: $50.
(n) Steam boiler: $100.
(o) Hot-water boiler: $100.
(p) Water heater: $75.
(q) Sewer pumps.
§ 155-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-10
151:454
[1] Residential single fixture: $100.
[2] Residential multifixture: $125.
[3] Commercial: $200.
(r) Interceptor:
[1] Interior: $125.
[2] Exterior: $250.
(s) Commercial backflow: $100.
(t) Water cool/AC or refrigerator unit.
[1] Residential: $50.
[2] Commercial: $125.
(u) Sewer connection: $100.
(v) Water service: $100.
(w) Active solar system: $75.
(x) Vents/stacks: $20 per vent/stack.
(y) Lawn sprinkler system: $75.
(z) Water filter/conditioner system: $75.
(aa) Sump pump: $50.
(bb) Roof drains: $25 per drain.
(cc) Condensate drain: $25 per unit.
(dd) Medical gas system: $100 flat.
(ee) Pressure booster: $100.
(ff) Pool heater: $100.
(2) The minimum fee for plumbing subcode shall be $75.
(3) Demolition of a structure to include capping of sewer and water
services is $75.
(4) Annual permits: fee charged as per current N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(c)5,
State of New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(5) Installation of liquid propane gas tanks (LPG): $100.
(6) Annual recertification of commercial backflow preventers as per
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23(k): $50 per unit.
(7) Small miscellaneous appliances or equipment: $50.
§ 155-10 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-10
151:455
(8) Large miscellaneous appliances or equipment: $100.
C. Electrical subcode fees.
(1) Receptacles and fixture:
(a) First 25: $75.
(b) 26 to 50: $125.
(c) 51 to 75: $165.
(d) 76 to 100: $205.
(e) 101 to 125: $245.
(f) 126 to 150: $285.
(g) 151 to 175: $325.
(h) 176 to 200: $365.
(2) Motors and electrical devices:
(a) Less than one horsepower or one kilowatt: $30.
(b) One to five horsepower or one to six kilowatt: $40.
(c) Each increment of five horsepower or five kilowatt: $6.
(d) Over 50 increment of 10 horsepower or 10 kilowatt: $6.
(3) Transformers and generators:
Number of Kilowatts/
Kilovolt-Amperes/
Horsepower Fee
0 to 1 $40
Over 1 to 5 $65
Over 5 to 10 $70
Over 10 to 15 $75
Over 15 to 20 $80
Over 20 to 25 $85
Over 25 to 30 $90
Over 30 to 35 $95
Over 35 to 40 $100
Over 40 to 45 $105
Over 45 to 50 $110
Over 50 to 60 $115
§ 155-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-10
151:456
Number of Kilowatts/
Kilovolt-Amperes/
Horsepower Fee
Over 60 to 70 $120
Over 70 to 80 $125
Over 80 to 90 $130
Over 90 to 100 $135
Over 100 to 110 $140
Over 110 to 120 $145
Over 120 to 130 $150
Over 130 to 140 $155
Over 140 to 150 $160
Over 150 to 160 $165
Over 160 to 170 $170
Over 170 to 180 $175
Over 180 to 190 $180
Over 190 to 200 $185
Over 200 to 210 $190
Over 210 to 220 $195
Over 220 to 230 $200
Over 230 to 240 $205
Over 240 to 250 $210
Over 250 to 260 $215
Over 260 to 270 $220
Over 270 to 280 $225
Over 280 to 290 $230
Over 290 to 300 $235
Over 300 to 310 $240
Over 310 to 320 $245
Over 320 to 330 $250
Over 330 to 340 $255
Over 340 to 350 $260
Over 350 to 360 $265
Over 360 to 370 $270
Over 370 to 380 $275
§ 155-10 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-10
151:457
Number of Kilowatts/
Kilovolt-Amperes/
Horsepower Fee
Over 380 to 390 $280
Over 390 to 400 $285
Over 400 to 410 $290
Over 410 to 420 $295
Over 420 to 430 $300
Over 430 to 440 $305
Over 440 to 450 $310
Over 450 to 460 $315
(4) Service panels, entrances and subpanels:
(a) 100 amperes or less: $95.
(b) 101 to 200 amps: $115.
(c) 201 to 400 amps: $145.
(d) 401 to 1,000 amps: $320.
(e) 1,001 to 1,100 amps: $520.
(5) Any installation of any wiring or any voltages operating at 10 volts
or more must comply with N.J.S.A. 45:5A-1 et seq., which is the
Electrical Contractors Licensing Act of 1962.
(6) For any inspection of any discipline (i.e., building, electric,
plumbing, fire) where violations previously cited have not been
abated and the third visit to the premises has been made, there
shall be imposed a penalty [as required by the Administrative Code
of New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.18(c) and 5:23-2.31(c)] equal to the
original fee charged for that subcode but not to exceed $75.
(7) The following flat fees are established:
(a) Annual commercial pool permit: $175.
(b) Residential aboveground pool permit:
[1] Bonding: $100.
[2] Receptacle: $50.
(c) Residential in-ground pool permit:
[1] Bonding: $200.
[2] Receptacle: $50.
§ 155-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-10
151:458
(d) Air conditioner over one horsepower: $75.
(e) Electrical signs: $95.
(8) Annual permits. Fee charged as per current N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(c)5,
State of New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(9) The minimum fee for the electrical subcode shall be $75.
(10) The fee for minor work for the electrical subcode shall be $75.
(11) Demolition of a structure to terminate electrical service is $110.
D. Fire protection subcode fees.
(1) Wet and/or dry sprinkler heads.
Number of Wet and/or Dry
Sprinkler Heads Fee
1 to 50 $75
51 to 100 $60
Part of or additional 100 $50
Residential sprinkler system $75 per unit
(2) Smoke and heat detectors.
(a) Fee for detectors.
[1] Residential:
[a] One to 10: $50.
[b] Each additional detector: $5.
[2] Commercial:
[a] One to five: $75.
[b] Each additional detector: $10.
[c] Duct smoke detector: $15.
(b) Manual pull stations (each): $20.
(c) Audible/visual devices:
[1] Up to 15 devices: $75.
[2] Each additional device: $10.
(d) Fire alarm control panel: $75.
(e) Tamper and supervisory switches:
[1] Up to 15 devices: $75.
§ 155-10 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-10
151:459
[2] Each additional device: $10.
(3) Pre-engineered suppression system: $150.
(4) Standpipes: $75 per riser.
(5) Kitchen hood exhaust systems: $100 each.
(6) Incinerators and crematoriums: $300 each.
(7) Smoke control systems: $200 each.
(8) Underground fire main installation: $350.
(9) Fire pump: $250 each.
(10) Flammable/combustible liquid tank installation fee:
(a) Less than 1,000 gallon: $75 each.
(b) More than 1,000 gallon: $200 each.
(11) Removable or abandonment of UST: $100 each.
(12) Removal of AST:
(a) Commercial: $100 each.
(b) Residential: $50 each.
(13) Finished basement: $65.
(14) Mechanical fees.
(a) Replacement of boiler/furnace:
[1] Residential: $65.
[2] Commercial: $100.
(b) Chimney liner: $65 each.
(c) Wood/gas fireplace: $65 each.
(15) Minimum fire protection fee: $75.
E. Elevator subcode fees. Elevator registration and fees shall be as per
N.J.A.C. 5:23, Subchapter 12.
F. The Borough of South River shall enforce the requirements of N.J.S.A.
45:5A-1 et seq., otherwise known as the "Electrical Contractors
Licensing Act of 1962," including any and all amendments as enacted.
§ 155-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-10.1
151:460
§ 155-10.1. Preparation of fee schedules. [Added 7-23-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-16]
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Borough Council, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 155-10.2. Surcharge fee; remittance; reports to state. [Added
7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-16]
In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
systems required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.0014 per cubic foot of volume of new
construction. Such surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing
Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the
fiscal quarters ending September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30
and not later than one month succeeding the end of the quarter for which
it is due. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first became effective,
such fee shall be collected and remitted for the third and fourth quarters
only. The enforcing agency shall report annually, at the end of each fiscal
year, to the Bureau of Housing Inspection and not later than July 31 the total
amount of the surcharge fee collection in the fiscal year. In the fiscal year
in which the regulations first became effective, such report shall be for the
third and fourth quarters only.
§ 155-10.3. Fire limits. [Added 7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-16]
The following fire limits are established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23 to be
established by July 1, 1977.
§ 155-10.4. Inspections; penalty for reinspections. [Added
7-23-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-16]
A. For inspections made after 4:00 p.m. on normal business days,
weekends and legal holidays: $250 for inspections up to four hours.
B. The fees set forth in this subsection shall be in addition to regular fees
set forth in this chapter.
C. For any reinspection of any discipline (i.e., plumbing, building, fire or
electric) where violations cited previously have not been abated and
this is the third visit to the premises, there shall be imposed a penalty,
as required by administrative law at N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.18, equal to the
original fee charged on residential structures and a flat fee of $75 for
any other structure.
§ 155-10.1 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-10.5
151:461
§ 155-10.5. Waiver of permit fees for construction of residential
handicapped accessibility improvements. [Added 7-23-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-16]
§ 155-10.6. Chapter 136, Donation Bins. [Added 10-26-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-46]
A. Purpose.
(1) The State of New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-126e, permits the governing body of any municipality to
provide by ordinance that no person shall be charged a
construction permit surcharge fee or enforcing agency fee for any
construction, reconstruction, alteration or improvement designed
and undertaken solely to promote accessibility by disabled persons
to an existing public or private structure or any of the facilities
contained therein.
(2) The governing body of the Borough of South River believes that the
promotion of such accessibility improvements in residential
buildings is for the public good.
B. Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
DISABLED PERSON — A person who has the total and permanent
inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of
any medically determinable physical or mental impairment, including
blindness, and shall include, but not be limited to, any resident of the
Borough who is disabled pursuant to the Federal Social Security Act (42
U.S.C. § 416), or the Federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C.
§ 231 et seq.), or is rated as having a sixty-percent disability, or higher,
pursuant to any federal law administered by the United States Veterans'
Act. For the purposes of this definition, "blindness" means central visual
acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with the use of a correcting
lens. An eye which is accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision
such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no
greater than 20° shall be considered as having a central visual acuity of
20/200 or less.
C. Waiver of fees. A disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled
person, shall not be required to pay any municipal fee or charge in
order to secure a construction permit for any construction,
reconstruction, alteration, or improvement which promotes
accessibility to his or her own living unit.
D. Exclusions. This section specifically excludes accessibility
improvements made to buildings or structures devoted to commercial
use.
A. Application fee: $25.
§ 155-10.5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-10.6
151:462
§ 155-10.7. Miscellaneous licenses and fees. [Added 7-12-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-20; amended 10-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-30;
5-14-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-9; 3-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-7;
11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-27; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
License Issued Fee
Application for police officer $75
Government record under Open Public Records Act
8 1/2 inches by 11 inches page size $0.05/page
8 1/2 inches by 14 inches page size $0.07/page
Firearms ID card $5
Street map $4
Master Plan copy $50
Birth, marriage, domestic partnership and death
certifications
$15
Birth, marriage, domestic partnership and death
corrections
$25
Bound volume of the Code of the Borough of South
River
$186
Code supplement $25
Zoning Map $4
Subdivision and Site Plan Review, Stormwater
Management and Zoning Book
$25
Real property tax search $3
Real property assessment search $3
Tax and utility lien and tax and utility property
search
$10
Lien search (water, sewer, electricity, taxes) $5
Water assessment search $3
Electric assessment search $3
Water or electric search $5
Duplicate real property tax bill $5
Duplicate water bill $5
Duplicate electric bill $5
Duplicate tax sale certificate $5
Unrecorded lien certificate $11
Duplicate mailing of tenant water and electric bills
to owner
$32
B. Renewal fee: $25.
§ 155-10.6 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-10.7
151:463
License Issued Fee
Credit card charge back $20
CD/DVD $1
Payment plan fees $5
Property maintenance administrative fee 5%
All payments made by credit card and/or debit
card to the Borough of South River, exclusive of
any payments to the Municipal Court
Fee of 3%
§ 155-10.8. Chapter 350, Zoning. [Added 4-11-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-13]
Permit Issued Fee
Change of Use/tenant $50
Commercial building $50
Home occupation $50
New home $50
Addition (commercial) $50
Addition (residential) $30
Accessory structure (commercial) $50
Accessory structure (residential) $30
Finished basement $30
Stairs/porch $30
Deck/gazebo $30
Shed $25
Fence $25
Sign $50
Impervious surface $30
Miscellaneous review $30
§ 155-11. Chapter 147, Electric Connections, Article I. [Amended
7-19-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-33; 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-30;78
4-25-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11]
The schedule of charges for electrical energy consumption is as follows:
A. Class A: residential consumption.
(1) Service charge: $8.75. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-5]
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect for consumption
commencing 1-1-2008 after passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
§ 155-10.7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-11
151:464
(2) Charge per kilowatt-hour: [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-20; 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-24; 12-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-2779]
Number of Kilowatt-Hours
Charge
(per kilowatt-hour)
All consumption $0.0270
B. Class B: general service/nondemand consumption.
(1) Service charge: $35.
(2) Charge per kilowatt-hour: [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-20; 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-24; 12-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-2780]
Number of Kilowatt-Hours
Charge
(per kilowatt-hours)
All consumption $0.3072
C. Class C: retail power/demand consumption.
(1) Service charge: $25.
(2) Demand charge (all kilowatts). The kilowatt demand charge for all
kilowatts of monthly demand shall be as follows:
(a) June 1 through September 30: $17.70.
(b) October 1 through May 31: $15.60.
(3) Kilowatt-hour charge. [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-20; 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-24; 12-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-2781]
(a) All consumption: $0.2100.
(4) Minimum monthly charge: $81.30.
D. Class F: streetlighting consumption.
(1) Charge per kilowatt-hour. [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-20; 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-24; 12-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-2782]
79.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect 1-1-2016.
80.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect 1-1-2016.
81.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect 1-1-2016.
82.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect 1-1-2016.
§ 155-11 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-11
151:465
Number of Kilowatt-Hours
Charge
(per kilowatt-hour)
All consumption $0.2010
(2) Pole rental: $4.82 per month.
E. Class G: yard lighting.
(1) Charges:
Size of Light Bulb
(in watts)
Rental Charge
(per lamp)
Monthly Charge
(per pole)
100 (mercury vapor) $38.87 $4.82
250 (mercury vapor) $49.40 $4.82
400 (mercury vapor) $95.70 $4.82
100 (h.p. sodium) $38.87 $4.82
150 (h.p. sodium) -- $4.82
250 (h.p. sodium) $95.70 $4.82
400 (h.p. sodium) -- $4.82
F. Class H: standby emergency service.
(1) Service charge: $25.
(2) Demand charge (all kilowatts). The kilowatt demand charge for all
kilowatts of monthly demand shall be as follows:
(a) June 1 through September 30: $17.70.
(b) October 1 through May 31: $15.60.
(3) Kilowatt-hour charge. [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-20; 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-24; 12-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-2783]
(a) All consumption: $0.2100.
G. Class I: commercial demand rate: general purpose at secondary -
distribution voltages.
(1) Service charge: $20.
(2) Demand charge (all kilowatts). The kilowatt demand charge for all
kilowatts of monthly demand shall be as follows:
(a) June 1 through September 30 (after first 15 kilowatt-hours):
$20.66.
83.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect 1-1-2016.
§ 155-11 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-11
151:466
(b) October 1 through May 31 (after first 15 kilowatt-hours):
$18.22.
(3) Kilowatt-hour charge. [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-20; 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-24; 12-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-2784]
(a) Up to 4,500 KWH: $0.3070.
(b) 4,501 KWH and up: $0.2460.
(4) Minimum monthly charge: $81.30.
H. Class J: public school building operated by the South River Board of
Education with demand metering.
(1) Service charge: $27.
(2) Demand charge (all kilowatts). The kilowatt demand charge for all
kilowatts of monthly demand shall be as follows:
(a) June 1 through September 30: $5.
(b) October 1 through May 31: $3.30.
(3) Kilowatt-hour charge. [Amended 7-28-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-20; 9-28-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-24; 12-14-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-2785]
(a) June 1 through September 30: $0.2030.
(b) October 1 through May 31: $0.1960.
(4) Minimum monthly charge: $292.50.
I. Application fee for opening an account: $25.
J. Final read fee for closing an existing account: $25.
K. Reconnection fee: $50. [Added 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-2886]
L. Tenant deposit. [Amended 3-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-5]
(1) Residential: $200.
(2) Commercial: $500.
M. Interest shall be charged on all unpaid account balances at 8% per
annum on the first $1,500 of delinquency and 18% per annum on any
amount in excess of $1,500 from the billing date if the balance is not
paid within 30 days of the billing date. For all South River Board of
84.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect 1-1-2016.
85.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect 1-1-2016.
86.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections K
through N as Subsections L through O, respectively.
§ 155-11 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-11
151:467
§ 155-12. Chapter 147, Electrical Connections, Article II.
Annual credit: $26.76.
§ 155-12.1. Chapter 147, Electrical Connections, Article III. [Added
6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-16; amended 3-14-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-5; 10-28-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-18]
An escrow deposit of $3,500 shall be paid to the South River Electric Utility
for a connection between the municipal electric utility and self-generating
electrical equipment. The escrow shall be utilized for an application fee of
$250, professional services of the Utility Engineer and Borough Attorney in
reviewing plans submitted by an applicant as well as for preparation of an
Education accounts, interest shall be charged on all unpaid account
balances at 8% per annum on the first $1,500 of delinquency and 18%
per annum on any amount in excess of $1,500 from the billing date if
the balance is not paid within 60 days of the billing date. [Amended
9-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-31]
N. Annual power cost adjustment (APCA). [Added 9-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-26]
(1) Each class of service set forth in this § 155-11 that is billed for
electricity on a per-kilowatt-hour basis shall be billed or credited
with the annual power cost adjustment factor as provided in
§ 147-3B.
O. Notwithstanding the kilowatt charge subsections above, the governing
body is authorized to provide demand charge relief to certain not-forprofit
organizations residing within the Borough of South River. The
governing body shall provide said demand charge relief through the
adoption of a resolution on an annual basis. [Added 3-27-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-4]
P. Class J: municipal electric vehicle charging stations. [Added
11-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-29]
(1) Charge per hour: $1.
(2) Minimum charge: $1.
(3) The governing body shall set and or adjust this rate as needed by
resolution.
Q. Veterans' organizations. Electric utility rates for Borough veterans'
organizations and institutions shall be levied based on the prevailing
residential rate when it is lower than the commercial rate, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:2-21.41. The requirements of N.J.S.A.
48:2-21.41 shall supersede the kilowatt charge subsections above and
any other conflicting sections of the Borough Code. [Added
12-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-32]
§ 155-11 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-12.1
151:468
interconnection and purchase power and payment obligation agreements in
addition to NETA testing costs, test result analysis by the Utility Engineer
and meter programming fees. Inspection fees for such equipment and
facility are set forth in § 155-10 of the Borough Code. The escrow deposit
shall be deposited by the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough, or his/
her designee, in an account for such purposes under the sole control of the
Borough. Said escrow may be commingled with similar escrows from other
applicants, but accurate accounts and records shall be kept so as to identify
particular escrows and charges made against the same.
§ 155-13. Chapter 157, Fiber Optic Cable.
§ 155-14. Chapter 169, Fire Prevention.
A. Fee for municipal approval or consent by ordinance: $150.
B. Fee schedule.
(1) For applications recommended for approval by Borough Council:
(a) Aboveground: [Amended 2-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-5]
[1] Aboveground installation: $0.50 per linear foot per year;
or
[2] Utility pole attachment fees equivalent to the fees charged
in Subsection B(1)(a)[1] above.
(b) Underground installation: $0.75 per linear foot per year,
provided that if the installation is located under publicly owned
property (not a right-of-way), the fee shall be $1.75 per linear
foot per year.
(c) In no event shall the fee be less than $500.
(2) An annual renewal fee payable to the Borough of South River on
July 1 of each subsequent fiscal year of $0.019 per linear foot, with
a minimum fee of $500.
(3) An engineering and legal professional escrow for review of at least
$750 or a greater amount as determined by the Borough Engineer.
A. Registration fees and local inspections. The following fees shall be
required for businesses, occupancies, buildings or structures upon
inspection by the local Fire Official, or a representative of the same,
which shall be performed at least once every three years: [Amended
4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
(1) Up to 12,000 square feet of occupiable space: $50.
(2) Maximum fee: $250.
B. Information requests. Requests for file information shall be
accompanied by a research fee of $25. Photocopies of information will
§ 155-12.1 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-14
151:469
§ 155-15. Chapter 198, Junk Dealers.
§ 155-16. Chapter 209, Licensed Trades and Occupation.
§ 155-17. Chapter 241, Outdoor Cafes and Restaurants. [Amended
3-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-16; 10-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-45]
Any person submitting an application for an outdoor café or restaurant
license shall submit an application fee in the amount of $100 with said
application. Should an application be approved by the Mayor and Council
of the Borough by resolution as specified herein, the applicant shall pay
a licensing fee in the amount of $100 plus $1 per square foot of sidewalk
utilized for said outdoor cafe or restaurant; provided, further, that no
renewal fee shall be required for a license renewal unless there shall be a
change in the design, setup or size of said outdoor restaurant/café in which
event the applicant shall pay a renewal fee of $100.
§ 155-18. Chapter 255, Peddling and Soliciting. [Amended
10-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-36; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
License fee: $25.
§ 155-18.1. Chapter 257, Precious Metals and Gems. [Added
6-22-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-26]
be provided at a cost of $0.50 per page for the first 10 pages, $0.25 per
page for the next 10 pages and $0.10 for each additional page.
C. Automatic fire alarms and carbon monoxide alarms for residential use.
[Amended 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
(1) Basic fee: $50 per unit.
(2) The fee would rise to $100 if the certificate is required within 10
days and to $150 if required within three days.
A. License fee: $300.
B. For each additional cart, wagon, truck or other vehicle: $10.
A. Initial license fee: $50.
B. License transfer fee: $25.
C. License replacement fee: $25.
A. Initial license application: $200.
B. Each annual license renewal: $25.
C. Initial license application where the dealer has been in business for a
period not less than one year on the effective date of this section: $25.
§ 155-14 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-18.2
151:470
§ 155-18.2. Chapter 45, Article XII, Parking Utility. [Added
10-11-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-35]
Fees for metered or permit parking shall be:
§ 155-19. Chapter 258, Property Maintenance. [Amended 4-27-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-12; 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-17; 3-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-11]
§ 155-19.1. Section 22-62, Recreation program and park fees.
[Added 2-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-8]
A. Parking by permit at municipal parking lots: $15 per month.
B. Meter parking:
(1) Per 12 minutes: $0.05.
(2) Per 24 minutes: $0.10.
(3) Per hour: $0.25.
C. Replacement fee for lost or destroyed permit: $5.
A. For a certificate of continuing occupancy for all residential and
commercial structures at time of sale, said fee shall be $100, and if a
reinspection is required, an additional fee of $100 for the first
reinspection. Said fee shall be paid along with the application, and the
reinspection fee shall be paid at the time of the requested reinspection.
B. The fee for additional reinspections after the first reinspection due to
continued denial shall be $125.
C. The fee for the fire inspection shall be that which is established in the
Uniform Fire Safety Act,87 set forth in said Act and revised general
ordinances of the Borough of South River.88
A. Baseball (t-ball, rookie, minor, major leagues): $35. Additional fees:
[Amended 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-12]
(1) After registration closed: $10.
(2) For nonresidents: $10.
B. Basketball (fundamentals, K through 2, 3rd through 5th, 6th through
8th): $45. Additional fees: [Amended 6-27-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-16; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
87.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
88.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding fees for vacant properties, which
immediately followed this subsection, was superseded 2-24-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-04. See
now § 258-17.1.
§ 155-18.2 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-19.1
151:471
(1) After registration closed: $10.
(2) For nonresidents: $10.
C. Softball (gidgets, juniors, seniors): $35. Additional fees: [Amended
6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
(1) After registration closed: $10.
(2) For nonresidents: $10.
D. Wrestling: $75. Additional fees: [Amended 6-27-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-16; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
(1) After registration closed: $10.
(2) For nonresidents: $10.
E. Street hockey: $35. Additional fees: [Amended 6-27-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-16; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-12]
(1) After registration closed: $10.
(2) For nonresidents: $10.
F. Street hockey fundamentals:
(1) Three-week basic skills program: $10.
(2) Additional registration fee for regular league play: $15.
(3) Full registration fee (exclusive of basic skills program): $25.
G. Aerobics, men's fitness, zumba and yoga: $30. [Amended 6-27-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-16]
H. Summer Recreation Early Dropoff Program. [Amended 4-22-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-06]
(1) One child: $100.
(2) Two children: $150.
(3) Three or more children: $200.
I. Soccer: $75. [Amended 6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-16; 4-27-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-12]
(1) After registration closed: $10.
(2) For nonresidents: $10.
J. Karate: program fee as determined by instructor.
K. Tennis: program fee as determined by instructor.
L. Athletic field lighting fees: [Added 3-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-6]
§ 155-19.1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-19.1
151:472
§ 155-20. Chapter 263, Roll-Off Dumpters.
§ 155-21. Chapter 275, Sewers
Sewer use charges and connection and application fees:
Connection Size
(inches) Connection Fee Charge
4 (minimum) $393.41
5 $613.72
6 $885.17
8 $1,573.64
(1) When any sports team or league seeks to reserve the use of a
Borough athletic field at night(s), with the use of lighting, it shall be
charged a lighting fee for the use of the electricity on lighted fields.
The fee shall be $25 per hour, billed in one-half-hour increments
per use, rounded up, based on the amount of the time reserved. All
fees will be collected up front, based on the amount of field time
reserved, at the beginning of each season. If there are any hours
paid for and not used, due to rainouts or other cancellations, said
fees shall be refunded in a reasonable time following the end of the
sports season.
(2) Exemptions. Fees for all Borough recreation leagues, Borough
schools and Borough youth teams shall be absorbed by the
Borough. Any disputes over what teams or groups are exempt shall
be decided by the Borough Administrator.
M. Athletic field use fees: [Added 4-28-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-9]
(1) When any sports team or league seeks to reserve the use of a
Borough athletic field, it shall be charged a fee for the use of the
fields. The fee shall be $50 per use. All fees will be collected up
front, based on the amount of field time reserved, at the beginning
of each season. If there are any dates paid for and not used, due to
rainouts or other cancellations, said fees shall be refunded in a
reasonable time following the end of the sports season.
(2) Exemptions. Fees for all Borough recreation leagues, Borough
schools and Borough youth teams shall be absorbed by the
Borough. Any disputes over what teams or groups are exempt shall
be decided by the Borough Administrator.
A. Refundable deposit: $200.
B. Permit fee: $50.
C. Renewal fee: $25.
§ 155-19.1 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-21
151:473
Connection Size
(inches) Connection Fee Charge
10 $2,458.81
12 $3,540.69
§ 155-22. Chapter 282, Soil Addition and Grade Alteration.
§ 155-23. Chapter 284, Soil Removal.
§ 155-23.1. Chapter 288A, Special Events. [Added 10-12-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-30; amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-29]
For applications submitted 30 or more days before the date proposed for
the special event, there shall be an application fee of $75. For applications
submitted between 15 days and 29 days before the date proposed for the
special event, there shall be an application fee of $125. For applications
submitted between one day and 14 days before the date proposed for the
special event, there shall be an application fee of $225.
§ 155-24. Chapter 289, Streets and Sidewalks.
A. Filing fee: $100.
B. Escrow fee: $500.
A. Application fee.
Application Review and Removal Fee
Minor $1,000
Major $1,750
B. Fees for inspection and enforcement.
Application Inspection Fee
Minor $2,500 per annum
Major 5,000 per annum
A. Excavations in streets.
(1) The fee for such permit shall be in accordance with the following
schedule, with the minimum fee being $10:
Permit Fee Schedule
10% of repair guaranty under $500
8% of repair guaranty from $500 to $5,000
6% of repair guaranty over $5,000
§ 155-21 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-24
151:474
§ 155-25. Chapter 295, Subdivision, site plan and variance
applications. [Amended 7-11-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-25; 12-27-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-41]
(2) In addition, each applicant for such permit shall deposit a repair
guaranty in accordance with the following schedule to ensure the
proper replacement of the roadway surface within 15 days after
completion of the project in the permit:
(a) For excavation in the bituminous-concrete-overlaid-portlandcement-
concrete roadway or surface: $4.50 per square foot.
(b) For excavation in a bituminous-concrete or portland-cementconcrete
roadway or surface: $4 per square foot.
(c) For excavation in oil-treated, untreated or unimproved
roadway or surface: $2.50 per square foot.
(3) Notwithstanding the above, the minimum repair guaranty to
ensure the proper replacement of the roadway surface shall be
$1,000.
A. Application fees:
(1) Subdivisions.
(a) Minor subdivision: $250 base fee, plus $100 for each lot
created.
(b) Preliminary major subdivision: $250 base fee, plus $100 for
each lot created.
(c) Final major subdivision: $250 base fee.
(2) Site plans.
(a) Minor site plan: $300 base fee.
(b) Preliminary major site plan: $300 base fee.
(c) Final major site plan: $200 base fee.
(3) Conditional use application to Planning Board: $250 base fee, plus
the fee for site plan.
(4) Application for a site plan waiver shall require an application fee of
$150.
(5) Appeals and interpretations.
(a) Application for appeal of Zoning Officer decision or action:
$75.
(b) Request for Zoning Ordinance interpretation: $75.
§ 155-24 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-25
151:475
(6) Variances.
(a) Request for each new single- or two-family residential bulk
variance: $75 each.
(b) Request for each multifamily or new nonresidential bulk
variance: $100 each.
(c) Request for use variance: $250
(7) Applications involving utility extensions (major applications).
(a) For any application, including the extension of sewer facilities,
add $100 per lot for subdivisions or $100 per unit for site
plans. If a pump station or other special facility is required, add
a flat fee of $700. A review of off-tract improvements shall be
the actual review fee of the engineer, estimated by the
engineer and paid in advance.
(b) For any application involving extension of water facilities, add
$50 per lot for subdivisions or $50 per unit for site plans. A
review of off-tract improvements shall be the actual review fee
of the engineer, estimated by the engineer and paid in advance.
(8) Final approval of site plans and subdivisions shall be conditioned
upon the applicant's paying all necessary water, sewer and electric
connection charges and inspection fees.
(9) Inspection fees shall be posted by certified check or cash prior to
final approval in an amount equal to 5% of the cost of the
improvements, except where the Borough Engineer deems it
necessary to increase same due to special or complex construction
requirements. Where construction of facilities will take place after
preliminary approval, the inspection fees shall be paid prior to
commencing construction.
(10) Submission of each revised plan shall result in a revised submission
application fee of 1/2 the original total application fee.
B. Escrow fees.
(1) Subdivisions.
(a) Minor subdivision: $3,000.
(b) Preliminary major subdivision: $5,000.
(c) Final Major subdivision: $1,500.
(2) Site plans.
(a) Minor site plans: $2,500.
(b) Preliminary major site plans:
§ 155-25 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-25
151:476
[1] Residential building of 0 to 10 units: $2,500.
[2] Residential building of 10+ units: $5,000.
[3] Nonresidential or mixed uses: $5,000.
[4] Nonresidential uses with over 5,000 GFA: $10,000.
(c) Final major site plans: $1,500.
(3) Conditional use application to Planning Board: $1,250, plus the fee
for site plan.
(4) Application for a site plan waiver: $300.
(5) Appeals and interpretations.
(a) "a" appeal of Zoning Officer decision or action:89 $600.
(b) "b" Request for zoning ordinance interpretation:90 $400.
(6) Variances.
(a) "c" Single or two family residential bulk variances:91 $700.
(b) "c" Multi-family or new non-residential bulk variances: $1,000.
(c) "d" Request for use variance:92 $1,000.
(7) Final approval of site plans and subdivisions shall be conditioned
upon the applicant's paying all necessary water, sewer and electric
connection charges and inspection fees.
(8) Inspection fees shall be posted by certified check or cash prior to
final approval in an amount equal to 5% of the cost of the
improvements, except where the Borough Engineer deems it
necessary to increase same due to special or complex construction
requirements. Where construction of facilities will take place after
preliminary approval, the inspection fees shall be paid prior to
commencing construction.
(9) Special design elements. Applicants shall pay escrow fees based
upon 33% of the original escrow fee when and as determined by the
reviewing board that the proposed project includes a special design
consideration, such as, but not limited to, sanitary sewer pump
station, detention of retention ponds, potable water storage facility,
traffic signalization device, off-tract improvements, etc.
(10) Resubmission. Submission of each revised plan shall result in a
revised submission escrow fee of 20% the original total escrow fee.
89.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a.
90.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
91.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
92.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
§ 155-25 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-26
151:477
§ 155-26. Chapter 300, Swimming Pools.
§ 155-27. Chapter 310, Taxicabs and Limousines. [Amended
5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-13]
§ 155-28. Chapter 315, Trailers.
Application for trailer camp permit: $125 for each trailer coach space.
§ 155-29. Chapter 319, Tree Removal and Woodlands Management.
[Amended 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-22]
Escrow deposit: $450 per tree.
§ 155-30. Chapter 333, Water. [Amended 4-13-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-7; 4-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-8; 2-15-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-03; 3-9-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-06]
A. Permit fees:
(1) Ten dollars per $1,000 of evaluation of estimated costs.
(2) Minimum fee (not refundable):
(a) Aboveground pools: $25.
(b) In-ground pools: $50.
B. Inspection fee: $1.
C. Special police officer: $1 per inspection.
A. For each taxicab owner’s license, the sum of $100 per year or any
fraction thereof. [Amended 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-16]
B. For each taxicab driver’s license, the sum of $50 per year or portion of
the year. [Amended 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-16]
C. For each limousine license, the sum of $50 per year or any fraction
thereof.
D. For each limousine driver’s license, the sum of $50 per year or portion
of the year. [Added 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-16]
E. For substitution of a taxicab vehicle, the sum of $25 per vehicle.
[Added 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-16]
A. Article I, Water Use:
(1) Payment of bills; discontinuance of service:
(a) To cover the cost of turning on water service during 7:00 a.m.
until 2:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays:
$50.
§ 155-26 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-30
151:478
(b) After 2:00 p.m. on any given workday or on weekends or
holidays: $125.
(c) Application fee for opening or changing an account: $25.
(d) Final read fee for closing an existing account: $25.
(2) Water rates.
(a) Effective April 1, 2020, the minimum charge per quarter for all
consumers within the Borough of South River shall be as
follows:
Meter-Size
(inches)
Minimum Charge per
Quarter
All meter sizes $73.07
(b) Quarterly rates.
[1] Effective April 1, 2020, the quarterly rates of all water
consumed by consumers in all meter size categories shall
be as follows:
Amount
(cubic feet)
Rate per 1,000 Cubic
Feet per Quarter
0 to 1,000 $73.07
1,001 to 4,000 $88.94
4,001 to 8,000 $97.50
8,001 to 12,000 $107.36
12,001 and up $118.06
[2] There will be a surcharge of 5% on all water consumption
based on water readings taken in the months of July,
August and September. Said readings are taken during the
normal water reading cycles as established by the Borough
of South River Water Utility.
(c) Senior citizen discount not to exceed $5 for each quarterly tax
bill.
(d) Tapping fees:
[1] Three-fourths inch: $46.30.
[2] One inch: $52.90.
[3] Tap larger than one inch: The owner's plumbing contractor
shall make a waterline tap under supervision of Utilities
§ 155-30 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-30
151:479
§ 155-31. Chapter 344, Wreckers. [Amended 7-23-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-15; 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-38; 4-27-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-12]
Department personnel upon payment of an inspection fee
of $35.
(e) Water meter fee: according to meter size and vendor pricing.
(f) Connection fees:
Connection Size
(inches) Connection Fee Charge
3/4 $947.58
1 and 1 1/4 $2,132.05
1 1/2 $3,600.80
2 $5,969.75
3 $13,171.36
4 $22,647.16
6 $50,600.77
8 $88,124.94
B. Fire service charges effective May 1, 2010.
(1) Quarterly charges.
Meter Size
(inches)
Minimum Charge per
Quarter
2 $62.10
3 $139.40
4 $245.25
6 $552.60
8 $984.25
10 $1,536.80
12 $2,212.15
(2) Minimum quarterly charge for each hydrant installed on private
property: $66.15
A. License fee: $100 per year; fee on or after August 1: $50.
B. Charges:
§ 155-30 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-31
151:480
§ 155-32. Chapter 350, Zoning.
(1) For conveying a disabled vehicle from any point in the Borough,
when towed, transported and/or conveyed or removed any time of
the day or night: $125. Licensed Borough wrecker operators may
assess a one-time administrative yard fee in the amount of $35 to
cover the handling costs of a vehicle in storage.
(2) Dead storage.
(a) For the first 15 days of dead storage, after a twenty-four-hour
grace period from the time of arrival at a storage facility: $45/
day for each twenty-four-hour period or fraction thereof.
(b) For every day of dead storage exceeding 15 days: $60/day.
(3) Cleanup scene of accident: $60; $25 additional for application of
absorbent material.
(4) Standby time: $85 per hour, which time shall begin to accrue once
the tow operator has been on the scene for 59 minutes without
being able to begin to tow and/or commence recovery efforts. Any
part of an hour after the elapsed first 59 minutes shall be counted
as a full hour, and the full hourly rate of $85 shall then be charged.
(5) Winching fee: $100 per hour.
(6) The rates delineated in this section shall be exclusive of any other
repair service costs provided by the tow operator, including, but
not limited to, such services as repairing flat tires or installing new
and/or spare parts to a disabled vehicle. A tow operator shall be
permitted to charge an additional fee of $85 for such services as
lockouts, tire changes and fuel deliveries. In such situations, it shall
be the responsibility of the tow operator to first inform the owner
and/or operator of the motor vehicle of the hourly labor rates and
estimated cost for parts, materials, other services and labor prior
to the performance of such repair services.
(7) If a motorist requests to have his or her vehicle taken to any
location within the Township other than the wrecker operator's
business location, the wrecker operator shall comply if the motorist
has either cash or a credit card to pay for the towing charges.
There shall be no additional charge for towing a vehicle to any
location within the Borough of South River. If a motorist requests
that his or her vehicle be taken outside the Borough but within
Middlesex County and the wrecker operator is able to comply with
the request, the fee shall be $6 per mile beyond the boundaries of
South River regardless of the time of day. The motorist shall be
responsible for negotiating the terms of a tow beyond Middlesex
County. No operator shall refuse a credit card or cash as payment
for services.
§ 155-31 ENTERTAINMENT § 155-32
151:481
§ 155-32.1. Chapter 363, Food and Beverage Service. [Added
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-53]
§ 155-33. Fees for marriage or civil union ceremonies. [Added
2-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-2]
A. Fences.
(1) Inspection fee: $25 each inspection.
(2) Any inspections after the first inspection: $25 per inspection.
A. Article IV, Mobile Retail Food Establishments.
(1) Application fee for mobile van, truck, cart or other vehicle from
which food and beverages are sold: $100.
(2) There shall be an annual fee of $50 for each permit or renewal for
each mobile retail food establishment. Payment of the fee provided
for in this Subsection B shall not entitle the vendor to a license
required under Chapter 209 of this Code, but a separate
application and a fee shall be made under Chapter 155 for a
mercantile license required by this Code.
(3) The above annual license fees are based on administrative costs
and the maximum of two inspections per year required of
establishments that continue to remain in a satisfactory condition.
Those establishments requiring more than two inspections per year
as a result of citizen complaints which are deemed by the Borough
Health Officer to be legitimate or reinspections needed to obtain
compliance will be subject to a reinspection fee of $25 for each
such reinspection.
(4) Transfer fee: $50.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish policies and
procedures for the collection of fees associated with the performance of
marriage or civil union ceremonies by the Mayor.
B. Requirements.
(1) Required fees. Persons seeking to be married or joined in civil
union by the Mayor of South River shall remit a fee of $100, to be
paid by check to the Borough of South River, which shall be
inclusive of an administrative fee of $25. Fees collected shall be
deposited into the Borough’s current fund as miscellaneous
revenue.
§ 155-32 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 155-33
151:482
Chapter 157
FIBER OPTIC CABLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Street openings — See Ch. 289, Art. VI.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A401.
§ 157-1. Application.
A. Every applicant for the installation of fiber optic or other cable or for
the use of a public utility easement shall submit to the Borough
Engineer the following items:
(1) A plat showing the proposed location of the fiber optic or other
cable installation.
(2) A depiction indicating whether the proposed installation is
overhead or underground.
(3) Copies of all easements proposed to be used which have previously
been granted to utilities.
(4) All consents for the use of any such easements by the applicable
utilities.
B. Every application recommended for approval by the Borough Engineer,
if approved by the Council, will require as a condition thereof, the
following:
(1) Payment of permit fees in accordance with the fee schedule
hereinafter set forth.
(2) A certificate of insurance naming the Borough as an additional
insured for general liability coverage in the amount of at least
$2,000,000.
(3) An indemnification agreement, properly executed by the applicant,
which shall hold the Borough, its officers, agents and employees
harmless from any loss, claim or damage arising out of the
installation, maintenance or use of the fiber optic cable installed by
the applicant, the form of said agreement to be approved by the
Borough Attorney.
(4) An agreement that the easement holder will permit the Borough to
use the holder's easement without consideration for the installation
of fiber optic or other cable for Borough operations, provided that
said installation will not interfere with any fiber optic or other cable
§ 155-33 FIBER OPTIC CABLE § 157-1
157:483
§ 157-2. Fee schedule.
Fees shall be as provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 157-3. Cable reserved for Borough use.
Every application approved by the Borough Council will require as a
condition thereof that an agreement be entered with the applicant that will
provide a minimum of six pairs of strands in each fiber optic cable (i.e., if
a cable contains 48 strands and two cables are run, the Borough will have
the use of 12 pairs of strands, six pair per cable) to the Borough for its
use and the use of any other governmental and quasi-governmental entities
approved by the Borough.
Chapter 165
the easement holders may have previously installed in the
easement area.
C. No license or permit issued hereunder shall be valid for a period of
more than the less of 10 years or, if applicable, the balance of the term
of an easement previously granted to a utility pursuant to Title 48 of the
New Jersey Statutes.
D. In any instance in which the holder of an existing easement requires
that an applicant for a license or permit hereunder obtain municipal
approval or consent by ordinance, the applicant shall pay to the
Borough Clerk, in addition to the fee established, a fee as provided in
Chapter 155, Fees; and the cost of advertising the ordinance prior to
adoption and the cost of advertising notice of adoption of the ordinance.
E. In the event that the fiber optic or other cable installation interferes
with the planned municipal installation, the subject fiber optic or other
cable shall be relocated by its owner in an expeditious manner within
the right-of-way to a location approved by the Borough at no cost to the
Borough. The owner of the fiber optic or other cable shall not pay any
additional fee to the Borough due to the relocation.
F. Any underground installation of fiber optic cable, where applicable,
shall be required to comply with the street opening requirements set
forth in the Borough Code of the Borough of South River.93
G. These procedures shall not be applicable to existing easements
previously granted to Public Service Electric and Gas Company
(PSE&G), Verizon (formerly known as Bell Atlantic-New Jersey) or to
existing easements previously granted to or obtained by the present or
future holder of a cable television franchise granted by the Borough of
South River.94
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 289, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. VI, Excavations in Streets.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. A401, Cable Television Franchise.
§ 157-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 157-3
165:484
FIRE INSURANCE
§ 165-1. Payment of tax liens on fire-damaged property.
§ 165-2. Insurance company authorized to pay Borough.
Unless a resolution is received in accordance with § 165-3 of this chapter
by an insurance company writing fire insurance policies in the Borough of
South River, such insurance company is hereby authorized and required,
prior to the payment of any claims for fire damages in excess of $2,500,
to pay to the Borough of South River the amount of the liens appearing
on the official certificate and such other recorded liens or related charges
as may be certified to the insurance company; provided, however, that
if an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other than
an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold 75% of the full amount of
the lien or charge being contested pending termination of all proceedings,
at which time such moneys and all interest accruing thereon at a rate paid
on interest-bearing accounts in banking institutions or savings and loan
associations in the state shall be disbursed in accordance with the final
order or judgment of the court.
A. The Borough of South River hereby prohibits the payment to a claimant
by any insurance company of any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire
damages on any real property located within the Borough of South
River pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the
adoption of this chapter and after the filing of such chapter with the
State Commissioner of Insurance until such time as all taxes and
assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due and payable
appearing on the official certificate of search shall have been paid
either by the owner of such real property or by the insurance company
pursuant to the provisions of § 165-2 of this chapter, or until the
municipality submits to the insurance company a copy of a resolution
adopted pursuant to § 165-3 of this chapter. No change in this chapter
shall take effect until filed with the Commissioner.
B. The State Commissioner of Insurance shall, within 15 days of the
receipt of a copy of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this section,
notify each carrier of fire insurance within the state of the adoption of
said ordinance.
C. The official certificate of search may, from time to time, be altered by
the bonded official responsible for preparing such certificates in order
to correct any errors or omissions or to add any municipal liens or
related charges due and payable subsequent to the preparation of the
official certificate.
§ 157-3 FIRE INSURANCE § 165-3
165:485
§ 165-3. Installment payments by owner.
The governing body of the Borough of South River, in which the firedamaged
property is located, may enter into agreement with the owner of
any fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments
or other municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or,
for the redemption of the tax sale lien, by installment payments pursuant
to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes
if the governing body of the Borough of South River is satisfied that the
claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged
property. An insurance company receiving a certified copy of a resolution
of agreement from the governing body of the municipality is authorized to
make full payment on the claim to the insured person.
§ 165-4. Other claims on insurance proceeds; construal of
provisions.
§ 165-5. Applicability.
In addition to the standard provisions for fire insurance policies set forth in
P.L. 1953, c. 268, Section 6 (N.J.S.A. 17:36-5.20), every fire insurance policy
issued on property situated in the Borough of South River shall be subject
to the provisions of this chapter.
A. A municipal claim made in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the
fire insurance policy, except the claim of a holder of a mortgage on the
fire-damaged property, where the fire insurance policy at the time of the
loss listed the mortgage as a named insured, in which event the claim of
the mortgage to the proceeds shall be paramount to the municipal lien
under this chapter only to the extent of the amount due and payable to
the mortgagee under the mortgage contract.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed:
(1) To obligate an insurance company for any amount in excess of the
value of the fire insurance policy on the property or the amount of
the liability of the insurance company thereunder;
(2) Except as provided in the case of appeals under § 165-2 of this
chapter, to obligate the insurance company for any liens not
appearing on the official certificate or any certified changes
submitted by a bonded official; or
(3) To affect the authority of a municipality to enforce a municipal lien
under any other law of this state.
§ 165-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 165-5
165:486
Chapter 169
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Department of Public Safety — See Ch. 72.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 99.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 129.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 258.
§ 169-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383;
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be
locally enforced in the Borough of South River.
§ 169-2. Enforcing agency designated.
The local enforcing agency shall be the County of Middlesex, Department
of Public Safety and Health, pursuant to the shared services agreement
authorized by N.J.S.A. 40A:65-1 et seq. The Borough Attorney shall assist
said agency in enforcing its code. The designated attorney shall advise the
agency and undertake such actions at law as the Fire Official shall deem
necessary to gain compliance with the code.
§ 169-3. Duties of enforcing agency.
§ 169-4. Life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 169-2 of this chapter shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
A. The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings,
structures and premises within the established boundaries of South
River, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and
shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety
Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
B. The local enforcement agency shall also enforce the storage of
explosives, blasting agents, flammable liquids and bulk storage of
petroleum gases pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act as well as all
codes and regulations adopted pursuant to it.
§ 165-5 FIRE INSURANCE § 169-5
165:487
§ 169-5. Organization.
The local enforcing agency established by § 169-2 of this chapter shall be
under the direct supervision and control of the Fire Official.
§ 169-6. Fire Official; inspectors and employees.
§ 169-7. Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-206 and 27D-208), any person aggrieved by any order of the local
enforcement agency shall have the right to appeal to the Construction
Board of Appeals of Middlesex County.
§ 169-8. Additional required inspections and fees.
In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act and the
regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, additional inspections
and fees shall be required.
§ 169-9. Permits; fees.
§ 169-10. Collection of fines.
Any and all fines levied by the local enforcing agency shall be collected
by the Violations Bureau of the Municipal Court of the Borough of South
River in accordance with the shared services agreement with the County of
Middlesex.
§ 169-11. Copy on file.
A copy of the new fire code, the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code and shared
services agreement with the County of Middlesex is on file in the office of
the South River Municipal Clerk.
§ 169-12. Automatic fire alarms and carbon monoxide alarms for
residential use.
A. Appointment of Fire Official who shall be designated by the County of
Middlesex, Department of Public Safety and Health.
B. Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and other employees as may
be necessary in the local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the
County of Middlesex, Department of Public Safety and Health.
C. Any notification and enforcement of the within provisions shall be made
by the Fire Official pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act.
A. Permits required.
(1) All permitting and fees shall be in accordance with the shared
services agreement with the County of Middlesex.
§ 169-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 169-12
165:488
§ 169-13. Fire areas and fire lanes.
A. A structure used or intended for use for residential purposes classified
as a Use Group R-3 or R-4 dwelling shall comply with the requirements
set forth by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3.
B. Before any Use Group R-3 or R-4 structure is sold, leased or otherwise
made subject to a change of occupancy for residential purposes, the
owner shall obtain a certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide
alarm compliance (CSDCMAC), evidencing compliance with N.J.A.C.
5:70-4.19, from the appropriate enforcing agency.
C. Upon application for a certificate of smoke detector and carbon
monoxide alarm compliance (CSDCMAC), an applicant shall be charged
a basic fee as provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
(1) In the event that a reinspection is necessary to complete the
evidencing compliance, an additional fee of 1/2 the fee schedule
shall be charged and shall be made payable prior to the receipt of
the CSDCMAC certificate.
D. The Tax Collector of the Borough of South River shall provide to each
person requesting a tax search from his or her office a statement calling
attention with respect to smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarms.
E. Any owner who sells, leases, rents or otherwise permits to be occupied
for residential purposes any premises subject to the provisions of this
section when the premises do not comply with said section or without
complying with the inspection and certificate requirements of said
section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500. Said section shall
be enforced within the Municipal Court of the Borough of South River
by the Fire Official or a representative of same.
A. The County of Middlesex Department of Public Safety and Health
pursuant to the shared services agreement authorized by N.J.S.A.
40A:65-1 et seq., upon approval of the Borough Council in the form of
an ordinance, is authorized to establish fire areas and/or fire lanes on
quasi-public property and on property devoted to public use, including,
but not by way of limitation, shopping centers, bowling alleys, drive-in
theaters, churches, swimming pools and similar uses involving parking
of a sufficient number of motor vehicles to make necessary such
regulation for the protection of persons and property in case of fire or
other emergency.
B. The fire areas and fire lanes shall be established to ensure fire
equipment and other emergency vehicles unobstructed means of
ingress to and egress from such properties and the buildings, persons,
vehicles, fire hydrants, including wall hydrants, and Siamese
connections for automatic sprinkler and standpipe systems thereon in
case of fire or other emergency.
§ 169-12 FIRE INSURANCE § 169-13
165:489
C. Markings. The owner shall, within 30 days of being given a notice to do
so by the Fire Official, mark the lane as follows:
(1) Signs constructed of metal and with raised red letters a minimum
of two inches in size on a white background with the wording NO
PARKING FIRE LANE shall be posted. Spacing of the signs shall be
even, with a minimum of one sign for every 100 feet of fire lane or
part thereof, or as ordered by the Fire Official.
(2) The area of the fire lane on improved areas shall be delineated
along its entire circumference with yellow lines four inches in
width. Within the yellow lines shall be marked NO PARKING FIRE
LANE in yellow letters 18 inches in height. The number of times
this wording is to be repeated shall be at the discretion of the Fire
Official. The inside of the fire lane shall be further marked with
diagonal striping yellow in color and four inches in width spaced at
intervals of five feet. If the designated fire lane abuts a curb, the
curbing shall be yellow in color where it abuts the fire lane.
D. Size. Fire lanes for vehicle access shall be a minimum of 18 feet in
width. Fire lanes for egress of occupants shall be a minimum of at least
the width of the exitway served.
E. Notification. Once a fire lane has been designated by the Fire Official
and properly marked by the owner of the premises, the Fire Official
shall notify the Police Department, Construction Code Agency and
Municipal Court Clerk, in writing, of the existence and location of the
designated fire lane.
F. Unpaved areas. Unpaved fire lanes installed on public or private
property shall comply with the fire lane typical details installation
methods blueprint available from the South River Engineering
Department and be approved by the Fire Official. Selection of a method
to be used as per the typical details shall be subject to the approval of
the Fire Official. Signs and markings shall be provided as required by
the Fire Official.
G. Restricted access. Gates, chains or other methods utilized to prevent
unauthorized access to fire lanes shall be approved by the Fire Official
prior to installation.
H. Installation and maintenance. Fire lanes shall be installed and
maintained by the owner of the premises in conformance with the
provisions of this section. Fire lanes in existence prior to the enactment
of this section shall be required to conform to the provisions herein at
the discretion of the Fire Official.
I. Obstructions. Designated fire lanes shall be maintained free of
obstructions and vehicles at all times.
§ 169-13 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 169-13
165:490
§ 169-14. Key box.
§ 169-15. Equipment rooms; barbecue grills.
J. Approval of Borough Council. Any and all fire areas and fire lanes shall
be determined by the Fire Official with the approval of the Borough
Council, which shall be by ordinance, and designated accordingly.
K. The regulations as to the fire areas and fire lanes shall be jointly
enforceable by the Fire Official and the South River Police Department.
L. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of
South River for a violation of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General
Penalty. Each and every day a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
A. Installation. When a property is protected by an automatic alarm
system and access to or within a structure or an area on that property is
unduly difficult because of secured openings, and where immediate
access is necessary for lifesaving or firefighting purposes, the Fire
Official may require a key box to be installed in an approved location.
The key box shall be of a type approved by the Fire Official.
B. Contents. The key box shall contain:
(1) Keys to locked points of ingress, whether on the interior or exterior
of such buildings.
(2) Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms.
(3) Keys to locked electrical rooms.
(4) Keys to elevator controls.
(5) Keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Official.
C. Exceptions. Subsections A and B above shall not apply to any
residential units.
A. Equipment rooms. No storage of any kind shall be permitted within any
mechanical equipment, electrical, furnace or boiler room.
B. Barbecue grills. Barbecue grills shall not be located for use within or
upon any building or within five feet laterally of any building wall or
overhang.
C. Exceptions. Subsections A and B above shall not apply to one- and twofamily
dwellings.
§ 169-13 FIRE INSURANCE § 169-15
165:491
Chapter 174
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 129.
§ 169-15 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 169-15
165:492
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
§ 174-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of South
River of Middlesex County, New Jersey, does ordain as follows:
§ 174-2. Findings of fact.
§ 174-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of South River of Middlesex
County are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 174-1 FIRE INSURANCE § 174-3
165:493
§ 174-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 174-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 174-4
165:494
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 174-5. Definitions; word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ADVISORY BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (ABFE) — The elevation shown on
a community's Advisory Flood Hazard Map that indicates the advisory
stillwater elevation plus wave effect (ABFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting
from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (AFHA) — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to flooding from the one-percent annual chance
event depicted on the Advisory Flood Hazard Map.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD MAP — The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Administration has delineated the areas of
advisory flood hazards applicable to the community.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Code Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
§ 174-5 FIRE INSURANCE § 174-5
165:495
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building:
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
Built, in the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have
the top of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal
high-hazard area, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural
member of the elevated floor, elevated above the base flood elevation
by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to
the flow of the water; and
A.
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood.
B.
In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters. In areas of coastal high hazard, "elevated buildings" also
includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated
building" even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls.
C.
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 174-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 174-5
165:496
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 174-5 FIRE INSURANCE § 174-5
165:497
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound
or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
For other than new construction or substantial improvements under
the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348) includes substantial
improvements and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such
as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
A.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
B.
§ 174-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 174-5
165:498
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above the ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an "historic
structure."
B.
§ 174-5 FIRE INSURANCE § 174-5
165:499

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 174-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of South River of Middlesex County, New Jersey.
§ 174-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 174-8. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than as authorized in the Code of the Borough of South River or
imprisoned for not more than those days as determined by a duly sworn
Municipal Judge, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all
costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the Borough of South River of Middlesex County from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of South River of
Middlesex County Community No. 340280 are identified and defined on
the following documents prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Middlesex County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated July 6,
2010.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Middlesey County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel(s),34023C0134F,
34023C142F, 34023C0153F, and 34023C0161F, whose effective
date is July 6, 2010.
(3) Advisory Base Flood Elevations and Advisory Flood Hazard Maps
New Brunswick NE, South Amboy NW and South Amboy SW, dated
December 7, 2012).These documents shall take precedence over
previous panels and FIS in construction and development
regulations only. Where the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) and
the Advisory Flood Hazard Area (AFHA) Maps conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent requirement shall prevail.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
are on file at 48 Washington Street, South River, New Jersey 08882.
§ 174-6 FIRE INSURANCE § 174-9
165:501
§ 174-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 174-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 174-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
South River of Middlesex County, any officer or employee thereof or the
Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 174-9 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 174-11
165:502
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 174-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 174-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Code Official
and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
§ 174-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 174-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Code Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 174-17B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 174-18A are met.
(4) Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard area of
the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
§ 174-12 FIRE INSURANCE § 174-14
165:503
§ 174-15. Variance procedure.
development alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood
damage.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 174-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
Code Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 174-17A, Specific standards, residential
construction, and § 174-17B, Specific standards, nonresidential
construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 174-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 174-15.
A. Appeal board.
§ 174-14 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 174-15
165:504
(1) The Zoning Board as established by the Mayor and Council shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Construction Code Official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the, or any taxpayer, may appeal
such decision to the Court of the Borough of South River, New
Jersey, or a court as appointed as determined by statute.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board shall consider
all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in
other sections of this chapter; and
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
§ 174-15 FIRE INSURANCE § 174-15
165:505
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 174-15A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Zoning Board may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes
of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Code Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that
items in § 174-15A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 174-15A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 174-15 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 174-15
165:506
ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 174-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 174-16 FIRE INSURANCE § 174-16
165:507
§ 174-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 174-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 174-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated at or
above the base flood elevation or advisory base flood elevation
whichever is more restrictive, plus two feet;
(2) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade one foot above the depth number
specified in feet (at least three feet if no depth number is specified)
or at or above the advisory base flood elevation plus two feet,
§ 174-16 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 174-17
165:508
whichever is more restrictive. And, require adequate drainage
paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and
away from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, either:
(1) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation or advisory base flood
elevation whichever is more restrictive, plus two feet; and
(2) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade one foot above the depth number specified in feet (at least
three feet if no depth number is specified) or at or above the
advisory base flood elevation plus one foot, whichever is more
restrictive. And, require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures; or
(3) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus two feet, or
advisory base flood elevation plus two feet, the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
(4) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(5) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 174-14C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 174-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation or advisory base flood elevation, plus
two feet.
§ 174-17 FIRE INSURANCE § 174-18
165:509
§ 174-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 174-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 174-18A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for flood hazard
reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 174-18 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 174-18
165:510
Chapter 183
HAZARDOUS SPECIMENS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Solid waste — See Ch. 287.
§ 183-1. Abandoned or unattended human blood or semen
specimens prohibited.
No person, corporation or unincorporated association shall cause, suffer,
allow or permit any specimen of human blood or human semen to be
abandoned in any public or private place, or to be left unattended in a place
other than a permanently enclosed building. For the purpose of this chapter,
the placing of such specimen in any box, container or other enclosure
located on the exterior portion of any building or structure, whether or not
such box, container or other enclosure is secured with a locking device,
shall be construed as a violation of this chapter.
§ 183-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation or unincorporated association who violates any
provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty. Each violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter and each day that such violation continues shall
be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 188
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 129.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 169.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 258.
Trailers — See Ch. 315.
§ 188-1. Enforcing official.
The Construction Official of the Borough of South River is hereby
designated as the officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter,
and he shall serve in such capacity without additional salary.
§ 188-2. Conditions rendering dwelling unfit.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Construction Official may determine
that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he finds that conditions
§ 174-18 HAZARDOUS SPECIMENS § 188-2
183:511
exist in such dwelling which are dangerous or injurious to the health or
safety of the occupants of such dwelling, the occupants of the neighboring
dwellings or other residents of the Borough of South River. Such conditions
may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing):
defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities;
lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation,
disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
§ 188-3. Adoption of state standards by reference.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1),
the New Jersey State Housing Code as approved by the Department of
Health and Conservation and Economic Development and filed in the office
of the Secretary of the State of New Jersey is hereby accepted, adopted and
established as the standard to be used as a guide in determining the fitness
of a building for human habitation or occupancy or use. Three copies of the
New Jersey State Housing Code have been placed on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk and are available to all persons desiring to use and examine
the same.
§ 188-4. Complaint and notice.95
Whenever a petition is filed with the governing body by a public authority, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of the municipality,
charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation as herein defined,
or whenever it appears to the Construction Official (on his own motion) that
any dwelling is unfit for human habitation as herein defined, he shall, if his
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the governing body (or its designated agent) at
a place therein fixed, not less than seven days nor more than 30 days after
the serving of said complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be
given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or
otherwise and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint;
and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not
be controlling in hearings before the governing body.
§ 188-5. Order to repair or demolish. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord.
No. 1977-6]
If, after such notice and hearing, the governing body determines that the
dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation as herein
defined, it shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order requiring:
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 188-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 188-5
188:512
A. The repair, alteration or improvement of the said building to be made by
the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
order, or, at the option of the owner, that the said building be vacated
and closed within the time set forth in the order; and
B. If the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health
and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails to
repair, alter or improve the said building within the time specified in the
order, that the owner remove or demolish the said building within a
reasonable time as specified in the said order of removal.
C. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building,
the Construction Official may cause such building to be repaired,
altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed. The Construction
Official may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so
closed a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this
building is prohibited and unlawful."
D. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the building, the Construction Official may cause such building to be
removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
E. That the amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert
witnesses' fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the
course of any proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor
of the municipality; and such cost of such repairs, alterations or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if any,
or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the
sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such
building or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be
a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the Construction
Official, he shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be
credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the
proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any
contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no
such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such
credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so
due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Collector or other custodian of
the records of tax liens and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded
to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such
costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court
and shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such Court
and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the Court
to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of
such Court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the municipality to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement
§ 188-5 HOUSING STANDARDS § 188-5
188:513
§ 188-6. Demolition of structurally unsafe building.97
If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened collapse
of any fire damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the public officer
may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to make such building
temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary proceedings for the
demolition thereof.
§ 188-7. Service of complaints and orders.
Complaints or orders issued by the Construction Official pursuant to this
chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by the Construction Official in the exercise of
reasonable diligence and the said Construction Official shall make an
affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon
such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for
two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the Borough
of South River. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order, and a
copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record
with the county recording officer of the county in which the dwelling is
located.
§ 188-8. Powers of Construction Official.
The Construction Official is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise
such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate
the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the following powers
in addition to others herein granted:
by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest
may, within 30 days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate
proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the
reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in
the municipal lien certificate.96
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Borough of South River in
order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human
habitation.
B. To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
97.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 188-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 188-8
188:514
§ 188-9. Reservation of powers.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the Borough or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of its
charter or its ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations
thereof, and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and
supplemental to the powers conferred upon the Borough by any other law
or ordinance.
Chapter 193
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Authority — See Ch. 22, Art. II.
Department of Public Safety — See Ch. 72.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 310.
Motor-driven vehicles — See Ch. 324.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 188-8 HOUSING STANDARDS § 188-9
188:515

Part 1
Traffic And Parking Regulations
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Amended 11-21-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-66; 12-5-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-69; 10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-26]
§ 193-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to enable the streets of the Borough of
South River to provide safe, convenient, and comfortable routes for walking,
bicycling, and public transportation that encourage increased use of these
modes of transportation, enable convenient travel as part of daily activities,
improve the public welfare by addressing a wide array of health and
environmental problems, and meet the needs of all users of the streets,
including children, older adults, and people with disabilities. The contents
of this chapter will address a variety of traffic and parking designations.
§ 193-2. Definitions.
A. The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings defined in this section unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
B. Whenever any undefined words and phrases are used in this chapter,
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such
words and phrases used herein.
C. As set forth in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMPLETE STREETS INFRASTRUCTURE — Design features that
contribute to a safe, convenient, or comfortable travel experience for
users, including but not limited to features such as: sidewalks; shared
use paths; bicycle lanes; automobile lanes; paved shoulders; street
trees and landscaping; planting strips; curbs; accessible curb ramps;
bulb-outs; crosswalks; refuge islands; pedestrian and traffic signals,
including countdown and accessible signals; signage; street furniture;
bicycle parking facilities; public transportation stops and facilities;
transit priority signalization; traffic calming devices, and surface
treatments such as street paint, paving blocks, textured asphalt, and
concrete; narrow vehicle lanes; raised medians; and dedicated transit
lanes.
PUBLIC HOLIDAYS —
(1) New Year's Day.
(2) Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr. (as observed).
§ 193-1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-2
188:517
§ 193-3. Requirement of infrastructure ensuring safe travel.
STREET — Any right of way, public or private, including arterials,
connectors, alleys, ways, lanes, and roadways by any other designation,
as well as bridges, tunnels, and any other portions of the transportation
network.
STREET PROJECT — The construction, reconstruction, retrofit,
maintenance, alteration, or repair of any street, and includes the
planning, design, approval, and implementation process, except that
"street project" does not include minor routine upkeep such as
cleaning, sweeping, mowing, spot repair, or interim measures on detour
routes (and does not include projects with a total cost of less than
$10,000).
USER — Individuals that use streets, including pedestrians, bicyclists,
motor vehicle drivers, public transportation riders and drivers,
emergency vehicles, freight and people of all ages and abilities,
including children, youth, families, older adults, and individuals with
disabilities.
(3) Lincoln's birthday.
(4) Washington's birthday (as observed).
(5) Good Friday.
(6) Memorial Day.
(7) Independence Day.
(8) Labor Day.
(9) Columbus Day.
(10)Election Day.
(11)Veterans Day.
(12)Thanksgiving Day.
(13)Christmas Day.
A. The Department of Transportation, Department of Public Works, and
other relevant departments shall make complete streets practices a
routine part of everyday operations, shall approach every
transportation project and program as an opportunity to improve public
and private streets and the transportation network for all users, and
shall work in coordination with other departments, agencies, and
jurisdictions to achieve complete streets within the Borough.
B. Every street project on public streets shall incorporate complete streets
infrastructure sufficient to enable reasonably safe travel along and
across the right-of-way for each category of users; provided, however,
that such infrastructure may be excluded upon written approval by the
§ 193-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-3
188:518
§ 193-4. Task Force for Safe Streets data collection, standards, and
public input.
The Task Force for Safe Streets shall be responsible for the following tasks
within the Borough of South River:
Borough Administrator or Borough Engineer where documentation and
data indicate that:
(1) Use by nonmotorized users is prohibited by law;
(2) The cost would be excessively disproportionate to the need or
probable future use over the long term;
(3) There is an absence of current or future need; or
(4) Inclusion of such infrastructure would be unreasonable or
inappropriate in light of the scope of the project.
C. As feasible, the Borough shall incorporate complete streets
infrastructure into existing streets to improve the safety and
convenience of users, construct and enhance the transportation
network for each category of users, and create employment.
D. If the safety and convenience of users can be improved within the scope
of pavement resurfacing, restriping, or signalization operations on
public streets, such projects shall implement complete streets
infrastructure to increase safety for users.
E. The Department of Transportation, Department of Public Works, and
other relevant departments shall review and either revise or develop
proposed revisions to all appropriate plans, zoning and subdivision
codes, laws, procedures, rules, regulations, guidelines, programs,
templates, and design manuals to integrate, accommodate, and balance
the needs of all users in all street projects on Borough property.
F. In design guidelines, the Department of Transportation, Department of
Public Works and other relevant departments shall coordinate
templates with street classifications and revise them to include
complete streets infrastructure, such as sidewalks, street crossings,
bicycle lanes, and planting strips.
A. The Task Force for Safe Streets shall develop policy for collecting data
measuring how well the streets of the Borough of South River are
serving each category of users.
B. The Task Force for Safe Streets shall consider developing performance
standards with measurable benchmarks reflecting the ability of users to
travel in safety and comfort.
C. When appropriate, the Task Force for Safe Streets shall establish
procedures to allow full public participation in policy decisions and
§ 193-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-4
188:519
§ 193-4.1. Violations and penalties.
§ 193-4.2. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are held to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
transparency in individual determinations concerning the design and
use of streets.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or
any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than
$50.
B. Fines.
(1) The following listed violations may be paid through the Violations
Bureau of the South River Municipal Court without the necessity of
a Court appearance, and the following fines shall be imposed:
Ordinance No. Explanation Fine
193-5.1 Repairing vehicle parked on street $50
193-5.2 Parking of specified vehicle prohibited
at all times
$25
193-6 Parking prohibited at all times $20
193-7 Parking prohibited during certain
hours
$20
193-7.1 Parking in handicapped zone $35
193-9 Parking time limited $3
193-10 Trucks and buses over certain weight
(4 tons) excluded
$50
193-21 Snow emergency/no parking $50
(2) In addition to the foregoing fines, the Municipal Court, in its
discretion, may impose Court costs consistent with those
permissible in Municipal Court, as well as any surcharges as set
forth by state statute.
§ 193-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-4.2
188:520
ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 193-5. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as
hereinafter provided.
§ 193-5.1. Repairing vehicle parked on street.
No person, persons, firm, partnership or corporation shall, at any hour of
the day or night, make mechanical repairs of any nature or description
whatsoever to any motor vehicle while said motor vehicle is parked or
standing on any public street, avenue, road or highway within the corporate
limits of South River, New Jersey.
§ 193-5.2. Parking of specified vehicles prohibited at all times.
[Added 10-23-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-22]
A. The parking of the following vehicles shall not be permitted on any
street or highway within the Borough of South River, nor within any
municipally owned or operated parking facility. [Amended 6-9-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-9]
(1) All vehicles having three or more axles.
(2) A-1 trucks and trailers, loaded or unloaded.
(3) Buses and other commercial vehicles with linear measurements
greater than any one of the following:
(a) Twenty feet in length.
(b) Seven feet in width, excluding rearview mirrors.
(c) Eight feet in height, excluding radio antenna.
(4) All cabs or tractors capable of pulling a trailer.
(5) Commercial tow trucks.
(6) Trailers intended or used for dwelling space, offices, storage or any
other residential, commercial or industrial purposes.
(7) Trailers, boat trailers, camp cars, campers or equivalent vehicles,
whether self-propelled or otherwise, used or intended for use as a
conveyance upon public streets or highways and whether or not
designed, constructed or reconstructed or added to by means of
accessories, sheds or tents in such manner as to permit the
occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more
§ 193-5 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-5.2
188:521
§ 193-6. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 193-30), attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 193-7. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
(§ 193-31) of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule II, attached to and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 193-7.1. Handicapped parking. [Added 7-25-1979 by Ord. No.
1979-36; amended 5-22-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-14]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park or
stand a vehicle at any time in a handicap zone upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule IIA (§ 193-31.1), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, except persons who have been issued special
vehicle identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-206 when using a motor vehicle on which
is displayed a certificate for which a special vehicle identification card has
been issued, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206.
§ 193-8. Stopping or standing prohibited.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule III (§ 193-32) of any day (except Sundays and public holidays)
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule III,
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
persons or having no foundation other than wheels, jacks or
skirtings so arranged as to be integral with or portable by said
trailer, boat trailer, camp car, camper or equivalent vehicle.
(8) All vehicles having a registered gross weight of four tons or over.
B. The foregoing parking restrictions shall not be applicable to the
following:
(1) Vehicles in the course of making deliveries requested by an
adjacent resident.
(2) Vehicles used in conjunction with the rendering of necessary
services requested by an adjacent resident during such times as
said necessary services are actually being rendered.
(3) Vehicles utilized for maintenance or repair of public utilities or
other construction within the public right-of-way during such times
as said maintenance, repairs or construction are in progress.
§ 193-5.2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-8.1
188:522
§ 193-8.1. Standing prohibited. [Added 7-25-1979 by Ord. No.
1979-36]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall stand a
vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule IIIA (§ 193-32.1), attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 193-8.2. Closure of streets. [Added 4-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-10]
The streets specified in Scheduled XXI shall be closed during the times set
forth therein on all school days to any through traffic with the exception of
school buses that are picking up and/or discharging students. At all times
during the pickup and discharge of students, all bus drivers shall remain
with their respective buses during the times set forth herein and shall utilize
all appropriate safety items and lights regulating the pickup and discharge
of students for the benefit and safety of the same.
§ 193-9. Parking time limited.
§ 193-9.1. Parking fines. [Added 4-26-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-12;
amended 9-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-31]
A. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV (§ 193-33) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule IV of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule IV, attached to
and made a part of this chapter.
B. Parking time limited. All on-street parking meters shall allow a person
to park a vehicle for a maximum of two hours. If any such person shall
park a vehicle for longer than this maximum time allowed, said
individuals shall be in violation of this section and receive the fines for
parking violations hereinafter set forth. [Added 5-12-1999 by Ord.
No. 1999-12]
C. Hours of operation. All on-street parking meters shall be considered in
operation and thereby require deposit of coins for on-street parking
from the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
[Added 8-18-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-22; amended 6-26-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-15]
A. Fines for parking violations within the Borough are hereby fixed as
follows:
(1) Prohibited parking areas: $10.
(2) Overtime parking: $10.
(3) Other violations: $10.
§ 193-8.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-9.1
188:523
§ 193-9.2. Residential permit parking. [Added 10-14-1999 by Ord.
No. 1999-29]
B. Said fines set forth above are exclusive of any mandatory state
assessments which have been established or which may be established
in the future including but not limited to the mandatory automated
traffic system surcharge $2.50, mandatory bullet-proof vest fund
surcharge $1 and mandatory spinal cord injury fund surcharge $1.
C. In addition to the foregoing fines, the Municipal Court, in its discretion,
may impose court costs consistent with those permissible in Municipal
Court.
A. Designation of restricted streets.
(1) Whenever the governing body of the Borough of South River shall
determine that certain streets exclusively or primarily servicing
residential land uses, or portion of such streets, are being used for
parking by the operators of vehicles, which operators do not reside
on said street and that the average number of such vehicles
parking in such manner is in excess of 20% of the number of
parking spaces on said streets, then the governing body may
determine that parking shall be prohibited on said street or portion
of said street except by permit, as hereinafter provided, during the
hours when the above-stated conditions have been found to exist on
those streets or portions affected thereby as established by such
determination.
(2) In such cases, the Chief of Police shall cause appropriate signs to
be posted on those streets or portions thereof effecting prohibiting
all parking thereon during the hours when the above-stated
conditions have been found to exist, except parking by the holders
of permits, to be granted only under the following terms and
conditions:
(a) To registered drivers who are residents on any street or
portion thereof upon which parking is so restricted, for every
vehicle owned, leased or operated by such registered driver
and registered in the State of New Jersey.
(b) To persons who are visitors of any persons who are residents of
any street or portion thereof upon which parking is so
restricted, subject to the provision, however, that not more
than one such permit shall be issued and outstanding at any
one time for the use of visitors of any one dwelling unit on any
said street or portion thereof upon which parking is so
restricted. Said visitor parking permit shall not be
transferable.
(c) To persons who do business with any persons who are
residents on any street or portion thereof upon which parking
§ 193-9.1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-9.2
188:524
is so restricted, subject to the provision, however, that the
parking prohibitions and restrictions of this chapter shall not
apply to service or delivery vehicles which are being used to
make service calls or deliveries.
(d) To registered drivers who are residents of any dwelling whose
side yard abuts any street or portion thereof which parking is
so restricted, for every vehicle owned, leased or operated by
such registered driver and registered in the State of New
Jersey. [Added 4-5-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-9]
(3) On the application of any person who resides on any said street
upon which parking is so restricted, the Chief of Police, or his
designee, may issue permits, to be valid for only one day and for no
more than eight hours on that day, upon a showing by such person
that, during the hours for which any such permit is to be issued
such person's residence will be used in such a way as to be
consistent with its residential character and with municipal
ordinances and regulations restricting the use thereof to
residential purposes and that visitors to such person's residence
shall not be able to park in the immediate vicinity thereof without
violating the restrictions imposed by this chapter. If the Chief of
Police shall approve such application and further find that the
issuance of any such requested permits will not unduly impair
traffic safety during the time of their validity, he shall issue such
permit and may limit the street or portions of streets for which they
shall be valid. The total number of such permits issued shall not at
any time exceed 35% of the total number of parking spaces on any
street or portion thereof for which such permits are valid.
(4) Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and based upon the
findings of the Chief of Police or his designee, made in accordance
therewith, no person who does not hold a parking permit issued in
accordance with the terms of this chapter shall park any vehicle on
the streets or portions thereof as set forth in § 193-33.1, Schedule
IVA: Residential Permit Parking, in the Borough of South River
seven days a week, 24 hours per day.
B. Application for permit.
(1) Applications for parking permits under this chapter shall be made
in writing to the Chief of Police, or his designee, upon such forms as
to be provided.
(2) An applicant for a parking permit under this chapter shall show to
the Chief of Police, or his designee, satisfactory evidence that he
fulfills all the conditions required for the issuance of such permit.
Whenever such conditions no longer exist, any person holding such
permit shall surrender the same to the Chief of Police, or his
designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to represent that he or
she is entitled to a permit hereunder when he or she is not so
§ 193-9.2 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-9.2
188:525
entitled, to fail to surrender a permit to which he or she is no longer
entitled or to park a vehicle displaying such permit at any time
when the holder of such permit is not entitled to hold it.
C. Exceptions. Where determined by the governing body of the Borough of
South River, there may be exceptions to the residential permit parking
regulations. Such exceptions may allow but not be limited to suspension
of the residential permit parking regulations for a specified period of
time due to extraordinary conditions which may exist in said areas
either on a daily or occasional basis.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $100. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day in which a new violation occurs or continues.
§ 193-9.2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-9.2
188:526
ARTICLE III
Truck and Bus Exclusions
[Amended 10-24-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-27; 12-30-1985 by Ord. No.
1985-35]
§ 193-10. Trucks and buses over certain weight excluded. [Amended
5-8-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-11]
A. All trucks and buses having a total combined weight of vehicle plus load
in excess of four tons shall be excluded from all streets within the
Borough of South River, except for the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule V (§ 193-34) and which streets therein set forth
are hereby designated as a route for trucks and buses over four tons.
Trucks having such a gross weight in excess of four tons shall be limited
to the pickup and delivery of materials on Borough streets not
designated as a route for trucks in Schedule V. Buses having such a
gross weight in excess of four tons shall be limited to the pickup and
discharge of passengers on the Borough streets not designated as a
route for trucks and buses in Schedule V as follows:
(1) Pickup and discharge of schoolchildren by school buses.
(2) Pickup and discharge of senior citizens and handicapped
individuals at their place of residence.
(3) Pickup and discharge of passengers solely within off-street parking
lots of Borough churches, civic organizations and Board of
Education properties.
B. This section shall not apply to buses owned and operated by New Jersey
Transit.
§ 193-10 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-10
188:527

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 193-11. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 193-35), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets
in the direction indicated.
§ 193-11 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-11
188:529

ARTICLE V
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 193-12. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VII (§ 193-36), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 193-13. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule VIII (§ 193-37), attached to and made a part of this chapter,
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 193-14. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX (§ 193-38), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 193-12 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-14
188:531

ARTICLE VI
Special Zones and Areas
§ 193-15. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule X (§ 193-39), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 193-16. Taxi stands designated.
The locations described in Schedule XI (§ 193-40), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 193-16.1. Rescue squad parking designated. [Added 3-15-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-12]
There shall not be allowed any public parking at the South River Rescue
Squad building and property located at the corner of Thomas Street and
George Street in the Borough of South River by any individual who is not a
member of the South River Rescue Squad or conducting business with the
South River Rescue Squad at the time the vehicle is parking in and on said
property.
§ 193-17. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 193-41), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 193-15 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-17
188:533

ARTICLE VIA
Fire Lanes
[Added 7-15-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-23]
§ 193-17.1. Fire lanes designated.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 193-49), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as fire lanes in which there shall
be no parking, standing or stopping.
§ 193-17.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-17.1
188:535

ARTICLE VIB
Pedestrian Crosswalk Signs
[Added 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-57]
§ 193-17.1. Pedestrian crosswalk signs designated.
The locations described in Schedule XXI, attached hereto and made a part
hereof are hereby designated as locations for the installation of pedestrian
crosswalk signs.
§ 193-17.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-17.1
188:537

ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions and Lane Reservations
§ 193-18. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIII (§ 193-42), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 193-19. Turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule XIV (§ 193-43), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 193-19.1. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule XIVA (§ 193-43.1)
whenever official signs are present prohibiting such turn.
§ 193-20. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule XV (§ 193-44), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 193-18 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-20
188:539

ARTICLE VIII
Emergency No Parking
§ 193-21. Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas.
§ 193-22. Posting of signs.
§ 193-23. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 193-24. Effectiveness of article.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent upon signs being erected as
required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any of
the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XVI (§ 193-45),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking
police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 193-21 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-24
188:541

ARTICLE IX
Speed Limits
§ 193-25. Limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XVII (§ 193-46), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 193-26. Posting of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 193-25 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-26
188:543

ARTICLE X
Traffic Control Signals
§ 193-27. Traffic signals established.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule XVIII (§ 193-47), attached to and made
a part of this chapter.
§ 193-28. Installation of signals.
The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of an Act concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulation, Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes, shall conform to the design and shall be
maintained in operation as authorized by the Department of Transportation
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 193-27 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-28
188:545

ARTICLE XI
No-Passing Zones
§ 193-29. No-passing zones established.
No-passing zones are hereby established and maintained along those
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XIX (§ 193-48), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, as authorized by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated and
numbered as indicated.
§ 193-29 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-29
188:547

ARTICLE XIA
Decal Parking
[Added 8-22-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-42]
§ 193-29.1. Purpose.
This article is adopted for the purpose of promoting the orderly and safe
parking of motor vehicles and the minimizing of traffic congestion on
Borough-owned property located within and generally bounded by Thomas
Street, George Street, Main Street and Stephen Street and known as Lot
Nos. 4-1, 6-1 and 3, Block 151.
§ 193-29.2. Scope.
§ 193-29.3. Restrictions on use of decal-parking areas.
A. The provisions, rules and regulations of this article pertain solely to the
premises hereinabove described which are owned, leased, occupied or
controlled by the Borough of South River and devoted to the purpose of
parking motor vehicles, but do not apply to any land or area within the
right-of-way of any public street, road or highway, nor do they apply to
any parking areas operated or controlled by the South River Parking
Authority.
B. These provisions, rules and regulations shall not be applicable to any
other parcels of land and premises owned, leased, occupied or
controlled by the Borough of South River, now or hereafter.
A. Parking on said lands and premises hereinbefore designated shall be
permitted by permit only, which shall be evidenced by a decal issued to
the owner of the motor vehicle.
B. Such parking area shall be marked by signs indicating that parking will
be by permit only and that vehicles must bear the required decal, which
signs may state "Parking for Vehicles With Decals Only."
C. No vehicle shall be parked in any such parking area unless it displays in
the lower rear corner of its left rear window a current and valid decal so
issued by the Borough of South River as herein provided.
D. No vehicle shall be parked except within a single designated parking
space as shall be indicated within said parking area or as may be
directed by the police or attendant in charge of the parking area or by a
control sign indicating the designated area to park.
E. Trailers, trucks or buses shall only be parked in any such parking area
as may be specifically designated for the same.
F. Visitors to public buildings, including the Borough Hall, of the Borough
of South River shall park their vehicles in two parking spaces which
shall be specifically set aside and clearly designated in such parking
area.
§ 193-29.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-29.3
188:549
§ 193-29.4. Issuance of decals.
§ 193-29.5. Presumption of receipt of permission.
Any person parking a motor vehicle with such decal affixed thereto shall be
presumed to have properly applied for and received permission to park said
motor vehicle in any such parking area of the Borough of South River.
G. All vehicles shall be parked in such area with the front of the vehicle
facing the control sign, if any, which designates the parking space
therefor.
H. No vehicle shall be parked within the entrance or exit to any such
parking area or within any of the aisles thereof.
A. Decals shall be issued by the Borough Clerk during the regular hours
during which his office is open and only upon display of a current and
valid New Jersey motor vehicle registration certificate showing the
name and address of the applicant as a resident of the Borough of South
River. Such decal shall be issued only to the owner of the motor vehicle
and shall not be transferable. However, a decal may be transferred
during the period of its validity to a new vehicle or motor vehicle
purchased by the applicant upon the sale or transfer of the original
vehicle. In such case of a sale or transfer, the owner shall remove the
decal and supply evidence thereof to the Borough Clerk to obtain a new
decal for transfer to a different vehicle.
B. Decals shall be valid from February 1 of the year in which issued to
12:00 midnight of January 31 of the following year.
C. The application for a decal and permission to use the same shall be at
no charge to the applicant. Any person may obtain a temporary decal
good for one day. Further, no decal and no permits shall be issued if the
parking area shall already be at full capacity.
D. The first decals issued following the adoption of this article shall be
valid from the date of issue until 12:00 midnight of January 31, 1980.
E. Said decals shall have written thereon "South River Borough Parking
Permit," together with the number of the decal, motor vehicle
registration number and the date issued and the date of expiration.
F. The Borough Clerk shall make and keep a record of all decals issued by
him, including therein the number of the decal, the date of issuance, the
name of the person to whom issued, with his address, the motor vehicle
registration number and the make, model and color of the motor vehicle
for which issued.
§ 193-29.3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-29.6
188:550
§ 193-29.6. Enactment of further regulations.
Further rules and regulations pertaining to such parking areas and the
parking of motor vehicles therein may be made from time to time by
ordinance of the Borough Council.
§ 193-29.7. Disabled vehicles.
No person shall park or place any disabled vehicle or permit any such
disabled vehicle to remain in any such parking area without the express
permission of the police or the attendant in charge of such parking area.
§ 193-29.8. Violations and penalties.
§ 193-29.9. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to any municipal vehicles registered to the
Borough of South River or to any vehicles engaged in police work.
A. Any person parking a vehicle in any other manner than is required by
this article, even though the vehicle bears a valid decal, shall be subject
to a fine not exceeding $2, and each day that such violation occurs shall
be a separate and distinct violation. Payment of such fine may be made
to the Court Violations Clerk of the Borough Municipal Court upon a
plea of guilty.
B. In case of a violation of any other provision of this article, the person so
parking and the owner shall be liable to a fine of not more than $25 or
five days in the municipal jail, or both, and each day the violation
continues shall be a separate and distinct violation.
C. Any vehicle parked in any such parking area in violation of this article,
except a vehicle bearing a valid decal and parked as now herein
required, may be removed from the parking area on order of any police
officer, and the owner thereof shall pay the reasonable cost of such
removal and of storage, which may result from such removal before
being allowed to regain possession of the vehicle, and such costs of
removal and storage shall be in addition to any penalty or fine
hereinbefore provided.
§ 193-29.6 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-29.9
188:551

ARTICLE XII
Schedules
§ 193-30. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-6, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Allgair Street East From Hillside Avenue to Palm Place
Anderson Street East From Charles Street to Division Street
Armstrong Avenue North From Whitehead Avenue to its terminus
Armstrong Avenue South From Whitehead Avenue to a point 180
feet east thereof
Augusta Street
[Amended
10-21-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-20]
South From Whitehead Avenue to its terminus
Belmont Avenue North From William Street to its terminus
Bright Street [Added
6-26-1986 by Ord.
No. 1986-15]
East From Ziegert Street to Darrow Street
Burton Avenue South From Old Bridge Turnpike to Rubin
Street
Charles Street South From Whitehead Avenue to Raritan
Avenue
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-25-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-25]
East From Henry Street to its intersection
with Nelson Street
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-25-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-25]
West From Nelson Street to its terminus
near Prospect Street
Chestnut Street
[Repealed 9-25-1996
by Ord. No. 1996-25]
Clayton Court South From Raritan Avenue to Willett Avenue
Colin Drive [Added
4-29-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-13]
Both From a point 170 feet west of its
intersection with Monticello Way
DeVoe Street North From Albourne Street to Old Bridge
Turnpike
Division Street NorthwestFrom Whitehead Avenue to Willett
Avenue
§ 193-30 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-30
188:553
Name of Street Side Location
Division Street [Added
3-3-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-3]
South From a point beginning at the westerly
end of the driveway located at 21
Division Street to a point 63 feet
westerly thereof
Eberwein Street NorthwestFrom Ferry Street to Water Street
Elizabeth Street Both From Whitehead Avenue to Water
Street
Exton Street East From Main Street to McPherson Street
Ferry Street NortheastFrom Main Street to Jackson Street
George Street NorthwestFrom Reid Street to Wilcox Avenue
George Street SoutheastFrom Reid Street to Leland Avenue
Gordon Street NortheastFrom Main Street to Jackson Street
Gross Lane [Added
12-14-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-45]
Both Entire length
Henry Street North From Maple Street to William Street
Henry Street South From William Street to Chestnut Street
Herman Street North From Whitehead Avenue to Water
Street
Hillside Avenue North From Main Street to Old Bridge
Turnpike
Hillside Avenue South From Old Bridge Turnpike to David
Street
Jeffrie Avenue East From Linden Avenue to Prentice
Avenue
Jeffrie Avenue West From Mageira Street to Linden Avenue
John Street East From Main Street to George Street
Johnson Place [Added
3-26-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-14]
North From a point 176 feet east of
Montgomery Street and extending 13
feet east thereof
Johnson Place South From David Street to Willett Avenue
June Street SoutheastFrom Prospect Street to William Street
Kamm Avenue NorthwestFrom David Street to Draeger Place
Kamm Avenue NorthwestFrom Old Bridge Turnpike to James
Street
Kamm Avenue [Added
6-13-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-23]
South From the Milton Court continuing 200
feet west along the southern curbline of
Kamm Avenue
§ 193-30 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-30
188:554
Name of Street Side Location
Kamm Avenue [Added
6-13-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-23]
South From the Marcus continuing 300 feet
west along the southern curbline of
Kamm Avenue
Klauser's Lane Both From Ferry Street to Water Street
Leonardine Avenue
[Amended
10-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-32]
North From Sunset Street to First Street
Levinson Avenue South From Whitehead Avenue to its terminus
Lincoln Street West From Charles Street to Division Street
Linden Avenue North From Whitehead Avenue to Jeffrie
Avenue
Lower Gaszi Avenue
[Added 8-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-31]
Both Entire northern and southern curbline
of lower Gaszi Avenue between
Maklary Street and Louis Street
Mageira Street South From Whitehead Avenue to Jeffrie
Avenue
Main Street Both From Ferry Street to the South River --
Sayreville border
Main Street [Added
8-16-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-37]
North From a point from the western curbline
of Obert Street and continuing west for
60 feet
Main Street NorthwestFrom Stephen Street to a point 147
feet southwest thereof
Main Street [Added
6-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-11]
North
and
south
Extending 326 feet east from Hillside
Avenue
Main Street [Added
10-13-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-44]
South From a point from the east curbline of
Pottery Lane continuing 25 feet east
thereof
Main Street [Added
10-13-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-44]
South From a point from the western curbline
of Pottery Lane continuing 25 feet west
thereof
Main Street SoutheastFrom Exton Street to a point 100 feet
northeast from the north curbline of
Hillside Avenue
Main Street SoutheastFrom Obert Street to a point 112 feet
southwest thereof
§ 193-30 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-30
188:555
Name of Street Side Location
Maklary Street [Added
5-26-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-18]
North From a point 250 feet south of the
eastern curbline of Burton Avenue,
extending around the cul-de-sac to a
point 215 feet south of the western
curbline of Burton Avenue
Maple Street West From Reid Street to Belmont Avenue
Marks Place NortheastFrom Jackson Street to its terminus
Marks Place
[Added 4-23-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-17]
West From a point 30 feet north from its
intersection with Jackson Street
Martin Street
[Repealed 5-10-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-12]
McPherson Street
[Repealed 7-27-1988
by Ord. No. 1988-28]
Milton Avenue NortheastFrom Russell Avenue to Elizabeth
Street
Milton Avenue SouthwestFrom Russell Avenue to a point 78 feet
westerly thereof
Montgomery Street
[Added 12-13-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-34]
West From Lexington Avenue to Claremont
Avenue
Morningside Avenue South From David Street to the most easterly
drive of the Corpus Christi Parochial
School
New Street Both From Second Street to Fourth Street
Obert Street NortheastFrom Washington Street to Jackson
Street
Obert Street SouthwestFrom Jackson Street to Charles Street
Obert Street SouthwestFrom Main Street to Washington Street
Obert Street [Added
4-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
West From the curbline south of Washington
Street to a point 25 feet south
Old Bridge Turnpike East Entire length
Pierson Street NortheastFrom Main Street to Roosevelt Street
Prospect Street Both From Reid Street to Old Bridge
Turnpike
Reid Street NortheastFrom Maple Street to Prospect Street
§ 193-30 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-30
188:556
Name of Street Side Location
Reid Street NortheastFrom Main Street to a point 700 feet
along the curbline of Reid Street
Reid Street SouthwestFrom Main Street to Prospect Street
Rubin Street West From Prospect Street to Burton Avenue
Russell Avenue
[Amended 6-26-1986
by Ord. No. 1986-15;
10-23-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-25]
North From Whitehead Avenue to Water
Street
Second Street West From New Street to Appleby Avenue
Serviss Street North From Whitehead Avenue to its terminus
South River High
School driveway
(northerly leg) [Added
11-14-1985 by Ord.
No. 1985-31]
Both Entire length
South River High
School driveway
(southerly leg) [Added
11-14-1985 by Ord.
No. 1985-31]
Both Entire length
South River High
School Drive [Added
11-14-1985 by Ord.
No. 1985-31]
Both Entire length
Southside Avenue North From Willett Avenue to Center Street
Stanton Street East From Charles Street to Division Street
Stephen Street NortheastFrom Main Street to George Street
Stephen Street SouthwestFrom George Street to Reid Street
Thomas Street [Added
2-12-1981 by Ord.
No. 1981-6]
East From a point 60 feet south of the south
curbline of Reid Street to George
Street
Thomas Street NortheastFrom Main Street to George Street
Thomas Street NortheastFrom Prospect Street to a point 60 feet
southeast thereof
Thomas Street SouthwestFrom Main Street to Prospect Street
Virginia Street Both From Main Street to George Street
Washington Street NorthwestFrom Gordon Street to Obert Street
Washington Street SoutheastFrom Jackson Street to Gordon Street
Water Street Both From Main Street to Jackson Street
§ 193-30 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-30
188:557
Name of Street Side Location
Whitehead Avenue SouthwestFrom Jackson Street to Kamm Avenue
Willett Avenue East From Johnson Place to Division Street
Willett Avenue West From Charles Street to Raritan River
Railroad
Willett Avenue [Added
9-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-27; amended
6-9-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-28]
West From the northwest curbline of the
intersection of Johnson Place and
Willett Avenue to a point 100 feet north
thereof
Willett Lane [Repealed 1-24-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-1]
Willett Lane [Added
2-21-1990 by Ord.
No. 1990-10]
Both Entire length from Whitehead Avenue
to Jackson Street
William Street [Added
9-26-1985 by Ord.
No. 1985-24]
East From Prospect Street to Henry Street
Wilson Avenue East From Grochowiak Street to Jackson
Street
Wilus Lane Both From Jackson Street to Klauser's Lane
Woodlawn Avenue
[Added 9-25-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-18]
West From Prospect Street, north to
intersection of Northern Street
Zeigert Street Both From Thomas Street to Bright Street
§ 193-31. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-7, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Caroline Drive Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
Causeway Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
Charles Street North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
Charles Street
[Amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
North School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From Obert Street to
a point 80 feet east
thereof
§ 193-30 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-31
188:558
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Charles Street
[Amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
North School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From Obert Street to
a point 80 feet west
thereof
Claremont
Avenue
[Amended
11-14-1985 by
Ord. No.
1985-31;
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37;
12-18-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998-32]
North School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From David Street to
Montgomery Street
Darrow Street
[Added
6-26-1986 by
Ord. No.
1986-15;
amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
North 8:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
From the easterly
curbline of Bright
Street to a point 108
feet west therefrom
David Street
[Added
10-17-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-37
East School days 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m. 3:00
p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
From Johnson Place to
Arlington Avenue
David Street
[Amended
11-25-1987 by
Ord. No.
1987-32;
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
Northeast School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From Johnson Place to
a point 272 feet
southeast thereof
§ 193-31 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-31
188:559
Name of Street Side Hours Location
David Street
[Added
11-28-2016 by
Ord. No.
2016-22]
South School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From a point
beginning at the
southern end of
driveway located at
14 David Street to a
point extending south
35 feet towards
Johnson Place thereof
David Street
[Amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
SouthwestSchool days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From the south
curbline of Johnson
Place to a point 60
feet south thereof
DeVoe Street Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
Division Street
[Added
3-3-1994 by
Ord. No.
1993-3;
amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
South School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From a point westerly
of the curbline of
Willett Avenue to a
point 63 feet westerly
thereof
Eberwein Street
[Amended
8-17-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-24]
Southeast 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
Ferry Street
[Amended
8-17-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-24]
Southwest2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
George Street
[Amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
Southeast School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From Clinton Street
to Leland Avenue
Holmes Avenue
[Amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
Both School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From Jackson Street
to a point 190 feet
southeast thereof
§ 193-31 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-31
188:560
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Jackson Street
[Amended
8-17-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-24]
Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. From Water Street to
Gordon Street
Jackson Street
[Amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
East School days 2:30
p.m. to 3:30 p.m.
From Holmes Avenue
to Whitehead Avenue
John Street
[Repealed
10-4-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-34]
Kamm Avenue Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
Leland Avenue
[Amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
Both School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From George Street
to a point 180 feet
northwest thereof
Lexington Avenue
[Amended
11-14-1985 by
Ord. No.
1985-31;
repealed
2-13-1986 by
Ord. No.
1986-6]
Main Street
[Amended
8-17-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-24]
Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. From Water Street to
Jackson Street
Marcus Court Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
Milton Court Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
§ 193-31 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-31
188:561
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Montgomery
Street [Amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37;
3-1-1995 by
Ord. No.
1995-6;
repealed
12-13-1995 by
Ord. No.
1995-34]
Montgomery
Street [Added
11-12-1997 by
Ord. No.
1997-33;
repealed
12-19-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-43]
Morningside
Avenue
[Amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37;
12-18-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998-32]
North School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From the north
curbline of Willett
Avenue to a point 600
feet west thereof
Northern Street Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
Obert Street
[Amended
8-17-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-24]
Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. From Main Street to
Jackson Street
Philip Street Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
§ 193-31 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-31
188:562
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Reid Street
[Added
7-9-1980 by
Ord. No.
1980-29;
amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
North 7:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From a point 720 feet
north of Main Street
to a point 400 feet
west thereof
Stephen Street
[Amended
8-17-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-24]
Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. From Main Street to
George Street
Thomas Street Northeast 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
Washington
Street [Amended
8-17-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-24]
Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. From Obert Street to
Ferry Street
Whitehead
Avenue
Both 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. Entire length
William Street
[Amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
East School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From Prospect Street
to Henry Street
William Street
[Amended
9-21-1994 by
Ord. No.
1994-37]
West School days 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
From the north
curbline of Prospect
Street to a point 250
feet north thereof
§ 193-31.1. Schedule IIA: Handicapped Parking. [Added 7-25-1979
by Ord. No. 1979-36]
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-7.1, no person shall park or stand
a vehicle at any time in a handicap zone upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
§ 193-31 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-31.1
188:563
Name of Street Side Location
Albert Street [Added
11-9-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-47]
East 153 feet south from the intersection of
Hillside Street continuing 22 feet south
Albert Street [Added
1-22-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-1]
West 60 feet south of Melrose Place and
extending 21 feet south thereof
Albourne Street
[Added 8-12-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-22;
repealed 6-22-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-24]
Augusta Street [Added
3-26-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-7]
North 551 feet east from the intersection of
Whitehead Avenue, continuing 22 feet
east
Augusta Street [Added
4-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-16]
North From a point 595 feet east from its
intersection with Whitehead Avenue to a
point 15 feet north thereof
Beryl Street [Added
6-10-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998-19]
West From a point 202 feet south from its
intersection with Wilcox Avenue to a
point 22 feet south thereof
Bright Street [Added
5-26-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-17]
East 137 feet from the northern curb of
George Street continuing 22 feet south
Bright Street [Added
4-22-1982 by Ord.
No. 1982-12]
East From a point 165 feet northerly from its
intersection with George Street to a
point 190 feet northerly from its
intersection with George Street
Bright Street [Added
9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-36]
West From a point 72 feet south from its
intersection with Darrow Street to a
point 15 feet west
Burton Avenue [Added
12-28-1988 by Ord.
No. 1988-47]
North From a point 90 feet west from its
intersection with William Street to a
point 35 feet west thereof
Causeway [Added
11-25-1987 by Ord.
No. 1987-33]
North From a point 108 feet west from its
intersection with Browns Lane to a point
130 feet west from its intersection with
Browns Lane
Center Street [Added
3-27-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-8]
East 50 feet south of Union Avenue
Center Street [Added
8-18-1999 by Ord.
No. 1999-21]
West From a point 70 feet north from its
intersection with Southside Avenue to a
point 22 feet south thereof
§ 193-31.1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-31.1
188:564
Name of Street Side Location
Charles Street [Added
10-11-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-31]
North 192 feet east from intersection of Lincoln
Street continuing 21 feet east
Charles Street [Added
4-22-1982 by Ord.
No. 1982-12]
North From a point 228 feet westerly from its
intersection with Whitehead Avenue to a
point 253 feet westerly from its
intersection with Whitehead Avenue
Chestnut Street
[Added 9-25-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-15;
amended 9-25-1996
by Ord. No. 1996-25;
repealed 3-11-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-4]
Chestnut Street
[Added 1-13-1982 by
Ord. No. 1982-47]
West From a point 95 feet north from the
curbline of Henry Street to a point 25
feet north thereof
Claremont Avenue
[Added 2-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-7]
North 175 feet east of Old Bridge Turnpike and
extending 21 feet east thereof
Colfax Street [Added
8-14-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-16]
East 25 feet south of intersection of Devoe
Street and ending 45 feet south of
intersection
Colfax Street [Added
8-22-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-31]
West 140 feet south from the southern
curbline DeVoe Street continuing 22 feet
north
Darrow Street [Added
12-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-28]
West 183 feet south of Wilcox Avenue and
extending 22 feet south thereof
David Street [Added
6-20-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-16]
East From a point 92 feet north from its
intersection with Claremont Avenue to a
point 22 feet north thereof
David Street [Added
11-25-1987 by Ord.
No. 1987-33;
repealed 4-19-2000
by Ord. No. 2000-11]
DeVoe Street [Added
9-22-1999 by Ord.
No. 1999-27;
repealed 4-29-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-13]
§ 193-31.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-31.1
188:565
Name of Street Side Location
DeVoe Street [Added
7-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-29]
North 88 feet west of the western curbline of
Beryl continuing 22 feet east
Division Street [Added
4-23-1987 by Ord.
No. 1987-7]
South From a point 93 feet west from its
intersection with Lincoln Street to a
point 107 feet west from its intersection
with Lincoln Street
Division Street [Added
9-8-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-27; repealed
9-25-1996 by Ord.
No. 1996-15]
East Street [Added
7-20-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-21;
repealed 3-17-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-4]
Eberwein Street
[Added 12-17-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-39]
South From a point 22 feet east of Ferry Street
to a point 22 feet east therefrom
Elizabeth Street
[Added 12-17-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-39;
repealed 4-6-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-10]
Elizabeth Street
[Added 9-10-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-25]
South 111 feet west of Water Street and
extending 17 feet west thereof
Exton Street [Added
4-9-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-11]
West From a point 133 feet south of its
intersection with Main Street to a point
22 feet south thereof
Exton Street [Added
10-21-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-35]
West From a point 364 feet north from its
intersection with McPherson Street to a
point 22 feet north thereof
Fairview Avenue
[Added 9-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-24;
repealed 12-10-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-28]
Florence Avenue
[Added 10-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-40;
repealed 5-10-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-13]
§ 193-31.1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-31.1
188:566
Name of Street Side Location
Gordon Street [Added
10-28-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-19]
South 46 feet southeast from the southernmost
corner of Gordon Street and Main Street
continuing 22 feet
Henry Street [Added
9-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-24]
North 37 feet west of William Street continuing
22 feet west
Herman Street [Added
8-7-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-27]
North 99 feet east of the eastern curbline of
Water Street continuing 22 feet east
Herman Street [Added
10-13-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-43]
North 240 feet east from the intersection of
Water Street continuing 22 feet east
Herman Street [Added
12-20-1989 by Ord.
No. 1989-29;
repealed 9-25-1996
by Ord. No. 1996-15]
High School Lot Road
No. 3 [Added
11-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-33]
East From a point 66 feet south of the west
curbline of High School Lot Road No. 3
to a point 46 feet south thereof (four
spaces)
High Street [Added
8-30-1989 by Ord.
No. 1989-24;
repealed 3-1-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-6]
Hillside Avenue [Added
5-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-16;
repealed 2-4-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-1]
Hollander Avenue
[Added 5-12-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-23;
repealed 6-9-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-17]
Holmes Avenue [Added
5-3-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-15]
West From a point 316 feet south from its
intersection with Jackson Street to a
point 22 feet south thereof
Icker Avenue [Added
9-9-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-26; repealed
3-11-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-3]
§ 193-31.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-31.1
188:567
Name of Street Side Location
Jackson Street [Added
9-25-1996 by Ord.
No. 1996-15]
South From a point 328 feet south from its
intersection with Main Street to a point
22 feet south thereof
Jackson Street [Added
6-29-1988 by Ord.
No. 1988-22]
South From a point 434 feet east from its
intersection with Main Street to a point
22 feet east thereof
James Street [Added
11-23-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-25;
repealed 2-12-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-6]
Jeffrie Avenue [Added
6-9-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-24; repealed
1-26-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-3]
Johnson Place [Added
10-21-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-35;
repealed 3-17-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-4]
Johnson Place [Added
6-13-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-21]
North From a point 167 feet west from its
intersection with Montgomery Street to
a point 22 feet west thereof
Joseph Street [Added
6-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-11]
North 70 feet east of Pulawski Avenue,
extending 21 feet east thereof
Joseph Street [Added
8-18-1993 by Ord.
No. 1993-15]
North Beginning at a point 306 feet west of
Raritan Street to a point 23 feet westerly
therefrom
Kathryn Street [Added
2-20-1991 by Ord.
No. 1991-4]
North From a point 212 feet west of its
intersection with Marie Street to a point
240 feet west thereof
Kathryn Street [Added
4-29-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-13;
repealed 4-11-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-17]
Lee Street [Added
9-25-1996 by Ord.
No. 1996-15;
repealed 3-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-06]
§ 193-31.1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-31.1
188:568
Name of Street Side Location
Leonardine Avenue
[Added 6-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-16]
South From a point 208 feet west from its
intersection with Constitution Way, to a
point 22 feet west thereof
Leonardine Avenue
[Added 10-4-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-35]
West From a point 321 feet south from its
intersection with Summit Road to a point
22 feet south thereof
Lexington Avenue
[Added 10-27-1999
by Ord. No. 1999-30]
South From a point 176 feet east from its
intersection of David Street to a point 22
feet east thereof
Lincoln Street [Added
10-3-1990 by Ord.
No. 1990-50]
East From a point 62 feet south from its
intersection with Charles Street to a
point 88 feet therefrom
Lincoln Street [Added
12-10-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-28]
East 115 feet south of Charles Street and
extending 22 feet thereof
Lincoln Street [Added
2-25-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-7]
East 268 feet south from the southern
curbline of Charles Street, continuing 22
feet south
Louis Street [Added
6-29-1988 by Ord.
No. 1988-22;
repealed 2-12-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-2]
Magiera Street [Added
10-5-1988 by Ord.
No. 1988-35]
South From a point 196 feet west from its
intersection with Spring Street to a point
218 feet west from its intersection with
Spring Street
Mageria Street [Added
8-16-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-36]
South 166 feet west of the western curb on
Center Street and continuing west 22
feet along the curbline
Main Street [Added
6-9-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-24; amended
8-16-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-37]
South From the intersection of the western
curbline of Obert Street and starting at a
point 60 feet west
Marks Place [Added
11-13-1986 by Ord.
No. 1986-25]
West From a point 141 feet northerly from its
intersection with Jackson Street to a
point 157 feet northerly from its
intersection with Jackson Street
Marks Place [Added
7-7-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-11]
West From a point 312 feet north from its
intersection with Jackson Street to a
point 22 feet north thereof
§ 193-31.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-31.1
188:569
Name of Street Side Location
Martin Avenue [Added
4-8-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-9; repealed
5-12-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-24]
Martin Avenue [Added
12-28-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-55;
repealed 10-24-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-20]
Martin Avenue [Added
7-8-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-17]
North From a point 164 feet east from its
intersection with Whitehead Avenue to a
point 22 feet east thereof
Melrose Place [Added
4-6-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-10]
South 190 feet east of James Street and
extending 22 feet south thereof
Mercer Street [Added
2-14-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-2; repealed
2-12-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-2]
Middle/Elementary
School Lot No. 1
[Added 11-12-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-33]
West On the west side thereof from a point 32
feet south from northwest curbline to a
point 56 feet south thereof (five spaces)
Middle/Elementary
School Lot No. 2
[Added 11-12-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-33]
North On the north side thereof from a point
710 feet west of the west curbline of K-8
Road entrance to a point 48 feet west
thereof (four spaces)
Miller Street
[Repealed 9-9-2002
by Ord. No. 2002-26]
Milton Avenue [Added
11-25-1987 by Ord.
No. 1987-33;
repealed 11-15-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-59]
Milton Avenue [Added
10-4-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-40]
West 70 feet south of the southern curbline of
Elizabeth Street continuing 22 feet north
§ 193-31.1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-31.1
188:570
Name of Street Side Location
Milton Avenue [Added
12-17-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-39;
repealed 11-15-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-59]
Milton Avenue [Added
6-10-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998-19;
repealed 11-15-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-59]
Montgomery Street
[Amended 9-26-1979
by Ord. No. 1979-44;
2-12-1981 by Ord.
No. 1981-6; repealed
11-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-33]
New Street [Added
4-23-1987 by Ord.
No. 1987-7; repealed
6-9-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-24]
Northern Street
[Added 7-7-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-11;
amended 6-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-28]
West From a point 390 feet north from its
intersection with Burton Avenue to a
point 22 feet north thereof
Northern Street
[Added 7-7-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-11;
amended 6-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-28]
West From a point 412 feet north from its
intersection with Burton Avenue to a
point 22 feet north thereof
Northside Avenue
[Added 10-7-1992 by
Ord. No. 1992-32]
South From a point 132 feet east of Jeffrie
Avenue to a point 24 feet east therefrom
Northside Avenue
[Added 11-10-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-40]
North From a point 215 feet west from its
intersection with Willow Place to a point
11 feet north thereof
Northside Avenue
[Added 8-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-31]
North 345 feet west of the western curbline of
Whitehead Avenue continuing 22 feet
east
Obert Street [Added
11-7-1990 by Ord.
No. 1990-56]
East From a point 113 feet south from its
intersection with Jackson Street to a
point 139 feet therefrom
§ 193-31.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-31.1
188:571
Name of Street Side Location
Obert Street [Added
2-12-1981 by Ord.
No. 1981-6; amended
5-22-1986 by Ord.
No. 1986-14]
East From a point 213 feet south of the south
curbline of Jackson Street to a point 22
feet south thereof
Obert Street [Added
1-28-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998-2; repealed
3-17-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-4]
Olchaskey Avenue
[Added 12-13-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-34;
repealed 9-23-1998
by Ord. No. 1998-23]
Olchaskey Avenue
[Added 12-1-1999 by
Ord. No. 1999-35;
repealed 12-19-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-43]
Olchaskey Avenue
[Added 9-23-1998 by
Ord. No. 1998-23;
repealed 8-22-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-10]
Prentice Avenue
[Added 3-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-4]
North 88 feet west of the northern curbline
from East Street and continuing 22 feet
west thereof
Prentice Avenue
[Added 4-28-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-20]
North 65 feet south from the southern curbline
of Foothills Drive, continuing 22 feet east
Prentice Avenue
[Added 6-9-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-10;
amended 6-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-28]
North From a point 87 feet east from its
intersection with Olchaskey Avenue to a
point 22 feet east thereof
Prentice Avenue
[Added 5-4-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994-17]
North From a point 226 feet west of its
intersection with Whitehead Avenue to a
point 22 feet west thereof
Prentice Avenue
[Added 2-24-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994-9;
repealed 12-10-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-28]
§ 193-31.1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-31.1
188:572
Name of Street Side Location
Radcliff Street [Added
10-7-1992 by Ord.
No. 1992-32;
repealed 3-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-06]
Reid Street [Added
12-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-49]
North From a point 222 feet from the eastern
cubline of Maple Street and continuing
14 feet east thereof
Robert Street [Added
4-12-1988 by Ord.
No. 1988-9; repealed
12-13-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-34]
Roosevelt Street
[Added 1-26-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-3]
South 251 feet from the eastern curb of High
Street and continuing 22 feet east
Roosevelt Street
[Added 1-23-1992 by
Ord. No. 1992-1]
South Beginning at a point 291 feet east of
High Street to a point 22 feet easterly
therefrom
Roosevelt Street
[Added 5-7-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-9;
repealed 1-27-2014
by Ord. No. 2014-2]
Roosevelt Street
[Added 5-3-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-15]
South From a point 260 feet east from its
intersection with Pierson Street to a
point 22 feet east thereof
Roosevelt Street
[Added 10-4-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-35]
South From a point 522 feet east from its
intersection with Pierson Street to a
point 22 feet east thereof
Schack Avenue [Added
9-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-29]
West 240 feet south of Prentice Avenue
South River High
School High School
Drive [Added
11-14-1985 by Ord.
No. 1985-31]
West From a point 238 feet south of the
southerly curbline of the high school
driveway (northerly leg) to a point 12
feet south thereof
Southside Avenue
[Added 7-23-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-21]
North 59 feet east of Center Street
§ 193-31.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-31.1
188:573
Name of Street Side Location
Spring Street [Added
1-29-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-1; repealed
9-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-26]
Summit Road [Added
11-5-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-29]
East 222 feet north of Leonardine Avenue
Summit Road [Added
9-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-36;
repealed 8-22-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-10]
Thomas Street [Added
6-11-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-12]
East 174 feet north from the intersection of
George Street continuing 22 feet north
Union Avenue [Added
3-12-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-9]
North From a point 62 feet east from its
intersection with Center Street to a point
22 feet east thereof
Washington Street
[Added 5-7-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-9]
South 140 feet west of the western curbline of
Ferry Street continuing for 22 feet (in
front of 10 Washington)
Washington Street
[Added 3-1-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-6]
South From a point 25 feet east from its
intersection with Gordon Street to a
point 22 feet east therefrom
Washington Street
[Added 6-14-1989 by
Ord. No. 1989-17;
repealed 3-1-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-6]
Washington Street
[Added 11-21-1990
by Ord. No. 1990-64]
South From a point 25 feet west from its
intersection with Obert Street to a point
51 feet therefrom
Washington Street
[Added 6-14-1989 by
Ord. No. 1989-17]
— Within the Municipal Parking Lot located
on Washington Street, on the north side
thereof, from a point 142 feet west from
its intersection with Gordon Street to a
point 162 feet west thereof
West Grochowiak
Street [Added
3-9-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-09]
South 108 feet east of Pulawski Avenue and
extending 22 feet south thereof
§ 193-31.1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-31.1
188:574
Name of Street Side Location
Whitehead Avenue
[Added 10-27-1999
by Ord. No. 1999-30;
repealed 2-12-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-2]
Whitehead Avenue
[Added 12-16-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-23]
East 83 feet south of Russell Avenue and
extending 22 feet south thereof
Whitehead Avenue
[Added 6-14-1989 by
Ord. No. 1989-17]
West From a point 92 feet north from its
intersection with Russell Street to a
point 22 feet north thereof
Willet Avenue [Added
12-16-1992 by Ord.
No. 1992-42;
repealed 12-28-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-56]
Willett Avenue [Added
7-8-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-12]
East 33 feet south from the intersection of
Clayton Court continuing 22 feet
Willett Avenue [Added
5-15-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-15;
repealed 2-12-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-2]
Willett Avenue [Added
3-7-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-11; repealed
6-9-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-24]
Willet Avenue [Added
3-17-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-4; amended
6-9-2003 by Ord. No.
2004-28]
South From a point 50 feet north from its
intersection with Johnson Place to a
point 22 feet north thereof
Willet Avenue [Added
12-28-1988 by Ord.
No. 1988-47;
repealed 6-9-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-24]
William Street [Added
5-4-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-17]
East From a point 105 feet north of Henry
Street to a point 22 feet north thereof
§ 193-31.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-31.1
188:575
Name of Street Side Location
William Street [Added
10-3-1990 by Ord.
No. 1990-50]
East From a point 64 feet south from its
intersection with Leroy Street to a point
90 feet therefrom
Wilson Avenue
[Added 4-22-1982 by
Ord. No. 1982-12]
East From a point 100 feet northerly from its
intersection with Joseph Street to a point
125 feet northerly from its intersection
with Joseph Street
Yates Avenue [Added
10-4-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-40;
repealed 2-11-2008
by Ord. No. 2008-5]
§ 193-32. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-8, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Herman Street
[Added 11-28-2002
by Ord. No.
2002-39]
South All From a point 350 feet east of its
intersection with Water Street
Main Street [Added
9-26-1979 by Ord.
No. 1979-44]
South All From a point 104 feet westerly
from its intersection with Gordon
Street to a point 200 feet westerly
from its intersection with Gordon
Street
§ 193-32.1. Schedule IIIA: No Standing. [Added 7-25-1979 by Ord.
No. 1979-36]
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-8.1, no person shall stand a
vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets described below:
Name of Street Side Location
Ford Street [Added
3-28-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980-11]
East From its intersection with the northerly
side of Hillside Avenue to its northerly
terminus
Main Street South From a point 104 feet westerly from its
intersection with Gordon Street to a point
200 feet westerly from its intersection
with Gordon Street
§ 193-31.1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-32.1
188:576
Name of Street Side Location
Reid Street [Added
7-9-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-29]
East From its intersection with Main Street to
a point 720 feet north thereof
Washington Street
[Added 12-17-1980
by Ord. No. 1980-51]
North Between the westerly side of Ferry Street
to the easterly side of Obert Street
§ 193-33. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-9, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time Location
Claremont
Avenue [Added
12-28-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998-32]
South 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
only
1/2 hour From the
southwest
curbline of David
Street to
Montgomery
Street
David Street
[Added
11-25-1987 by
Ord. No.
1987-32;
repealed
4-19-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-11;
11-29-2000 by
Ord. No.
2000-39]
Ferry Street
[Added
3-24-2014 by
Ord. No.
2014-7]
Southwest6:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.
2 hours Entire length
Gaszi Avenue
[Added
6-11-1987 by
Ord. No.
1987-13]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday to
Friday
2 hours From Old Bridge
Turnpike to Rubin
Street
§ 193-32.1 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-33
188:577
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time Location
Gordon Street West 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Monday to
Friday
2 hours From a point 35
feet south of the
south curbline of
Main Street to a
point 75 feet
south thereof
Hillside Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
15 min. From a point 35
feet from the west
curbline of
Hillside Avenue to
a point 60 feet
east thereof
Hillside Avenue
[Added
12-8-2008 by
Ord. No.
2008-42]
North 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m., daily
15 min. 95 feet from the
southern curbline
of Main Street and
continuing 22 feet
Jackson Street North 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday to
Saturday
1 hour From Ferry Street
to Water Street
Lexington
Avenue [Added
12-28-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998-32]
North 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
only
1/2 hour From the
northeast curbline
of Montgomery
Street to David
Street
Main Street North 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday to
Saturday
15 min. From a point 132
feet from the east
curbline of Wilcox
Avenue to a point
60 feet east
thereof
Main Street
[Added
6-9-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-24]
North From a point 82
feet from the
western curbline
of Obert Street
continuing for 22
feet
§ 193-33 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-33
188:578
Name of
Street Side Hours
Maximum
Time Location
Main Street
[Added
6-9-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-24;
amended
8-7-2006 by
Ord. No.
2006-27]
South Metered
parking
From a point 45
feet west of the
western curbline
of Obert Street
and continuing for
22 feet west
thereof
Main Street
[Added
6-9-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-24;
amended
8-7-2006 by
Ord. No.
2006-27]
South Metered
parking
From a point 67
feet west of the
western curbline
of Obert Street
and continuing for
22 feet west
thereof
Montgomery
Street [Added
6-24-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998-20]
Northwest7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.,
school days
1/2 hour From a point 60
feet south of the
northwest
curbline of
Johnson Place to a
point 562 feet
south thereof
Montgomery
Street [Added
12-18-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998-32]
West 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
only
1/2 hour From Lexington
Avenue to
Claremont Avenue
Obert Street SouthwestAll 15 min. From Washington
Street to a point
35 feet southeast
thereof
Pettit Avenue
[Added
6-11-1987 by
Ord. No.
1987-13]
Both 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.,
Monday to
Friday
2 hours From Old Bridge
Turnpike to Rubin
Street
§ 193-33 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-33.1
188:579
§ 193-33.1. Schedule IVA: Residential Permit Parking. [Added
3-1-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-5]
In accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code, no person shall park
a vehicle upon any of the following streets or parts of streets for longer
than allowed by the Borough Code of the Borough of South River unless
said individuals are in possession of a residential parking permit, in which
situation said individual shall be allowed to park on said street without
regard for any time limit parking. Any holders of a residential parking
permit shall be exempt from any time limit parking regulations on said
street.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Claremont
Avenue
Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., school days
only
From the intersection of
David Street to the
intersection of
Montgomery Street
Lexington
Avenue
Both 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., school days
only
From the intersection of
David Street to the
intersection of
Montgomery Street
§ 193-34. Schedule V: Streets Designated as Routes for Trucks and
Buses. [Amended 1-13-1983 by Ord. No. 1982-47; 10-24-1985 by
Ord. No. 1985-27; 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-35; 5-8-1986 by
Ord. No. 1986-11]
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-10, the following streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as a route for trucks and buses over four
tons:
Name of Street Location
Hillside Avenue From New Brunswick -- Old
Bridge Turnpike to Main Street
Jackson Street (County Road No.
3-S-2)
Entire length
Main Street (County Road No. 535) Entire length
Obert Street (eastbound only) From Main Street to Jackson
Street
Old Bridge -- New Brunswick Turnpike
(County Road No. 527)
Entire length
Prospect Street -- Reid Street (County
Road No. 3-R-8)
Entire length
Veterans Memorial Bridge (County
Road No. 3-R-2)
Entire length
§ 193-33.1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-34
188:580
Name of Street Location
Water Street (County Road No. 3-R-2)
(westbound only)
From Jackson Street to Main
Street
Whitehead Avenue (County Road No.
3-R-8)
From Ferry Street to the Township
of East Brunswick corporate line
§ 193-35. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-11, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Colin Drive [Added
4-29-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002-13]
East From a point 170 feet west of its
intersection with Monticello Way
Eberwein Street East From Ferry Street to Water Street
Ferry Street North From Jackson Street to Main Street
Herman Street [Added
10-24-1979 by Ord.
No. 1979-49]
West From its intersection with Water
Street to its intersection with
Whitehead Avenue
Holmes Avenue South From Jackson Street to Willett Lane
John Street South From George Street to Main Street
K-8 Roadway [Added
11-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-33]
South Entire length
K-8 Roadway Spur
[Added 11-12-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-33]
South Entire length
Klauser's Lane West From Water Street to Ferry Street
Lincoln Street [Added
9-27-1984 by Ord.
No. 1984-16]
South From Charles Street to Miller Street
Lower Gaszi Avenue
[Added 8-22-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-31]
West From Maklary Street to Louis Street
Russell Street [Repealed 5-22-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-13]
§ 193-34 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-35
188:581
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
South River High
School driveway
(northerly leg) [Added
11-14-1985 by Ord.
No. 1985-31;
amended 6-25-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-14;
11-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-33]
West Entire length
South River High
School driveway
(southerly leg) [Added
11-14-1985 by Ord.
No. 1985-31;
amended 6-25-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-14;
11-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-33]
West From the easterly curbline of
Montgomery Street to a point 140
feet east therefrom
South River High
School Drive [Added
11-14-1985 by Ord.
No. 1985-31;
amended 6-25-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-14;
11-12-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-33]
South Entire length
Stephen Street North From Main Street to George Street
Virginia Street Northwest From Main Street to George Street
Washington Street
[Amended 9-13-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-24]
West From Obert Street to Ferry Street
Willett Avenue North From Miller Street to Charles Street
Willett Lane West From Whitehead Avenue to Jackson
Street
§ 193-36. Schedule VII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-12, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street, except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations.
§ 193-35 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-36
188:582
Name of Street Location
Albourne Street -- Pershing Street Between Ferris Street and Old
Bridge Turnpike
Albourne Street -- Pershing Street Between DeVoe Street and Ferris
Street
Appleby Avenue Between Old Bridge Turnpike and
Fourth Street
Charles Street Between Raritan Avenue and
Whitehead Avenue
Cleveland Avenue Between Albourne Street and
Virginia Street
Colfax Street Between Wilcox Avenue and Virginia
Street
Darrow Street Between Wilcox Avenue and Virginia
Street
David Street Between Hillside Avenue and Kamm
Avenue
DeVoe Street Between Old Bridge Turnpike and
Main Street
Division Street Between Willett Avenue and
Whitehead Avenue
Ferry Street Between Jackson Street and Main
Street
George Street Between Thomas Street and Reid
Street
George Street Between Wilcox Avenue and Thomas
Street
Hillside Avenue Between Main Street and Willett
Avenue
James Street Between Johnson Place and Kamm
Avenue
Kamm Avenue Between Old Bridge Turnpike and
Whitehead Avenue
Leonardine Avenue Between Old Bridge Turnpike and
Ridge Road
Montgomery Street [Added
11-14-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-31]
Between Johnson Place and
Morningside Avenue
New Street Between Old Bridge Turnpike and
Kamm Avenue
Raritan Avenue Between Franklin Avenue and
Jackson Street
§ 193-36 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-36
188:583
Name of Street Location
Thomas Street Between Main Street and Prospect
Street
Virginia Street Between George Street and its
westerly terminus
Water Street Between Causeway and Herman
Street
Wilcox Avenue Between Albourne Street and Main
Street
Willett Avenue Between Kamm Avenue and Charles
Street
William Street Between Prospect Street and its
northerly terminus
Wilson Avenue Between Paul Avenue and Jackson
Street
Zeigert Street -- Dailey Street Between Thomas Street and Virginia
Street
§ 193-37. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-13, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign on
Anne Street and Bissett Place
[Added 9-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
Anne Street
Bissett Place and Anne Street
[Added 9-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
Bissett Place
Bissett Place and Whitehead Avenue
[Added 9-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-18]
Bissett Place
Burton Avenue and Rubin Street
[Added 10-25-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-32]
Rubin Street
Darrow Street and John Street John Street
Draeger Place and David Street David Street
East Street and South Side Avenue South Side Avenue
Ferris Street and Albourne Street Albourne Street
Ferris Street and Dailey Street Dailey Street
§ 193-36 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-37
188:584
Intersection Stop Sign on
Gordon Street and Washington
Street
Washington Street
Herman Street and Water Street Water Street
Highland Street and Garden Street
[Added 12-10-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-34]
Garden Street
High School and K-8 Road [Added
11-12-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-33]
K-8 Road
High School Drive and High School
Road No. 1 [Added 11-12-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-33]
High School Road No 1
High School Drive and High School
Road No. 2 [Added 11-12-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997-33]
High School Road No 2
High School Drive and High School
delivery road [Added 11-12-1997
by Ord. No. 1997-33]
High School delivery road
High Street and Grove Street
[Added 3-1-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-6]
High Street
Hillside Avenue and Allgair Street Allgair Street
Hollander Street and Amhurst
Street [Added 10-3-1990 by Ord.
No. 1990-50]
Amhurst Street
Johnson Place and James Street James Street
Johnson Place and Montgomery
Street
Montgomery Street
John Street and Garwood Street Garwood Street
John Street and Monush Street Monush Street
Kathryn Street and Marie Street
[Added 11-18-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-39]
Marie Street
Marie Street and Anne Street
[Added 11-18-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-39]
Anne Street
Monush Street and Amhurst Street
[Added 10-3-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-50]
Amhurst Street
Obert Street and Washington Street Washington Street
Obert Street and Willett Place Willett Place
§ 193-37 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-37
188:585
Intersection Stop Sign on
Prentice Avenue and East Street East Street
Prentice Avenue and Rubin Street
[Repealed 10-25-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-32]
Prospect Street and Woodlawn
Avenue [Added 10-25-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-32]
Woodlawn Avenue
Sheldon Avenue and Prentice
Avenue
Prentice Avenue
§ 193-38. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-14, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 193-39. Schedule X: Loading Zones. [Amended 12-17-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980-44; 2-12-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-6]
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-15, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Augusta Street
[Added
11-10-2008 by
Ord. No.
2008-36;
amended
10-21-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-20]
North 9:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday to
Friday
75 feet from the eastern
curbline of Whitehead
Avenue, continuing 50 feet
east thereof
Elizabeth Street
[Added
8-24-2009 by
Ord. No.
2009-35]
North 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday to
Friday
110 feet west from the
western curbline of Water
Street continuing 65 feet
west
§ 193-37 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-39
188:586
Name of Street Side Hours Location
High School
delivery road
[Added
11-12-1997 by
Ord. No.
1997-33]
West 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m., school days
only
From a point 604 feet of
the north curbline of
delivery road to a point 42
feet north thereof
K-8 Road [Added
11-12-1997 by
Ord. No.
1997-33]
North 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m., school days
only
From a point 630 feet
west of the north curbline
of K-8 Road to a point 72
feet north thereof
Martin Avenue
[Added
8-16-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-36]
South 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
162 feet east of the
eastern curbline of
Whitehead Avenue and
continuing east for 22 feet
Maple Street
[Added
11-18-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002-39]
West All From a point 50 feet north
from the stop sign at the
intersection of Reid
Street, to a point 37 feet
north thereof
Marks Place
[Added
9-8-2003 by
Ord. No.
2003-27;
amended
6-9-2004 by
Ord. No.
2004-28]
West From a point 130 feet
north of its intersection of
Jackson Street to a point
110 feet north thereof
Obert Street
[Added
9-23-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998-22;
repealed
8-1-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-30]
Obert Street
[Added
12-11-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-29]
East 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
40 feet north of Charles
Street to a point 26 feet
south of Willet Lane
§ 193-39 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-39
188:587
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Obert Street
[Added
12-11-2017 by
Ord. No.
2017-29]
West 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
125 feet south of Main
Street and extending from
75 feet thereof
Obert Street
[Added
8-1-2005 by
Ord. No.
2005-30]
West 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
195 feet south of the
southern curbline of
Washington Street and
continuing for 100 feet
south thereof
Thomas Street East 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m., Monday to
Friday
From a point 226 feet
north of the north curbline
of George Street to a point
50 feet north thereof
Whitehead
Avenue
East 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday to
Friday
From a point 65 feet south
of the south curbline of
Serviss Street to a point
50 feet south thereof
Willet Avenue
[Added
11-14-1985 by
Ord. No.
1985-31]
East 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday to
Friday
From a point 53 feet north
of the northerly curbline
of Division Street to a
point 98 feet north thereof
Willet Avenue
[Added
9-23-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998-22]
East All From a point 306 feet
north of the north curbline
of Miller Street to a point
80 feet north thereof
§ 193-40. Schedule XI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-16, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Street Side Location
Main Street [Repealed 11-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-40]
Obert Street [Repealed 5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-18]
§ 193-41. Schedule XII: Bus Stops. [Amended 9-26-1979 by Ord. No.
1979-41]
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-17, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
A. Along Main Street, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at:
[Amended 6-9-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-24]
§ 193-39 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-41
188:588
(1) Hillside Avenue (far side): beginning at the easterly curbline of
Hillside Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(2) Jackson Street and Main Street (on Jackson Street 60 feet east of
Main Street on the north side of Jackson Street.
(3) The north side of Main Street directly in front of Fleet Bank (Main
Street 52 feet west of its intersection with Ferry Street.
(4) The south side of Jackson Street directly in front of the Knights of
Columbus (80 feet west of Gordon Street).
(5) The east side of Obert Street, directly across from Coffaros Pizzeria
(145 feet south of Main Street).
(6) Along Main Street, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at the
southwest corner of Main Street and Gordon Street.
B. County roadway. [Added 12-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-66]
(1) Along Jackson Street, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at:
(a) Between Raritan Avenue and Wilson Avenue (midblock):
beginning 310 feet west of the westerly curbline of Raritan
Avenue and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom.
(2) Along Main Street, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at:
(a) Hillside Avenue (far side): beginning at the easterly curbline of
Hillside Avenue and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(b) Jackson Street (far side): beginning at the easterly curbline of
Jackson Street and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(c) Between Gordon Street and Jackson Street, midblock:
beginning 137 feet west of the westerly curbline of Gordon
Street and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom. [Amended
9-10-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-19]
(3) Along Main Street, westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
(a) Reid Street (far side): beginning at the westerly curbline of
Reid Street and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(b) Between Wilcox Avenue and DeVoe Avenue (midblock):
beginning 250 feet west of the westerly curbline of Wilcox
Avenue and extending 135 feet westerly therefrom.
(4) Along Old Bridge Turnpike, northbound, on the easterly side
thereof at:
(a) Gladstone Drive (far side): beginning at the northerly curbline
of Gladstone Drive and extending 130 feet northerly therefrom.
§ 193-41 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-41
188:589
§ 193-42. Schedule XIII: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-18, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Name of Street Location
Montgomery Street [Added
9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-25]
Between Johnson Place and
Morningside Avenue
§ 193-43. Schedule XIV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-19, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Prohibited Turn
At Intersection
of
Fairview Avenue
[Added 8-28-2006
by Ord. No.
2006-29]
East Left David Street, 8:00
a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m., school
days
Johnson Place [Added
12-29-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-42]
West Left K-8 Roadway
(b) Between New Street and Tice Avenue (midblock): beginning
300 feet north of the northerly curbline and extending 135 feet
northerly therefrom.
(c) Johnson Place (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline
of Johnson Place and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(d) Icker Avenue (far side): beginning at the northerly curbline of
Icker Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(e) Prospect Street (near side): beginning at the southerly curbline
of Prospect Street and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
C. Municipal roadway.
(1) Along Hillside Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
(a) Allgair Street (near side): beginning at the easterly curbline of
Allgair Street and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(2) Along Obert Street, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
(a) Between Washington Street and Main Street (midblock):
beginning 70 feet north of the northerly curbline of
Washington Street and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
§ 193-41 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-43
188:590
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Prohibited Turn
At Intersection
of
Pettit Avenue [Added
8-7-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-27]
West Left Old Bridge
Turnpike
§ 193-43.1. Schedule XIVA: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-19.1, no person shall make a
right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the
following locations:
Location Prohibited Right Turn
Hillside Avenue and Main Street From southbound on Main Street to
west on Hillside Avenue
Hillside Avenue and Main Street
[Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-41; amended 3-17-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-4]
From eastbound on Hillside Avenue to
south on Main Street
Hillside Avenue and Main Street
[Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-45; amended 3-17-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-4]
From westbound on Hillside Avenue to
north on Main Street
Hillside Avenue and Old Bridge
Turnpike
From all directions
Jackson Street and Main Street From westbound on Jackson Street to
north on Main Street
Main Street and Hillside Avenue
[Added 12-9-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-45; amended 3-17-2003
by Ord. No. 2003-4]
From northbound on Main Street to
east on Hillside Avenue
Main Street and Old Bridge
Turnpike
From northbound on Old Bridge
Turnpike to east on Main Street
Prospect Street and Old Bridge
Turnpike
From northbound on Old Bridge
Turnpike to east on Prospect Street
Prospect Street and Thomas Street [Repealed 7-2-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-14]
Reid Street and Main Street [Repealed 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-14]
Thomas Street and Reid Street From northbound on Thomas Street to
east on Reid Street
Whitehead Avenue and Jackson
Street
From northbound on Whitehead
Avenue to east on Jackson Street
§ 193-43 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-44
188:591
§ 193-44. Schedule XV: Lanes Reserved for Certain Purposes.
In accordance with the provisions of § 193-20, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Lane Reserved Purpose
Arlington Avenue
[Added
8-28-2006 by
Ord. No.
2006-29]
East Right turn only onto
David Street, 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m., school days
Main Street West Right Right turn only onto Reid
Street
Montgomery
Street [Added
8-28-2006 by
Ord. No.
2006-29]
North Right turn only onto
Johnson Place, 7:30 a.m.
to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 3:30 p.m., school days
§ 193-45. Schedule XVI: Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 193-21, no person shall park a vehicle upon
either side of any of the streets listed below whenever snow has fallen and
the accumulation is such that it covers the street or highway:
Name of Street
Albourne Street
Arlington Avenue between David Street and James Street [Added
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
Brenning Place [Repealed 8-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-25]
Burton Avenue
Charles Street
Chestnut Street between Nelson Street and Henry Street [Added
4-8-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-10]
Claremont Avenue between David Street and James Street [Added
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
Claremont Avenue (between Montgomery Street and David Street)
[Added 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-32]
Colfax Street [Repealed 8-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-25]
David Street
DeVoe Street
Division Street
§ 193-44 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-45
188:592
Name of Street
Fairview Avenue between David Street and James Street [Added
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
Ferris Street (Old Bridge Turnpike to Cleveland Avenue)
Ferry Street
George Street
Gordon Street
Henry Street between William Street and Chestnut Street [Added
4-8-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-10]
Heritage Drive (Heritage Hills Development): entire length between
Leonardine Avenue and Whitehead Avenue [Added 4-8-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998-10]
Hillside Avenue
Jackson Street
James Street between Hillside Avenue and Kamm Avenue [Added
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
Johnson Place (Old Bridge Turnpike to Willet Avenue) [Added 8-17-1994
by Ord. No. 1994-25]
Kamm Avenue
Leonardine Avenue
Lexington Avenue between David Street and James Street [Added
6-23-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-18]
Lexington Avenue (between Montgomery Street and David Street) [Added
12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-32]
Lisa Drive [Added 3-1-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-6]
Main Street
Monush Street [Repealed 8-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-25]
Morningside Avenue (between Willett Avenue and David Street) [Added
12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-32]
Nelson Street [Added 4-8-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-10]
New Street
Obert Street (Main Street to Jackson Street) [Added 8-17-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994-25]
Prentice Avenue
Prospect Street
Reid Street
Samuel Drive (Kuberski Farms Development): entire length between
Whitehead Avenue and Lark Drive [Added 4-8-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-10]
Southside Avenue [Repealed 8-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-25]
§ 193-45 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-45
188:593
Name of Street
Summit Road [Added 3-1-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-6]
Thomas Street
Washington Street
Water Street [Repealed 8-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-25]
Whitehead Avenue
Wilcox Avenue [Repealed 8-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-25]
Willett Avenue
William Street
Yates Avenue [Repealed 8-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-25]
§ 193-46. Schedule XVII: Speed Limits.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 193-25, speed limits are hereby established
upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Old Bridge Turnpike (Co.
Rd. 3-R-14) [Added
2-13-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-3]
40 Zone 1: From Main Street (also
called Bordentown South Amboy
Turnpike) to Lee Street (as to
that portion of said roadway
within the Borough of South
River); thence
Old Bridge Turnpike (Co.
Rd. 3-R-14) [Added
2-13-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-3]
35 Zone 2: To Tices Lane (as to that
portion of said roadway within
the Borough of South River);
thence
Old Bridge Turnpike (Co.
Rd. 3-R-14) [Added
2-13-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-3]
40 Zone 3: To Route 18 Interchange
(as to that portion of said
roadway within the Borough of
South River)
Old Bridge Turnpike (Co.
Rd. 3-R-14) [Added
2-13-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-3]
25 School Zone: In the Murry A.
Chittick School Zone (in Zone 2)
during recess or while children
are going to or leaving school,
during opening or closing hours
River Road 35 Entire length
§ 193-45 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-46
188:594
Name of Street
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Veterans Bridge (westerly
approaches) [Added
11-26-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-46]
35 From a point commencing with
the easterly municipal boundary
limit of the Boundary of South
River and the westerly municipal
boundary limit of the Borough of
Sayreville and from said point
westerly along the approach to
the Veterans Bridge for a
distance of 2,150 feet
Whitehead Avenue 25 From Ann Street -- Kamm Avenue
to Jackson Street
Whitehead Avenue 35 From East Brunswick Township --
South River Borough line, north
to Ann Street -- Kamm Avenue
§ 193-47. Schedule XVIII: Traffic Control Signals.
Pursuant to § 193-27, traffic control signals shall be installed at the
following described intersections:
Intersection
Hillside Avenue and Old Bridge Turnpike [Added 2-26-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-2]
Jackson Street and Obert Street [Added 2-26-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-2]
Jackson Street and Whitehead Avenue [Added 2-26-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-2]
Main Street and Hillside Avenue
Main Street and Jackson Street
Main Street and Old Bridge Turnpike [Added 2-26-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-2]
Main Street and Reid Street
Main Street and Thomas Street [Added 1-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-1]
Old Bridge - New Brunswick Turnpike and North End Drive [Added
12-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-34]
Old Bridge Turnpike and Prospect Street [Added 2-9-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-4]
Old Bridge Turnpike and Tices Lane [Added 2-12-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-5; amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-52]
Prospect Street and Thomas Street
§ 193-46 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-48
188:595
§ 193-48. Schedule XIX: No-Passing Zones.
Pursuant to § 193-29, no passing zones are hereby established and shall be
maintained upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 193-49. Schedule XX: Fire Lanes. [Added 7-15-1982 by Ord. No.
1982-23]
Pursuant to § 193-17.1, fire lanes in which there shall be no parking,
standing or stopping are hereby established and shall be maintained upon
the following described streets, premises or parts hereof:
Name of Street Location
Appleby Avenue [Added
11-12-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-23]
At the entrance to the South River
Library parking lot to a point 130 feet
beginning at curved portion of curbline
extending 150 feet to end of curve
vicinity of handicapped parking
South River High School Drive
[Added 6-23-1993 by Ord.
No. 1993-10]
Entire length, both sides
South River High School
driveway [Added 6-23-1993
by Ord. No. 1993-10]
Entire length, both sides
Village Green Apartments From the intersection of Willet Avenue
(the entrance to Village Green
Apartments) to a point 301 feet westerly
therefrom on both sides of said road or
entranceway
§ 193-50. Schedule XXI: Pedestrian Crosswalk Signs. [Added
11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-57; amended 4-4-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-12]
In accordance with § 193-17.2, the following locations are hereby
designated as locations for the installation of pedestrian crosswalk signs:
Street Location
Main Street Middle of Main Street, 50 feet west of the unsigned
crosswalk running along the west side of Gordon
Street
Main Street Middle of Main Street, 50 feet east of the unsigned
crosswalk running along the east side of Gordon
Street
§ 193-48 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-50
188:596
Street Location
Main Street Middle of Main Street, 50 feet east of the unsigned
crosswalk running along the east side of Stephen
Street
§ 193-50.1. Schedule XXI: Street Closure. [Added 4-24-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-10]
Street Location Times
Lincoln Street From the intersection of
Lincoln Street and Charles
Street to the intersection of
Lincoln Street and Miller
Street
Monday - Thursday 5:00
p.m. to 5:15 p.m., Friday
1:15 p.m. to 1:30 p.m.
§ 193-50 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-50.1
188:597

Part 2
Parking Meters
ARTICLE XIII
(Reserved)98
§ 193-51. (Reserved)
§ 193-52. (Reserved)
§ 193-53. (Reserved)
§ 193-54. (Reserved)
§ 193-55. (Reserved)
§ 193-56. (Reserved)
§ 193-57. (Reserved)
§ 193-58. (Reserved)
§ 193-59. (Reserved)
98.Editor's Note: Former Art. XIII, Parking Meter Zones, which was derived from an
ordinance adopted 1-12-1953, as amended, was repealed 2-13-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-4.
§ 193-51 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-59
188:599

ARTICLE XIV
Off-Street Parking Meters99
§ 193-60. (Reserved)100
§ 193-61. Designation of public parking lots.
Any and all parking lots and facilities now or hereafter owned, operated,
constructed or maintained by the Authority are and shall be public parking
lots, and the same are hereby constituted and are to be known as "parking
meter zones."
§ 193-62. Installation of meters. [Amended 6-13-1979 by Ord. No.
1979-27]
In each of said public parking lots, the Authority shall install parking
meters. Said parking meters shall be placed immediately adjacent to or in
front of the parking places hereinafter described. Each parking meter shall
be placed or set in such a manner as to show or display by signal that the
parking place adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking
meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time
established by ordinance and, when operated, shall indicate thereon and by
its dial that it is in legal use and, upon the expiration of the time for which
a coin or coins were inserted therein, shall indicate illegal or overparking.
§ 193-63. Painting of lines; manner of parking.
The Authority shall have lines or markings painted or placed upon the
pavement adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the
parking area for which said meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked
adjacent thereto or in front thereof or next to any parking meter shall
park within the lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful and a
violation of this article to park any vehicle across any such line or marking
or to park said vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely
within the area so designated by such lines or markings.
§ 193-64. Deposit of coins.
When any vehicle shall be parked in any such space adjacent to, next to
or in front of which a parking meter is located in accordance with the
provisions of this article, the operator of said vehicle shall, upon entering
the parking space, immediately deposit or cause to be deposited coin(s) of
the United States, or such token(s) as may be approved by resolution of the
Authority, in such parking meter, and failure to deposit such coin or coins
shall constitute a breach of this article and shall subject such person to the
penalty prescribed in § 193-70 hereof, except as hereinafter provided. Such
parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle for a period of time
99.Editor's Note: Article XIV, Off-Street Parking Meters, is derived from an ordinance
adopted 5-11-1959.
100. Editor's Note: Former § 193-60, Definitions, was repealed 6-13-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-27.
§ 193-60 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-64
188:601
equal to the amount of money or tokens deposited at the rate determined
by the Parking Authority. If said vehicle shall remain parked in any such
parking space beyond the parking time paid or as indicated on said parking
meter and the parking meter indicates such illegal parking, then and in that
event such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond the
period of legal parking time as above set forth.
§ 193-65. Overtime parking.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicles registered in the name
of or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period
of legal parking time herein established for any public parking lot as herein
described, as hereinafter provided.
§ 193-66. Parking after meter expired.
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful and a violation of the
provisions of this article for any person to permit a vehicle to remain in any
parking meter space while said meter is displaying a signal indicating that
the vehicle occupying such parking space has already been parked beyond
the period of time prescribed for such parking space.
§ 193-67. Coin substitutes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article to deposit
or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device, counterfeit
coin or metallic substitute for coins of the United States, except as approved
by resolution of the Authority.
§ 193-68. Monthly parking stickers.
Upon payment to the Authority of the proper fee, a person may be permitted
to park a designated vehicle in a designated public parking lot space for a
period of one month. The Authority shall issue to such person a sticker or
other suitable sign to be placed on the vehicle designated thereon showing
the month during which such vehicle may be parked in a designated public
parking lot space. A vehicle bearing such monthly parking sticker or sign
may, during the calendar month shown thereon, be parked in a designated
parking space at any time. The Authority shall have the right, from time to
time, to limit the number of monthly parkers in any or all of the parking lots
or facilities owned, operated and maintained by it. In the event that there
are more applications for monthly parking spaces than spaces available,
they may be assigned in the order that the applications are received.
§ 193-69. Tampering prohibited; driving through lot.
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for
any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break,
destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under
the provisions of this article.
§ 193-64 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-69
188:602
§ 193-70. Report of violations; fines.
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for
any person to drive and operate a motor vehicle through any parking lot
or facility owned, operated and maintained by the Authority for the
purpose of using any such parking lot or facility as a public
thoroughfare; and no person shall drive any motor vehicle into any such
parking lot facility for any other purpose than to park lawfully under the
terms hereof as a patron in such parking lot or facility, unless otherwise
permitted by the Authority or through its authorized agents.
C. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for
any person to drive and operate a motor vehicle through any parking lot
or facility owned, operated and maintained by the Authority carelessly
or without due caution and circumspection in a manner as to endanger
or be likely to endanger a person or property.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Borough of South River,
acting in accordance with instructions issued by the Police Committee
Chairman, to report;
(1) The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(2) Any other facts or knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending each violation.
B. Each police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a traffic ticket or
summons showing the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has
been parked in violation of the provisions of this article and summoning
such owner or operator to appear before the Municipal Court of the
Borough of South River in regard to such violation. In the case of any
person charged with any traffic offense under this article, the
disposition of which is within the authority of the Violations Clerk prior
to the return date of the summons, the Judge in his discretion may
authorize the Violations Clerk to accept such plea and payment at any
subsequent date. Fines for violations shall be the same as provided for
on street parking meter zones and may be paid in the same manner as
tickets issued under Article XIII as set forth in § 193-56C.101
C. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed
$50 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 15
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of any
101. Editor's Note: Section 193-56C was repealed 2-13-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-4. Said § 193-56C
read as follows: “C. Each such owner or operator may, within seven (7) days of the time
when such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay to the proper court personnel, as a
penalty for and in full satisfaction of an overtime parking violation, the sume of two
dollars ($2); and the failure of such owner or operator to make such payment within said
seven (7) days shall render such owner or operator subject to the penalties hereinafter
provided for violation of the provisions of this article.”
§ 193-69 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-70
188:603
of the provisions of this article and each day there is a violation thereof
shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
D. In order to implement such enforcement of applicable laws, ordinances
and regulations, the appointment by or on behalf of the municipality,
upon designation from time to time by the Authority, of persons to
serve, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14-146, but under the supervision and
direction of the Authority, as special policemen of the municipality with
full power and authority, in such manner and to such extent as may be
approved on behalf of such municipality, to issue summonses for
violations of any provisions of said laws, ordinances or regulations, to
serve and execute all process with respect to any such violation issuing
out of the police court of the municipality by whatsoever name the same
shall be known and to cause any vehicle parked, stored or abandoned in
violation of any provision of said laws, ordinances or regulations to be
towed away from the scene of such violation and to collect from the
owner of such vehicle the costs of the towing and subsequent storage of
said vehicle before surrendering said vehicle to such owner.
§ 193-70 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-70
188:604
ARTICLE XV
Construction on Roadways
[Added 4-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-16]
§ 193-71. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways.
The Borough of South River does hereby adopt the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways hereby known as
the MUTCD, except as hereby supplemented and amended, as it controls
and regulates whenever construction, maintenance operations or utility
work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor or utility
that fails to comply with the provisions of MUTCD while performing such
work is in violation of this chapter.
§ 193-72. Preconstruction meeting.
It shall be the responsibility of the persons, contractor or in the case of a
public utility as required in a public utility agreement, wishing to conduct
work on, under or above the street, to contact the Police Department of
the Borough of South River in order to arrange a preconstruction meeting
and submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such periods of
construction or work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply
with this section prior to the start of such work, or whose plans are not
approved by the Police Department of the Borough of South River is in
violation of this section.
§ 193-73. Emergency contact telephone numbers.
The person, contractor or utility shall provide at least two emergency
contact telephone numbers to be called in case of emergency problems
at the construction or maintenance site prior to the start of work. If, for
any reason, emergency contact must be made, or if the emergency contact
person does not respond to a call from the Police Department to correct
such hazardous condition, the Borough of South River may respond to
correct the hazardous conditions. The reasonable fees for such emergency
services by the Borough of South River shall be charged to the person,
contractor or utility responsible for the condition.
§ 193-74. Hours of construction.
There shall be no construction, maintenance, operations or utility work on
any roadway in the Borough before the hours of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00
p.m. The officer in charge of the Police Department may adjust his time
limit to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. If the officer in
charge determines that the construction or maintenance operation prior to
9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause safety
or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only between 9:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. The limit on hours of construction set forth herein shall be
suspended in the event of emergency work.
§ 193-71 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-75
188:605
§ 193-75. Road closings.
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the South River Police Department.
§ 193-76. Traffic directors.
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Police Department that same is necessary to
provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 193-77. Stop work.
The Borough of South River Police Department shall have the authority to
stop work, including removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material
within the street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations and/or related
work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violation of this chapter.
§ 193-78. Site preparation.
No materials, vehicles or equipment are to be placed in the roadway or
sidewalk until all construction signs, light devices and pavement marking
are in place.
§ 193-79. Authorization of closing of any street.
§ 193-80. Tow-away of vehicles.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance to
the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide
for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear the reasonable cost of
removal and storage, which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
§ 193-81. Violations and penalties.
A. The Chief of Police of the municipality is hereby authorized to provide
for the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on
any day or days whenever he finds that such closing is necessary for the
preservation of the public safety, health or welfare. Any such closing
shall provide for the posting of proper warning signs of such closing on
any street or portion thereof during the time same is closed.
B. Any closing of any street for a period greater than 48 consecutive hours
shall not become effective unless and until it has been submitted to and
approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
A. Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, for a first offense, pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail
§ 193-75 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 193-81
188:606
for a term not exceeding 90 days; for a second offense, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of not less than $200 and/or be imprisoned in the
county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 193-81 HOUSING STANDARDS § 193-81
188:607
Chapter 198
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 255.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 258.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 198-1. License required.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of
junk shop keeper or junk dealer in the Borough of South River without first
obtaining a license to do so.
§ 198-2. Definitions.
The terms "junk shop keeper" and "junk dealer" shall mean and describe any
person or persons, firm or corporation engaged in the business of storing,
displaying, buying or selling old junk, old rope, old iron, brass, tin, lead
or other materials, old automobile cars or other abandoned or nonusable
vehicles, old bottles and the like.
§ 198-3. Application for license.
All persons, firms or corporations now engaged in or hereafter engaging in
the business of junk shop keeper or junk dealer shall, from and after the
effective date of this chapter, make application for a license to the Borough
Clerk, who is hereby designated as the licensing officer for the purpose of
this chapter. Said application shall be in writing and shall set forth the name
of the person or persons, firm or corporation, their respective addresses
or principal place of business, and shall describe the premises upon which
said business is to be conducted, giving the street frontage and approximate
depth of said premises, and the said application shall be accompanied by
the license fee hereinafter provided.
§ 198-4. Issuance of license; expiration.
The Borough Clerk is hereby directed to present said application to the
Borough Council at its next meeting and is hereby authorized to issue a
license to such person or persons, firm or corporation upon approval of the
same by the Borough Council, and said license shall be effective from the
date of issue to the 31st day of December of the year in which said license
is issued.
§ 193-81 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 198-5
198:608
§ 198-5. Renewal of license. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
Upon the expiration of any license granted them hereunder, all persons,
firms and corporations shall, on or before the first day of January of each
year, make application to the Borough Clerk for a license to conduct said
business for the ensuing year or part thereof, in the manner set forth in
§ 198-3 hereinabove; provided, however, that no license shall be issued
except as set forth in § 198-4 hereinabove.
§ 198-6. License fee. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6]
Every person or persons, firm or corporation shall, upon making application
for such license, pay to the Borough of South River an annual license fee
as provided in Chapter 155, Fees; provided, however, that said fee shall
be returned to the applicant in the event that the Borough Council fails to
approve said application, and provided further that if any application for
said license is made after July 1 in any year, a license may be issued for the
remainder of such year upon the payment of 1/2 of said license fee.
§ 198-7. Site of operation.
No license issued hereunder shall entitle such licensee to operate
thereunder at or in any lot, building or location other than that specified in
the said license.
§ 198-8. Operation as pawnshop prohibited.
No licensee hereunder shall receive in the line of his, her or its business any
article or thing by way of pledge or pawn, nor shall be, she or it advance
any sum or sums of money on the security of any such article or thing.
§ 198-9. Purchases from certain minors prohibited.
No licensee hereunder shall purchase any goods, articles or other things
whatsoever from any person under the age of 15 years.
§ 198-10. Fencing requirements. [Amended 5-10-1954]
A. Any junk shop which may be conducted on an open lot in the Borough of
South River shall have said lot fenced in by a solid board fence not less
than seven feet in height, and such fence shall be set back at least 20
feet from any municipal, county or state highway near which it is
located.
B. Said fence shall be painted white and shall be kept neat and in good
repair. No signs of any kind shall be painted or posted upon said fence
excepting a business sign advertising the junkyard, not to exceed in size
a portion of said fence 10 feet in width, facing each abutting street.
None of the materials described in § 198-2 of this chapter shall be
§ 198-5 JUNK DEALERS § 198-10
198:609
§ 198-11. Storage on sidewalk prohibited.
No junk, old rope, old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead or other metal, rags, old
bottles and the like shall be kept on any sidewalk of the Borough of South
River or in front of the place of business conducted by the licensee as a junk
shop.
§ 198-12. Storage restrictions.
All flammable material stored on the premises shall be kept or placed in
a fireproof building or room, and any articles of junk so designed as to
collect and hold rainwater if left exposed in the open shall be housed in a
watertight building, and no articles shall be stored or piled in such manner
as to create a fire hazard or create a place for the harboring and breeding
of rats, mice or vermin.
§ 198-13. Collection vehicles.
Every person or persons, firm or corporation licensed hereunder shall be
entitled to keep one cart, wagon, truck or other vehicle for the purpose of
collecting the junk articles above mentioned; provided, however, that if said
licensee desires to keep more than one cart, wagon, truck or other vehicle,
the licensee, for the privilege of keeping the same, shall pay to the Borough
Clerk the sum as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, and provided also that said
licensee shall cause to be painted in legible fashion on the outside of every
such cart, wagon, truck or other vehicle the name of the licensee and the
street and number of licensee's place of business, and said licensee shall
affix to one side of every such cart, wagon, truck or other vehicle a metal
tag bearing the number of such licensee, which tags shall be furnished by
the Borough.
§ 198-14. Vehicle license.
Every person engaged in drawing or driving any such cart, wagon, truck
or other vehicle shall at all times carry with him when so engaged the
license issued for such cart, wagon, truck or other vehicle whereby such
conveyance is authorized, and shall exhibit the same on demand to any
police officer of the Borough of South River.
§ 198-15. Operation of collection vehicle.
No person or persons except such as are duly licensed under this chapter
or as are in the regular employ of such licensee shall draw or drive or cause
to be drawn or driven any such cart, wagon, truck or other vehicle for the
purposes of collecting any articles of junk.
stored or displayed in the open within said junkyard at a height
exceeding seven feet.
§ 198-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 198-16
198:610
§ 198-16. Lost or stolen articles.
Every licensee hereunder who shall receive or be in possession of any
goods, articles or things which may have been or are lost or stolen shall
forthwith on demand to view the same present the same to the police
authorities of the Borough of South River.
§ 198-17. Disposition of fees.
The Borough Clerk, upon the issuance of any licenses under the provisions
of this chapter, shall turn over said license fees to the Borough Treasurer.
§ 198-18. Inspections by Health Officer.
The Health Officer designated by the Board of Health of the Borough of
South River is hereby authorized and directed, during reasonable business
hours, to make reasonably periodic and effective inspection of all of the
premises and buildings used for the purposes hereinabove described, for
the purpose of ascertaining that the business is being conducted on the
licensed premises in accordance with the provisions hereof.
§ 198-19. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of raising revenue and regulating
the business hereinabove referred to.
§ 198-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating or refusing or
neglecting to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
liable, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article I,
General Penalty.
Chapter 204
LIBRARY PROPERTY
§ 204-1. Return of property required upon notice.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book or article borrowed from
the South River Public Library of the Borough of South River, contrary to the
rules and regulations of said public library, after 30 days have elapsed from
the date of posting by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a notice
demanding return thereof, addressed to said person at the last address
furnished to the library.
§ 198-16 LIBRARY PROPERTY § 204-2
204:611
§ 204-2. Defacing of materials.
No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage
or destroy any book or other article, or any part thereof, which is owned by
or is in the custody of such library.
§ 204-3. False information.
No person with intent to defraud shall register or furnish a false name or
address or use any card other than the one issued to said person for the
purpose of borrowing any book or article from said library.
§ 204-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the regulations and
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
not to exceed the sum of $100 or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term
not to exceed 10 days, or both, in the discretion of the Judge before whom
such conviction is obtained.
Chapter 209
LICENSED TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Fees — See Ch. 155.
§ 209-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct, engage
in or carry on any business, trade, occupation or activity within the Borough
of South River, New Jersey, without having first complied with the provisions
of this chapter and obtained a license therefor as is herein provided.
§ 209-2. Contents of application. [Amended 12-14-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-48]
Applications for all licenses and permits required by this chapter shall be
made in writing to the Borough Clerk. Each application shall contain the
following information in the suggested format:
A. Name under which business is to be conducted.
B. Name of applicant. (If a corporation, give names and addresses of
president and secretary; if a partnership, give names and addresses of
all partners.)
C. Present residence.
§ 204-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 209-2
209:612
§ 209-3. Applicability.
Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation
or conduct of any business or establishment or for doing business or
engaging in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be
subject to the requirement if, by himself or through an agent, employee
or partner, he holds himself forth as being engaged in the business or
occupation or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or performs
or attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in the
Borough of South River, New Jersey.
§ 209-4. Preparation and filing of forms.
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the Borough Clerk.
§ 209-5. Required signature.
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the Borough Clerk
in the absence of any provision to the contrary.
§ 209-6. Investigations and inspections. [Amended 9-27-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-27]
D. Address within the Borough of business to be conducted and addresses
of said business for the past five years.
E. Nature of business.
F. Residence of applicant during past five years (if individual).
G. Whether the applicant has ever had a license to conduct the business
herein described denied or revoked, except as noted.
H. Business telephone number of applicant.
I. Name and address of attorney, if applicable.
J. Name and address of registered agent if applicant is a corporation.
K. The undersigned makes these statements above to induce the Borough
of South River to issue the license herein applied for and agrees to
comply with all laws and ordinances of the Borough applicable to the
subject matter thereof.
A. Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, the Borough
Clerk shall refer such application to the following departments for the
purpose of making an investigation or inspection, and said departments
shall make a report thereon, favorably or otherwise, within seven
business days after receiving the application or a copy thereof. If said
report shall recommend a denial, the reasons for said denial must be set
forth.
§ 209-2 LICENSED TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS § 209-6
209:613
§ 209-7. Approval standards; time limit. [Amended 9-27-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-27]
Within five business days of receipt of the investigations or inspections as
set forth, the Borough Clerk shall issue a written approval or denial of the
license. An approval shall be issued if all investigations or inspections are
favorable. In the event that any investigation or inspection is not favorable,
the Borough Clerk shall issue a denial of such application and forward a
copy of the report or reports denying the license. The written denial and
accompanying reports shall be forwarded via certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the applicant within the five-business-day time period.
§ 209-8. Appeals. [Amended 9-27-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-27]
(1) Health Department (with respect to such licenses in connection
with the care and handling of food and preventing of nuisances and
spread of disease).
(2) Zoning Officer (to determine solely whether the proposed business
conforms to the zone in which the property is located).
(3) Chief of Police (to determine whether the applicant has been
convicted of a criminal or disorderly persons offense or whether or
not there are any outstanding warrants).
(4) Fire Prevention Department (to determine whether or not the
building or structure in which the business is intended to operate
complies with the fire safety codes).
B. In the event that the departments' investigation or inspection produces
an unfavorable decision, that department must set forth specifically
why the applicant is being given the unfavorable decision in writing.
A. In the event that a license is denied by the Borough Clerk, the applicant
shall have 10 days from receipt of the denial to file an appeal of said
decision directly with the Borough Council. The applicant must file the
appeal by forwarding a written notice to the Borough Clerk advising
that the applicant wishes to appeal the denial of the license and setting
forth the specific reasons for the appeal and attaching copies of any and
all reports produced by the investigations and inspections upon which
the denial was issued.
B. The Borough Council of the Borough of South River shall have 45 days
from receipt of the approval to review the same and determine whether
said applicant has complied with the general laws and statutes of this
state and the ordinances of the Borough of South River, and said
Borough Council shall be guided in making the determination by the
following standards:
(1) Zoning Ordinance and Master Plan of the Borough of South River.
(2) The Fire Prevention Code.102
§ 209-6 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 209-8
209:614
§ 209-9. Disposition of fees; fee for more than one activity.
§ 209-10. Termination of licenses.
All licenses shall terminate when the licensee ceases operating within the
Borough of South River.
§ 209-11. Lawful compliance required for building and premises.
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit
shall be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and building to be used
for the purpose do not fully comply with the laws of the Borough, county,
state or federal government.
§ 209-12. Change of location.
The location of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted
act may be changed, provided that 10 days' notice thereof is given to the
Borough Clerk and approval is granted by the governing body and provided
that the requirements of all Borough ordinances are complied with and
payment of a license transfer fee is made in accordance with this chapter.
§ 209-13. Nuisances.
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount
to a nuisance in fact.
§ 209-14. Right of entry for inspection.
Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required
(3) The reports of all municipal officers required under this chapter
and the general laws and public health and statutes and codes of
the State of New Jersey applicable to this community.
(4) The license history of the applicant regarding past violations,
rejections or suspensions and the timeliness of past applications for
licenses and the applicant's continued compliance with license
requirements.
A. In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application
therefor is made to the Borough Clerk. Except as otherwise provided,
all license fees shall become a part of the general Borough treasury.
B. Where the licensee is engaged in more than one activity, as enumerated
in this chapter, at the same location, which may be subject to more than
one fee, said licensee shall be required to pay that fee which would be
charged for the activity assessed the highest fee.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 169, Fire Prevention.
§ 209-8 LICENSED TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS § 209-14
209:615
by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any
ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected to admit
thereto, for the purposes of making the inspection, any officer or employee
of the Borough who is authorized or directed to make such inspection, at
any reasonable time that admission is requested.
§ 209-15. Revocation of license; notice of hearing; counsel.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough shall have the right to revoke any
license whenever the holder thereof or any of the licensee's agents or
servants violate any provision of this chapter, the laws of the State of New
Jersey or any rules or regulations promulgated as herein provided. Prior to
the revocation of a license, a notice of the contemplated action of the Mayor
and Council of the Borough shall be served upon said licensee, setting forth
such charges as may be the reason for said proposed revocation and the
place, date and hour when the Mayor and Council of the Borough will hear
the matter. The licensee may be represented by counsel at such hearing.
§ 209-16. Posting of license.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall be posted at the place of business
shown on said license in a conspicuous place. Said license shall remain
posted for the duration of the licensing year when issued and so long as the
licensed business is in operation.
§ 209-17. Fees. [Amended 2-25-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-4; 9-27-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-27; 7-16-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-16]
The license fees to be paid, as hereinbefore provided, to the Borough of
South River for conducting or engaging in business, trades or activities
at the place designated in the license certificate shall be as provided in
Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 209-18. Relationship of fees to municipal costs.
The fees herein imposed for business and mercantile licenses are revenueproducing
in nature, but said fees are used primarily in an attempt to cover
the cost of inspections of such businesses to ensure compliance with the
laws of the state and the ordinances of this municipality. It is the legislative
intent of this chapter to ensure that all businesses of whatsoever kind
and wheresoever located in this Borough shall be inspected periodically
to ensure compliance with the laws as aforesaid. In certain instances,
there are those businesses which warrant additional police surveillance
and inspection and there are also those businesses which attract unusual
amounts of vehicular traffic, necessitating additional regulation and
enforcement. The fees herein set forth provide a reasonable relationship to
the costs of the regulation of these businesses and the administration of this
chapter.
§ 209-14 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 209-19
209:616
§ 209-19. Exception.
This chapter shall not apply to any business or occupation licensed under
those various laws of this state which prohibit licensing by municipalities.
§ 209-20. Enforcement.
The proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter dealing with
mercantile licenses shall be within the jurisdiction of the Police Department
of this Borough and additionally within the jurisdiction of those officers
charged with providing the necessary inspections and regulations.
§ 209-21. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 214
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Housing standards — See Ch. 188.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 246.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 258.
Solid waste — See Ch. 287.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, any person, firm, association or
corporation violating any section of this chapter shall, upon conviction
in the Municipal Court having jurisdiction, be subject to the penalties
provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
B. The court before which any person is convicted of violating this chapter
shall have power to impose any fine or term of imprisonment, or
suspension thereof, not exceeding the maximum fixed by this chapter.
§ 209-19 LITTERING § 209-21
214:617

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 10-7-1970 by Ord. No. 1970-20 (Ch. 128 of the 1977
Code)]
§ 214-1. Definitions.
Certain words as used in this article are defined as follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of South River.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material or any combination thereof,
including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.[Amended 4-18-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-28]
PARK — A park, reservation, recreation center or any other area in the
Borough either owned or leased and either used or operated by the Borough
and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and
includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveways, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, alleyways, sidewalks, roadways,
parking areas open to the public and any and all public parks, squares,
spaces, grounds and public buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles, other abandoned personal property and solid market and
industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as circulars, leaflets, pamphlets,
wrappers, handbills, newspapers and all and any other printed material,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass and
other like material.
§ 214-1 LITTERING § 214-2
214:619
§ 214-2. Litter in public places. [Amended 4-18-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-28]
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise place
litter of any nature upon any public or private property, other than a litter
receptacle.
§ 214-3. Placement of litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in duly authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent such litter from being
scattered upon any street, alleyway, sidewalk or other public place or upon
private property.
§ 214-4. Litter in bodies of water.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any pond, lake, stream, river or
any other body of water within or bordering the Borough of South River.
§ 214-5. Litter from vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in any vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any public places or private property within the Borough of
South River except in officially designated places.
§ 214-6. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Borough, whether owned by such person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection. Such owner or person in control of private
property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided,
however, this section shall not prohibit storage of litter in private
receptacles for collection.
§ 214-7. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any open or vacant private
property within the Borough, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 214-8. Litter in gutters or streets. [Amended 4-18-1990 by Ord.
No. 1990-28]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin
or other public place any accumulation of litter from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Every person who owns or occupies property shall
keep the sidewalk in front of his or her premises free of litter. All litter
sweepings shall be collected and properly containerized for disposal.
§ 214-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 214-9
214:620
§ 214-9. Sidewalks and other areas. [Amended 4-18-1990 by Ord.
No. 1990-28]
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances
of every kind and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys
free from litter.
§ 214-10. Litter from trucks. [Amended 4-18-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-28]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any public roadway unless such a vehicle is constructed, covered or
loaded to prevent any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise
escaping therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any
materials which constitute litter have fallen or escaped which could cause
an obstruction, damage a vehicle or otherwise endanger travelers or public
property shall immediately cause the public property to be cleaned of all
such materials and shall pay the costs therefor.
§ 214-11. Solid waste restrictions. [Added 4-18-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-28]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or
road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste,
rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances or
furniture on private property in any place not specifically designated for the
purpose of solid waste storage or disposal.
§ 214-12. Servicing of receptacles. [Added 4-18-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-28]
Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public
places which exist in the municipality, including sidewalks used by
pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a
minimum there shall be no single linear quarter-mile without a receptacle;
buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, government
buildings and railroad and bus station; parks; drive-in restaurants; all street
vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites;
gasoline service station islands; shopping centers; parking lots;
campgrounds and trailer parks; marinas, boat moorage and fueling station;
boat launching areas; public and private piers operated for public use;
beaches and bathing areas; and at special events to which the public is
invited, including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that adequate
containerization is available.
§ 214-9 LITTERING § 214-13
214:621
§ 214-13. Overflowing waste. [Added 4-18-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-28]
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 214-14. Construction waste. [Added 4-18-1990 by Ord. No.
1990-28]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or immediately following completion of any construction or
demolition project. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor
in charge of a construction site to furnish containers adequate to
accommodate flyable or nonflyable debris or trash at areas convenient to
construction areas and to maintain and empty the receptacles in such a
manner and with such a frequency as to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 214-15. Handbills. [Added 4-18-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-28]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, to cause to be placed or to hire
another person to place any advertisement, handbill or unsolicited material
of any kind in or on any street, sidewalk, building or vehicle within the
community in such a manner that it may be removed by natural forces.
§ 214-16. Removal; notice of violation. [Added 4-18-1990 by Ord.
No. 1990-28]
In the event that the owner or possessor of private property or lands
shall refuse or neglect to abate or remedy the condition which constitutes
a violation of § 214-8, 214-10, 214-13 or 214-14 of this article, the
municipality may cause the condition to be abated and remedied. Upon the
removal of any materials prohibited to be stored or abandoned on lands by
§ 214-8, 214-10, 214-13 or 214-14 of this article by or under the direction of
an appointed officer or officers of this jurisdiction, in cases where the owner
or tenant shall have refused or neglected to remove the materials within
five days of receiving a notice of violation, such officer shall certify the cost
thereof to the municipality, which shall examine the certificate and, if found
correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said
lands and will be added to and become and form a part of the taxes next to
be assessed and levied upon said lands. The costs shall bear interest at the
same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers
and in the same manner as taxes. The provisions of this section shall be in
addition to any fine, penalty or community service which may be imposed
by a court of competent jurisdiction for violation of the provisions of this
article.
§ 214-13 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 214-17
214:622
§ 214-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6; 6-26-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-16]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
Each violation of any of the provisions of this article and each day that such
violation continues shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 214-17 LITTERING § 214-17
214:623

ARTICLE II
Litter Control
[Adopted 8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-23]
§ 214-18. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements to control littering
in the Borough of South River so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 214-19. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, saw milling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 214-20. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle or, having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this article.
§ 214-18 LITTERING § 214-21
214:625
§ 214-21. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Borough of South River Police
Department.
§ 214-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 214-21 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 214-22
214:626
Chapter 220
(RESERVED)
Chapter 232
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Housing standards — See Ch. 188.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 258.
§ 232-1. Numbering required. [Amended 5-14-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-19103]
The owner, occupant or lessee of each and every residential unit, building,
business or commercial unit which now fronts or may hereafter front upon
any of the public streets of the Borough shall cause the proper number of
such residential unit, building, business or commercial unit to be placed in
figures at least two inches in height in some conspicuous place on the front
part of such building so as to be plainly visible from the sidewalks of the
street on which such house or building may front.
§ 232-2. Rooming houses and boardinghouses. [Added 5-14-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-19]
The owner of each and every rooming house or boardinghouse within the
Borough of South River, in addition to numbering the building as set forth
above, shall number each and every apartment and/or room in said building
as set forth above.
§ 232-3. Procedure for numbering.
A. In numbering the houses and buildings as aforesaid, the following order
shall be observed:
(1) The numbers on or in such streets as run a northerly and southerly
course shall begin at the house or building standing or which may
stand in or at the southeasterly extremity of each and every street
which runs such course as aforesaid and within the line of buildings
aforesaid, which said house or building shall be numbered one; and
the house or building standing or which may stand at the
southwesterly extremity of each and every street which runs such
course as aforesaid and within the line of buildings aforesaid shall
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 214-22 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 232-3
232:627
§ 232-4. Duty of Engineer.104
In case of any difficulty or doubt concerning the proper number of any
lot, house or building in the Borough, the owner, occupant or lessee or
any person interested may apply to the Engineer of the Borough in order
that the question may be determined, and the order and decision of such
Engineer shall be final and conclusive.
§ 232-5. Enforcement.105
It shall be the duty of such committee of Borough Council as may be
appointed for the purpose, to see that the provisions of this chapter are
properly carried into effect.
§ 232-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
Any person, persons or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article I, General
Penalty.
be numbered two; and within the line, the house or building
adjoining number one shall be numbered three, and the house or
building adjoining number two shall be numbered four, and so on
in such a progression in numerical order.
(2) The numbers in such streets as run in an easterly and westerly
course shall begin at the house or building standing or which may
stand at the northeasterly extremity of each and every street which
runs such course as aforesaid and within the line of the buildings
aforesaid, which said house or building shall be numbered one; and
the house or building standing or which may stand at the
southeasterly extremity of each and every street which runs such
course as aforesaid and within the line of buildings aforesaid shall
be numbered two; and the houses or buildings in each and every
street which runs such course as aforesaid shall be numbered in
progressive numerical or in the same order as hereinbefore
specified.
B. Whenever any vacant lot or lots shall occur in the numbering of the
houses or buildings in any street of said Borough, the adjacent houses
or buildings shall be so numbered that when such vacant lot or lots shall
be built upon, the house or houses built thereon may be numbered
appropriately in proper numerical order, provided that the numbers
shall be designated for each 40 feet of vacant lot.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 232-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 232-6
232:628
Chapter 236
OBSCENE MATERIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Curfew — See Ch. 133.
Dancing and exhibitions — See Ch. 151, Art. I.
§ 236-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the definitions hereinafter
given them:
HARMFUL TO MINORS — That quality of any description or representation,
in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct or sexual excitement, when it:
KNOWINGLY — Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or belief
or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry of both:
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
NUDITY — The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area
or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the
female breasts with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof
below of the top of the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Any of the following depicted items:
Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of
minors in sex;
A.
Is patently offensive to contemporary standards in the adult community
as a whole with respect to what is suitable sexual material for minors;
B.
Taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific
value.
C.
The character or content of any material which is reasonably
susceptible of examination by the defendant; and
A.
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
B.
Any act of sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, including genitalgenital,
anal-genital or oral-genital intercourse whether between
human beings or between a human being and an animal.
A.
Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning flagellation or torture by or upon a
person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a revealing costume
B.
§ 232-6 OBSCENE MATERIAL § 236-1
236:629
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.106
§ 236-2. Display of obscene materials.
It is unlawful for any person commercially and knowingly to exhibit, display,
sell, offer to sell, give away, circulate, distribute or attempt to distribute any
material whose cover, covers or packaging, standing alone, is harmful to
minors, in any place where minors are or may be present or allowed to be
present and where minors are able to view such material, unless each item
of such material is blocked from view by an opaque cover. The requirement
of an opaque cover shall be deemed satisfied concerning such material if
those portions of the cover, covers or packaging containing such material
harmful to minors are blocked from view by an opaque cover.
§ 236-3. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the distribution or attempt
to distribute, the exhibition, display, sale, offer of sale, circulation or giving
away of material harmful to minors where such material is sold, exhibited,
displayed, offered for sale, given away, circulated, distributed or attempted
to be distributed under circumstances where minors are not present, not
allowed to be present or are not able to view such material or the cover,
covers or packaging of such materials. Any business may comply with the
requirements of this section by physically segregating such material in the
manner so as to physically prohibit the access to and view of the material
by minors, by prominently posting at the entrance or entrances to such
restricted areas: "Adults Only — You must be 18 to enter," and by enforcing
said restrictions.
or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically
restricted on the part of one so clothed.
Masturbation or lewd exhibitions of the genitals including any explicit,
close-up representations of the human genital organ.
C.
Physical contact or simulated physical contact with the clothed or
unclothed pubic areas or buttocks of a human male or female, or the
breasts of the female, whether alone or between members of the same
or opposite sex or between humans and animals in an act of apparent
sexual stimulation or gratification.
D.
An act of sexual assault where physical violence or drugs are employed
to overcome the will of or achieve the consent of a person to an act of
sexual conduct and the effects or results of the violence or drugs are
shown.
E.
106. Editor's Note: Original §§ 142-2, Sale of obscene material, and 142-3, Obscene exhibitions,
which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 236-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 236-4
236:630
§ 236-4. Presumptive evidence.
The public display of any obscene material as defined in this chapter shall
constitute presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or
permitted the display.
§ 236-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
Chapter 241
OUTDOOR CAFES AND RESTAURANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Fees — See Ch. 155.
§ 241-1. Purpose.
§ 241-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served upon the public right-of-way, namely the sidewalks
immediately in front of any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria or place of business
where food and/or other refreshments are served.
A. Various Borough businesses have requested and proposed the use of
portions of public sidewalks for commercial ventures and outdoor
dining as a means of enhancing the business district and the economic
vitality of the Borough;
B. The Borough Council desires to support and encourage appropriate
business activities which bring together residents of the Borough in
various settings to enjoy a better quality of life;
C. The Borough Council desires to support and encourage appropriate
activities which bring together members of the commercial and
business district in various settings to enhance the economy of the
Borough;
D. The temporary use of Borough sidewalk for the purposes of outdoor
dining can most appropriately be accomplished through the
registration requirements and other regulations enumerated herein.
§ 236-4 OBSCENE MATERIAL § 241-3
236:631
§ 241-3. Registration required.
Outdoor cafes and restaurants may be established as an accessory use to
a permitted restaurant use in any zoning district that permits restaurants.
No person, however, shall establish, maintain, own or operate any outdoor
cafe or restaurant nor serve food, liquor or other beverages outdoors or
at tables outdoors on any public street, sidewalk or alleyway without first
having registered with the Clerk of the Borough of South River. Nothing
contained herein shall be deemed to waive any obligations by the license
holder under this chapter from complying with any applicable ABC or health
regulation. A cafe or restaurant must meet the requirements for a retail
food establishment as defined in state statute, State Sanitary Code and any
and all other state, county or local regulations, and for purposes of this
chapter must meet the following additional requirements:
§ 241-4. Parking requirements.
The establishment of an outdoor cafe or restaurant pursuant to this chapter
shall not require the holder of said license to acquire any new and/or
additional parking as a result of the grant of said license and the operation
of an outdoor cafe and/or restaurant.
§ 241-5. Lighting.
Any and all lighting which shall be utilized by an outdoor cafe and/or
restaurant shall conform to the following criteria:
§ 241-6. Conditions.
A. The amount of available outdoor table seating shall not exceed the
amount of available indoor table seating at said establishment. Seating
at the bar in an establishment shall not constitute indoor table seating
for computing the amount of available outdoor table seating that an
establishment may have.
B. The establishment must comply with the restaurant requirements as to
restroom facilities under the Uniform Construction Code,107 unless
exempt from same.
A. Only low-level lighting may be utilized.
B. Maximum level of illumination shall be 1.0 fc at the curbline and to all
property lines as extended to the curbline.
C. No lighting shall shine directly into the public roadway.
D. No lighting shall simulate or resemble, in color or operation, any traffic
control device.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 129, Uniform Construction Codes.
§ 241-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 241-6
236:632
§ 241-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty,
in the discretion of the court.
Chapter 246
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 103.
Dogs — See Ch. 108.
Littering — See Ch. 214.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 253.
§ 246-1. Prohibited activities.
No person in a public park or recreation area shall:
A. Any sidewalk cafe or restaurant choosing to provide sidewalk dining
must have a minimum insurance liability policy of $500,000 and must
name the Borough of South River as an insured.
B. Notwithstanding the restrictions and regulations enumerated herein,
outdoor cafes and restaurants shall be allowed to operate at any time.
C. In accordance with South River Borough Code § 350-20D(5)(b), all
eating areas on the front facade of a building shall be of temporary
nature and shall not block pedestrian circulation on any Borough
sidewalk.
D. Clear, straight and unobstructed passage for pedestrians of at least five
feet in width shall be maintained at all times.
E. When a cafe ceases operation for a period of five days or longer, all
furniture and equipment utilized for outdoor dining shall be removed
from the sidewalk and stored inside.
F. All permits are issued on the condition that the use of a Borough
sidewalk for outdoor dining shall be terminated pursuant to an order of
the Chief of Police or Fire Inspector when necessary, in the opinion of
such official, to respond to the needs of law enforcement or fire
suppression.
A. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
paving or paving material, water lines or other public utilities or parts
or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary
§ 241-6 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 246-1
246:633
markers or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
B. Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six years shall use the
rest rooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
C. Dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil,
rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down-timber or other wood or
materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other
means or agency.
D. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether
permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special written
permit issued hereunder.
E. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure
the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant, nor attach any
rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not
dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas nor in any other way injure or
impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
F. Climb any tree, or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains,
railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or
customarily used for such purposes.
G. Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
H. Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw
missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor remove or have in his
possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest or young of
any reptile or bird; nor collect, remove, have in his possession, give
away, sell or offer to sell, buy or offer to buy, or accept as a gift, any
specimen, alive or dead, of any of the group of tree snails. Exception to
the foregoing is made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous,
such as rattlesnakes, moccasins, coral snakes or other deadly reptiles,
may be killed on sight.
I. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed into the
water of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in
or adjacent to any park, or into any tributary, stream, storm sewer or
drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or
solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
J. Have brought in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass,
ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or
other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or
contiguous to any park or be left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but
shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided;
where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall
§ 246-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 246-1
246:634
§ 246-2. Swimming, boating, fishing and picnicking.
In areas of parks and public lands designated as recreation areas, no person
shall:
be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
K. Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or parking
areas or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated
as temporary parking areas by the Recreation Department.
L. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area,
and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions thereat
and with the instructions of any attendant who may be present.
M. Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking areas
or elsewhere in park areas.
N. Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or path designated
for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a
bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved
area reserved for pedestrian use.
O. Ride a bicycle other than on the right-hand side of the road paving as
close as conditions permit, and bicycles shall be kept in single file when
two or more are operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at all times
operate their machines with reasonable regard for the safety of others,
signal all turns, pass to the right of any vehicle they are overtaking and
pass to the right of any vehicles they may be meeting.
P. Ride any other person on a bicycle.
Q. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is
provided and there is a space available.
R. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against a tree or in
any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by
it.
S. Ride a bicycle on any road or bicycle path between 15 minutes after
sunset and 15 minutes before sunrise.
A. Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any
park except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor
and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may
be hereafter adopted. Nor shall any person frequent any waters or
places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing,
or congregate thereat, when such activity is prohibited by the
Recreation Department upon a finding that such use of water would be
dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
§ 246-1 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 246-2
246:635
B. Frequent any waters or places designated for the purpose of swimming
or bathing, or congregate thereat, except between such hours of the
day as shall be designated by the Recreation Department for such
purpose for each individual area.
C. Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or bathing area any
tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there shall be an
unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or structure from at least two
sides, nor shall any guy wire, rope or extension or exterior brace or
support be connected or fastened from any such structure to any other
structure, stake, rock or other object outside thereof.
D. Allow himself to be so covered with a bathing suit as to indecently
expose his person. No person shall appear in bathing costume at any
place in the parks except within the limits of designated bathing places
or areas, and all bathing costumes shall conform to commonly accepted
standards.
E. Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet room or other
place except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided
for that purpose.
F. Bring into any waters or operate thereon any boat, raft or other
watercraft, whether motor-powered or not, except at places designated
for boating by the Recreation Department. Such activity shall be in
accordance with such applicable regulations as are now or may
hereafter be adopted.
G. Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to unjustifiably
or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the occupant of any
other boat.
H. Launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any waters between
the closing hour of the park at night and the opening hour the following
morning, nor shall any person be on or remain on or in any boat during
the said closed hours of the park.
I. Fish in any water except in waters designated by the Recreation
Department for that use and under such regulations and restrictions as
have been or may be prescribed by the Recreation Department.
J. Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.
K. Hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time. No person shall use, carry or
possess firearms of any description, or air rifles, spring guns, bow and
arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons potentially inimical to
wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or any instrument that can be
loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device.
Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is forbidden.
L. Picnic or lunch in a place other than those places designated for that
purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in
§ 246-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 246-2
246:636
§ 246-3. Prohibited conduct.
While in a public park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and in particular no person
shall:
such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the
maximum use for the comfort and the convenience of all. Visitors shall
comply with any directions given to achieve the end.
M. Violate the regulation that use of individual fireplaces, together with
tables and benches, follows generally the rule of "first come, first
served."
N. Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of
other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an
unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
O. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage
and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles, where provided.
If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be
carried away from the park area by the picnicker, to be properly
disposed of elsewhere.
P. Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of
overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing
hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could
be used for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp
wagon or the like.
Q. Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or
otherwise propelled objects, such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or
model airplanes, except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation.
The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games, such as
football, baseball and quoits, is prohibited except on the fields and
courts or areas provided therefor. Roller-skating shall be confined to
those areas specifically designated for such pastime.
R. Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails. Where permitted,
horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained and ridden
with due care and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended, nor
shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.
A. Bring alcoholic beverages into or drink same at any time in a park, nor
shall any person be under the influence of intoxicating liquor in a park.
B. Have in his possession, set off or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks
or explosives or flammable material, or discharge them or throw them
into any such areas from land or highway adjacent thereto. This
§ 246-2 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 246-3
246:637
prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that
in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be
dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. At the discretion
of the Recreation Department, permits may be given for conducting
properly supervised fireworks in designated areas.
C. Be responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into
areas other than automobile parking concourses and walks immediately
adjacent thereto and such other areas as may be clearly marked by
signs bearing the words "Domestic Animals Permitted in This Area."
Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the running of dogs at
large. All dogs in those areas where such animals are permitted shall be
restrained at all times on adequate leashes not greater than six feet in
length.
D. Occupy any seat or bench or enter into or loiter or remain in any
pavilion or other park structure or section thereof which may be
reserved and designated by the Recreation Department for the use of
the opposite sex. Exception is made for children under six years of age.
E. Appear at any place in other than proper clothing. With the exception of
the restricted bathing areas, "properly clothed" shall be construed to
prohibit the wearing of trunks or clothing that does not cover the upper
portion of the body.
F. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private.
G. Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated by the Recreation Department. No
person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material within
any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous
thereto.
H. Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person use
or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
I. Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance.
J. Go onto the ice on any of the waters except such areas as are
designated as skating fields and provided a safety signal is displayed.
K. Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or benches or other areas, or
engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent
language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a
breach of the public peace.
L. Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the Recreation Department
which he claims to have upon request of any authorized person who
shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance
with any ordinance or rule.
§ 246-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 246-3
246:638
§ 246-4. Opening and closing of parks.
§ 246-5. Permits for special events.
Permits for special events in parks shall be obtained by application to the
Recreation Department in accordance with the following procedure:
M. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
N. Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall be station or place
any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any
such article or thing. Exception is here made as to any regularly
licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and
regulation of the Recreation Department.
O. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or
inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected
any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to
a park.
P. Park within any park or playground, including but not limited to the
parking areas of said park or playground, during any hours which the
park is not open to the public. This shall include but is not limited to
overnight parking. [Added 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-31]
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening
and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for
public information. Parks shall be open at sunrise and shall close at
sunset as published in the official paper of the Borough of South River.
[Amended 12-16-1998 by Ord. No. 1998-30]
B. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by
the Recreation Department at any time and for any interval of time,
either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise)
and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Recreation
Department shall find reasonably necessary.
A. A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the Recreation Department, stating:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(4) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
(5) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
§ 246-3 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 246-5
246:639
§ 246-6. Enforcement.
(6) Any other information which the Recreation Department shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit
should issue hereunder.
B. Standard for issuance. The Recreation Department shall issue a permit
hereunder when it finds:
(1) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general enjoyment of the park.
(2) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety
and recreation.
(3) That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to
incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(4) That the proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the Borough.
(5) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the day and hour requested in the application.
C. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in said
permits.
D. The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any
loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of
the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit is issued.
E. Revocation. The Recreation Department shall have the authority to
revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance or
upon good cause shown.
A. The Recreation Department and park attendants shall, in connection
with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
B. The Recreation Department and any park attendant shall have the
authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this
chapter.
C. The Recreation Department and any park attendant shall have the
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the
park or used in violation of this chapter.
§ 246-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 246-7
246:640
§ 246-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
This chapter shall also be enforced by the Police Department, and any
person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter relating to
conduct in public parks or any regulation or rule promulgated hereunder
shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General
Penalty, in the discretion of the Judge.
Chapter 253
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 103.
Curfew — See Ch. 133.
Littering — See Ch. 214.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 246.
§ 253-1. Specific acts prohibited. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-31]
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough of South River:
A. (Reserved)108
B. Permit any house, shop, store or other building or structure owned or
leased or occupied by him or her to be frequented or resorted to by
noisy, riotous or disorderly persons or by prostitutes, gamblers or
vagrants, or permit any person to loiter or linger therein.
C. Commit or attempt to commit an assault or an assault and battery in
either a public place or private place, or aid or assist or abet any person
about to commit or attempt to commit an assault or an assault and
battery.
D. Appear on any street or in any park or other public place or in public
view in a state of nudity or in dress not belonging to his or her sex or in
indecent or lewd apparel, or make any indecent exposure of his or her
person, or commit or do any lewd or indecent act or behave in a lewd or
indecent manner, or wear apparel that is used for swimming purposes
other than in those areas designated by the Borough of South River for
lawful bathing and swimming.
E. Throw any posters or paper, sticks, glass, metal or any hard, dangerous
or offensive substance upon any sidewalk, street, highway or public
place or at any car, vehicle, house building, fence or person.
108. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, prohibiting public intoxication, was repealed
1-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1.
§ 246-7 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 253-1
246:641
F. Maliciously destroy, damage, deface or injure any property, public or
private.
G. Cause or permit to be emitted any vile, offensive, obnoxious or
nauseating smoke or odor, or any smoke that may be vile, offensive,
obnoxious or nauseating to any person.
H. Cause or permit to be emitted any smoke, fumes, gases, vapors, steam
or other substances of such nature or of such quantity as to be injurious
to life, health, plants, trees, produce of the soil, buildings or other
property.
I. Go about from door to door or place himself or herself on any sidewalk,
street, store or other public or private place or places to beg or gather
alms without lawful authority.
J. Trespass upon lands owned or leased by the Borough of South River or
belonging to the Board of Education of the Borough of South River or
belonging to any board engaged in public works or recreation of the
Borough of South River, or break or injure or deface such buildings or
any part thereof or the fences or outbuildings belonging to or
connected with such buildings or any part thereof upon any such lands,
or disturb the exercises of any school or molest or annoy the children
attending any school or any teacher or teachers therein.
K. Intentionally, willfully or maliciously destroy or injure any of the bulbs,
globes, lights, wires, poles, equipment, bells, sirens, boxes or other
apparatus or parts of the electrical distribution system, the fire alarm
system, the Police Department or any of said items belonging to any
board or any other property belonging to the Borough of South River, or
intentionally, willfully or maliciously interfere with the same or hinder
or impede any of the operations intended to be accomplished thereby,
or intentionally cause or assist in causing a false alarm of fire to be
given in any manner.
L. Hinder or obstruct any Borough officer in the performance of his duties;
nor shall any person willfully refuse or neglect to assist any Borough
officer, when lawfully called upon to do so, in the execution of any
process or in the suppression of any breach of the peace or disorderly
conduct or in case of any escape or when such officer is resisted in the
discharge of his duty; nor shall any person knowingly resist or oppose
any officer or person authorized by law, serving or attempting to serve
any writ, bill, order or process or when making any arrest, either with
or without a warrant.
M. Maliciously tamper with, alter or plug up any culvert, drain, drainage
ditch, storm sewer, manhole or catch basin.
N. Intentionally enter upon or trespass upon the land or property of
another person or persons without permission so to do, or enter upon or
trespass upon the land or property of another person or persons and
§ 253-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 253-1
246:642
§ 253-2. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
All other riotous, indecent or disorderly conduct, breach of the peace and
vagrancy not hereinbefore specifically mentioned is hereby prohibited.
§ 253-3. Word usage.
The term "person" as used in this chapter shall, wherever appropriate
in connection with the context, include "corporation," "partnership,"
"association" and "individual," and shall include the plural. The masculine
pronoun shall include the feminine.
§ 253-4. Disposition of fines.
All fines imposed and collected under and by virtue of this chapter shall be
paid into the treasury of the Borough of South River.
§ 253-5. Violations and penalties.
damage, injure or deface any property thereon, or by any means
damage, deface or injure the property of another.
O. Invade the privacy of any person by going upon private property of
others by stealth and at night for the purpose of "peeping" through the
windows, doors or other openings, thereby engaging in conduct
associated with what is commonly known as a "Peeping Tom."
P. Upon apprehension, be unable to give a good account of himself, or be
engaged in an illegal occupation or be in the Borough of South River for
any unlawful purpose. In any prosecution under this subsection, the
fact that the person apprehended cannot give a good account of himself
or is engaged in an illegal occupation is prima facie evidence that he is
present in this Borough for an unlawful purpose.
Q. No person shall engage in any sport, game or other activity which
endangers or frightens persons in any public place. [Added 6-22-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-25]
A. Any person who shall violate any of the terms or provisions of this
chapter or who shall commit or do any act or thing which this chapter
prohibits shall, upon conviction thereof before the Judge of the
Municipal Court, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I,
General Penalty. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6]
B. Fines. [Added 12-5-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-68]
(1) The following listed violations may be paid through the Violations
Bureau of the South River Municipal Court without the necessity of
a Court appearance, and the following fines shall be imposed:
Section Explanation Amount
253-1D Urinating in public $75
§ 253-1 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 253-5
246:643
§ 253-6. Smoking in Borough parks, sports fields, and recreation
areas prohibited. [Added 6-10-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-11]
(2) In addition to the foregoing fines, the Municipal Court, in its
discretion, may impose court costs consistent with those
permissible in Municipal Court, as well as any surcharges as set
forth by state statute.
A. Purpose. The following are the purposes of this section:
(1) The United States Surgeon General has determined that there is no
safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke and that nonsmoking
Americans exposed to secondhand smoke in public places are at
significantly increased risk of heart disease and lung cancer (See
United States Department of Health and Human Services, The
Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke; a
report of the surgeon General, United States Department of Health
and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Coordinating Center for Health Promotion, National Center for
Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on
Smoking and Health, 2006.); and
(2) Smoking is the leading cause of death in the United States, and the
United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has
determined that reduction of the death and disease caused by
tobacco use and exposure to secondhand smoke is one of six top
national health care problems; and
(3) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, the Borough is given the authority to
adopt ordinances for the public health, safety and welfare of the
Borough, its residents and guests; and
(4) The New Jersey Smoke-Free Air Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3D-63) specifically
authorizes local restrictions on smoking "equivalent to, or greater
than those provided" in the NJSFAA for purposes of "protecting
public health."
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
following definitions:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic device that can be
used to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from
the device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar,
cigarillo, or pipe.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from,
or the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other matter
or substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can
be smoked, or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an
electronic smoking device.
C. Smoking in Borough parks, sports fields and recreation areas
prohibited. No person shall smoke while on the grounds of any and all
§ 253-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 253-6
246:644
Chapter 255
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Fees — See Ch. 155.
§ 255-1. Permit and license required.
It shall be unlawful for any solicitors, canvassers or peddlers, as defined in
§ 255-2 hereof, to engage in such business within the corporate limits of the
Borough of South River without first having obtained a permit and license
therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 255-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER — A person who circulates a petition or the seeking of
contributions for a cause, charitable or otherwise, or the practice of
distributing literature, pamphlets, handbills and the like for the purpose of
distributing information or seeking support for any legal purpose or cause,
from a stationary location on a street or other public place, or by going from
house to house, place to place or street to street.[Added 12-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-30]
PEDDLER — Includes any person, whether a resident of the Borough of
South River or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any
other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or
from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares,
merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck farm products
or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale from a wagon,
automotive vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance, and further
Borough parks, sports fields, and recreation areas, whether owned,
leased or utilized by the Borough.
D. Enforcement. Whenever the Health Officer or his or her designee or a
law enforcement officer or a Borough Code Enforcement Officer
observes or reasonably believes that there exists a violation of this
section, he or she may issue a summons and complaint to the violator.
The complaint shall be written and served on the violator. Citizens of
the Borough may also bring private complaints for the violation of this
section.
E. Violations and penalties. Any person found to be in violation of this
section shall be subject to the fines and penalties set forth in Borough
Code § 253-5.
§ 253-6 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 255-2
246:645
provided that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes
deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a "peddler" subject to the
provisions of this chapter. The word "peddler" shall include the words
"hawker" and "huckster."
PERSON — Includes the singular and the plural, and also means and
includes any person, firm or corporation, association, club, copartnership or
society or any other organization.
SOLICITOR — Any individual, whether a resident of the Borough of South
River or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motortruck or any
other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from
street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods,
wares and/or merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for
future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future,
whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample
of the subject of such sale, or whether he is collecting advance payments
on such sales or not; provided that such definition shall include any person
who, for himself or for any other person, firm or corporation, hires, leases,
uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel
room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any place within the Borough of
South River for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for
future delivery.[Amended 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-30]
§ 255-3. Application for permit and license.
A. Applicants for permit and license under this chapter must file with the
Borough Clerk a sworn application in writing (in duplicate) on a form to
be furnished by the said Borough Clerk, which shall give the following
information:
(1) Name and description of the applicant.
(2) Permanent home address and full local address of applicant, if any.
(3) A brief description of the nature of the business and/or goods to be
sold.
(4) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship.
(5) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(6) The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold or
orders taken for the sale thereof are manufactured or produced,
where such goods or products are located at the time said
application is filed and the proposed method of delivery.
(7) The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two
reliable property owners of the County of Middlesex who will
certify as to the applicant's good character and business
respectability, or, in lieu thereof, such other available evidence as
§ 255-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 255-3
246:646
§ 255-4. Investigation of applicant. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6; 10-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-17]
Upon receipt of such applications, the original shall be reviewed by the
Chief of Police, the Borough Clerk and the Business Administrator, who shall
cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character
to be made as they deem necessary for the protection of the public good,
and the conduct of such investigation prior to the issuance of a license
hereunder shall be mandatory. If the result of such investigation is that the
application is satisfactory, same shall be approved by the Borough Clerk.
If as a result of such investigation the applicant’s background reveals a
prior history involving crimes of moral turpitude within the past 10 years
or if the applicant’s character or business responsibility is found to be
unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied, with reasons for said denial
indicated on the application by the Borough Clerk.
§ 255-5. License fees.
The license fee which shall be charged by the Borough Clerk for such
licenses shall be as provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 255-6. Badges. [Amended 4-11-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-15]
The Borough Clerk shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery
of his license a badge which shall contain the words "Licensed Solicitor"
to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant
as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character
and business responsibility.
(8) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance,
the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed
therefor.
(9) A statement by a reputable physician licensed by the State of New
Jersey, dated not more than 10 days prior to the submission of the
application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious,
infectious or communicable disease. [Amended 9-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-37]
B. At the time of the filing of the application, a fee as provided in Chapter
155, Fees, shall be paid to the Borough Clerk to cover the cost of the
investigation of the facts stated therein.
C. All applicants for a license under this chapter shall obtain a criminal
background check at a private agency approved by the Borough. The
results of the criminal background check shall be forwarded by the
approved agency directly to the Borough Clerk, who shall in turn
forward same to the Chief of Police. [Added 10-15-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-17]
§ 255-3 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 255-6
246:647
or "Licensed Peddler," the period for which the license is issued and the
number of the license, in letters and figures easily discernible from a
distance of 10 feet. Such badge shall, during the time such licensee is
engaged in soliciting, peddling or canvassing, be worn constantly by the
licensee on the front of his outer garment in such a way as to be
conspicuous. No license or badge issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one
to whom it was issued.
§ 255-7. Unnecessary noise.
All peddlers, canvassers and solicitors and any person in their behalf shall
comply with the Antinoise Ordinance of the Borough of South River in
conducting their business.
§ 255-8. Use of streets.
No peddler, canvasser or solicitor shall have any exclusive right to any
location in the public streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary
location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where
his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purposes
of this chapter, the judgment of the police officer, exercised in good faith,
shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the
public impeded or inconvenienced.
§ 255-9. Duty of police.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Borough of South River
to require any person seen soliciting or canvassing and who is not known
by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his solicitor's or peddler's
license, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person
found to be violating the same.
§ 255-10. Maintenance of records.
The Chief of Police shall report to the Borough Clerk all convictions for
violations of this chapter, and the Borough Clerk shall maintain a record for
each license issued and record the reports of the violations therein.
§ 255-11. Revocation of licenses.
A. Permits and licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the
Chief of Police of the Borough of South River, after notice and hearing,
for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as solicitor, peddler or canvasser.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
§ 255-6 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 255-11
246:648
§ 255-12. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the Borough
Clerk in the denial of an application for a permit or license as provided in
§ 255-4 of this chapter, or in the decision with reference to revocation of a
license as provided in § 255-11 of this chapter, shall have the right of appeal
to the Mayor and Council of the Borough of South River. Such an appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Mayor and Council within 14 days after
notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last
known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds of the
appeal. The Mayor and Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on
such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the
same manner as provided in § 255-11 of this chapter for notice of hearing
on revocation. The decision and order of the Council on such appeal shall
be final and conclusive.
§ 255-13. Exemptions. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6;
4-11-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-15]
Accredited representatives of all bona fide religious, veterans, civic or
charitable organizations, the Rescue Squad and public utility corporations
shall be exempted from compliance with § 255-3A(7) through A(9) inclusive
and § 255-5 hereof, but all nonreligious groups shall pay the sum as
provided in Chapter 155, Fees, upon the issuance of a badge. Local
organizations of these types need only advise the Police Department of their
intention to solicit or sell and the nature of their operation.
§ 255-14. Hours of operation. [Amended 5-28-1998 by Ord. No.
1998-14]
(4) Conviction for any crime or misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business of peddling, soliciting or canvassing in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a menace to
the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for such revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior
to the date set for such hearing.
A. No commercial soliciting and/or peddling shall take place on Sundays
or other than between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
weekdays, except by appointment prearranged by the prospective
purchaser.
B. Notwithstanding the above, any nonprofit, not-for-profit, bona fide
religious, veterans, civic or charitable organizations, the Rescue Squad
and public utility organizations or any other bona fide organization
§ 255-11 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 255-14
246:649
§ 255-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General
Penalty.
Chapter 257
PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 255.
§ 257-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public with regard to the
ever-increasing sales of gold, silver, other precious metals and gems and to
ensure that such purchases are bona fide and legal and that the seller is the
lawful owner of said defined gold, silver, other precious metals and gems.
§ 257-2. License required; advertising.
§ 257-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
which is exempted from full compliance of this chapter by § 255-13
shall be allowed to canvass the Borough between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m. on such days as set forth in the request for canvassing.
A. No person, partnership or corporation shall engage in the business of
the purchase of precious metals and gems and all forms of previously
owned jewelry without first obtaining a license from the Borough Clerk.
Said license shall bear a number issued by the Borough Clerk and shall
be prominently displayed within the licensed premises.
B. Advertising in any print or electronic media or by sign that precious
metals and/or gems are being bought in any location within the
Borough of South River shall constitute engaging in business for the
purpose of this chapter. No person shall place or cause to be placed any
paid print advertisement for the purchase of gems and/or precious
metals without stating in said advertisement the license number issued
to the individual or entity by the Borough of South River. Failure to state
or indicate the license number shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 255-14 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 257-3
246:650
REGULATED ACTIVITY — The purchase of any item containing gold or
silver or gems or any other precious metals, except for coins, for subsequent
resale purposes and not for personal use.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person, partnership or corporation who,
through any means, buys or sells gold, silver, precious metals or jewelry,
and includes anyone advertising the purchase or sale of any of the
aforementioned items. The business of secondhand dealer shall not be
deemed to include:
§ 257-4. Application process; issuance or denial of license;
hearings.
A. Judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators.
Occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from private
homes.
B.
C. Auctions of real estate.
The occasional sale, purchase or exchange of coins or stamps by a
person at his permanent residence or in any municipally owned
building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting coins or stamps
and who does not solicit the sale, purchase or exchange of such coins
or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign, handbill,
newspaper, magazine, radio, television or other form of printed or
electronic advertising.
D.
A. Upon receipt of an application by the Borough Clerk completed
pursuant to this chapter, the Police Department shall make an
investigation of the prospective licensee pursuant to this chapter for
the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant for licensing.
Such investigation shall include but shall not be limited to the following:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in Subsection A of the
definition of "secondhand dealer" in § 257-3 herein, although
nothing in this section shall be construed to warrant denial of a
license solely on the basis of lack of experience.
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license.
(3) Any criminal record of the applicant.
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of those articles and
goods referred to in Subsection A of the definition of "secondhand
dealer" in § 257-3 herein, and other factors bearing upon whether
the licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
§ 257-3 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 257-4
246:651
§ 257-5. Application fee; bond; expiration of license.
section, however, shall not be construed to require denial of any
license solely on the grounds that the business is not conducted
from a fixed location.
B. The Police Department shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
chapter within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Borough Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not been
received by the Police Department within that period, the Chief of
Police may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
C. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend grant or denial of the requested license to the Borough
Council. The recommendation of the Chief of Police shall be in writing
and, in the case of a recommendation of denial, shall state fully and
specifically the reasons for said recommendation. If the Borough
Council accepts the recommendation of the Chief of Police to deny any
license, the Borough Council shall notify the applicant, by certified mail,
within 10 days of such denial and forward to the applicant a statement
of the reason or reasons for such denial. Grounds for recommending
denial of a license by the Chief of Police may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to the business for which the applicant seeks a license pursuant
to this chapter. A license may be denied if the investigation conducted
by the Police Department reveals conviction of the applicant or any of
its principal officers or employees of any crime or disorderly persons
offense involving theft or receiving stolen goods, whether such
conviction was as a principal or accessory, before or after the fact, or
conspirator. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Chief of Police,
the Borough Clerk shall issue or deny the license accordingly.
D. In the event of a denial of the license by the Borough Council, the
applicant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Borough Council, if
requested, in writing, within 10 days of receiving the notice of denial, at
which time the applicant shall be permitted to introduce such evidence
as he/she shall deem proper. The burden of proof in any such hearing
shall be on the Police Department. The Borough Council shall, within 10
days of the close of the hearing, make known its decision in writing. If
the license is denied, 75% of the fees shall be retuned to the applicant,
the balance going to offset the cost of the investigation.
A. An application for such license shall be filed with the Borough Clerk and
shall be accompanied by a license fee as set forth in § 155-18.1 for the
initial application and a fee as set forth in § 155-18.1 for each annual
renewal for each premises on which the regulated activity is to be
conducted. If, on the effective date of this chapter, a dealer has been in
business for a period not less than one year, the fee for initial
§ 257-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 257-5
246:652
§ 257-6. Records.
application shall be fee as set forth in § 155-18.1, and investigation
pursuant to § 257-4 may be waived by the Borough Clerk.
B. Each licensee shall deliver a bond to the Borough Clerk, executed by
the applicant as principal, with a surety company authorized to do
business under the laws of the State of New Jersey as to surety. The
bond, to be approved by the Borough Attorney, shall be in the penal sum
of $10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance of and
compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of
the Borough in force or which may be adopted respecting the conduct
of this business and conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain
for the benefit of any person or persons who shall have received
judgment against any person licensed under this chapter by reason of
any damage sustained by any such person as having made a sale to such
licensee, due to dishonesty, fraud or deceit practiced in effecting the
purchase of precious metals.
C. Each license shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is
issued.
A. Each dealer shall record in a bound book, non-loose-leaf form, with all
pages numbered in sequence, entries of receipts and disbursements, to
be made in pen or ink. There shall be no space between entries, and
each entry shall be numbered in sequence. All such ledgers shall be
made available for inspection by any law enforcement official of the
Borough of South River upon request and shall contain the following
information:
(1) In the case of purchase:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the seller of the
item. [Amended 5-12-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-10]
(b) The signature of the seller.
(c) A complete description of each item bought, along with a
digital photograph of each item of used jewelry. [Amended
5-12-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-10]
(d) The date and amount of the purchase.
(e) A photocopy of the seller’s photograph-bearing, valid state- or
federal-issued driver’s license or other government-issued
form of identification bearing a photograph. [Amended
5-12-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-10]
B. These records shall be retained by the dealer for a period of one year
and shall be subject to the inspection of any authorized police officer of
the Borough of South River. [Amended 5-12-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-10]
§ 257-5 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 257-7
246:653
§ 257-7. Notification to the Police Department.
Upon completion of the said sale of precious metals, a completed copy of a
South River Police, Record of Sale or Trade of Precious Metals Form, along
with a photocopy of the identification utilized by the seller, will be delivered
to South River Police Department with 24 hours of the transaction.
§ 257-8. Restrictions.
§ 257-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, as defined above, who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, within
the discretion of the Municipal Judge. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed in each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 258
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 169.
Housing standards — See Ch. 188.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 198.
Littering — See Ch. 214.
A. The licensee under this chapter shall retain any articles or goods
referred to in the definition of "secondhand dealer" in § 257-3 herein in
the form in which they were purchased for a period not less than 10
business days following the delivery of the record of the purchase of
that jewelry to the Police Department. [Amended 5-12-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-10]
B. No licensee under this chapter shall purchase any item covered by this
chapter from any person under the age of 18.
C. If any licensee under this chapter shall be convicted of robbery,
burglary, theft, receiving stolen goods or any other crime involving
moral turpitude, the Borough Council of the Borough of South River
may, after notice and hearing, revoke the license issued to such
licensee.
D. A licensee shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he notifies the Borough Clerk, in writing, of the
street address of said new location.
§ 257-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 257-9
246:654
ARTICLE I
Combustible Waste and Vegetation on Vacant Lots
[Adopted 10-9-1950 (Ch. 151, Art. I, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 258-1. Accumulation of combustible litter.
Accumulation of combustible waste or litter of any kind on vacant lots or in
any open space is hereby prohibited.
§ 258-2. Overgrowth of vegetation. [Amended 6-17-1992 by Ord. No.
1992-20]
The owners of vacant lots or open spaces of any kind shall not permit them
to become infested with any overgrowth of grass, vines, ragweed or other
weeds and/or vegetation which may constitute a fire hazard, a nuisance or
a menace to the health and welfare of the residents of the Borough of South
River.
§ 258-3. Notice to remove overgrowth. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord.
No. 1977-6; 6-17-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-20]
§ 258-4. Notice to remove combustible waste.
A. It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works and Deputy Director
of Public Works to report to the Mayor and Council from time to time on
the condition of such vacant lots and open spaces within the Borough.
B. When, in the opinion of the governing body, there exists a violation of
the provisions of § 258-2 of this chapter on any vacant lot or open space
within the Borough, the Borough Clerk shall cause to be served upon
the owner of the property a written notice of violation, advising the
owner of the nature of the violation, directing the owner to remove all
such overgrowth within seven days of receipt of such written notice and
advising the owner that failure to do so shall result in the necessary
work being accomplished by the Borough, with the cost thereof to be
assessed against the owner and to become a municipal lien against the
real property. Upon the failure of the owner to comply with said notice,
the governing body may proceed forthwith to act in accordance with the
terms of the aforesaid notice.
A. It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to report to the
Mayor and Council from time to time on the existence of any
accumulations of combustible waste material on vacant lots and open
spaces within the Borough. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6]
B. When, in the opinion of the governing body, there exists a violation of
the provisions of § 258-1 of this chapter on any vacant lot or open space
within the Borough, the Borough Clerk shall cause to be served upon
the owner of the property a written notice of violation, advising the
owner of the nature of the violation, directing the owner to remove all
such combustible waste and/or litter within a specified time of receipt
§ 258-1 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 258-4
246:655
§ 258-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
Violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article
I, General Penalty. This provision shall be construed to provide a penalty in
addition to that set forth in §§ 258-3B and 258-4B of this article.
of such written notice and advising the owner that failure to do so shall
result in the necessary work being accomplished by the Borough, with
the cost thereof to be assessed against the owner and to become a
municipal lien against the real property. Upon the failure of the owner
to comply with said notice, the governing body may proceed forthwith
to act in accordance with the terms of the aforesaid notice. [Amended
6-17-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-20]
C. No person shall set fire to any brush on any vacant lot for the clearance
of the same unless permission is first obtained from the Chairman of the
Fire Committee or Chief of the Fire Department.
§ 258-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 258-5
246:656
ARTICLE II
Junk, Abandoned Vehicles and Rubble
[Adopted 5-17-1965 (Ch. 151, Art. II, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 258-6. Prohibited disposal.
No person shall, within the limits of the Borough of South River:
§ 258-7. Investigation and report.
Upon complaint of any resident or property owner of the Borough of South
River or any employee of said Borough, or upon his own motion, the Health
Officer or Police Chief or their designated agents shall make an
investigation of the condition complained of and report thereon in writing
to the Borough Clerk for the Mayor and Council.
§ 258-8. Notice to owner.
When, in the opinion of the governing body, the land in question is found
to be in such condition as to be in violation of § 258-6 hereof, the Borough
Clerk shall notify the owner or possessor of said lands complained of, in
writing, either personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested,
A. Throw, dump, cast or deposit paper, paper products, bottles, tin cans,
containers, automobile parts, junk, unusable machines or parts of
machines, metal, trash, garbage, debris or other waste materials upon
open fields, woods or private property or upon or along any public
street, highway or other public place.
B. Keep, store, abandon or leave upon any parcel of land, street, road,
alleyway or parkway in the Borough of South River any motor vehicle
not currently used for transportation and not being licensed for the
current year or which cannot be readily operated under its own power;
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to
prohibit the placing, keeping, storing or abandonment of any such
motor vehicle in a garage or other building in the Borough nor the
ownership and operation of any duly licensed junkyard.
C. Allow to remain upon any lot or parcel of land for a longer period than is
reasonably necessary to effect its removal, the rubble and debris from a
demolished building or structure, and the owner or owners of such lot
or parcel of land shall be responsible for effecting such removal and for
the filling or barricading of any depressions resulting from such
demolition; provided, however, that if such demolition is effected by the
Borough or its contractor under the provisions of Chapter 129,
Construction Codes, Uniform, or under the provisions of Chapter 188,
Housing Standards, the rubble and debris shall be removed by the
Borough or its contractor and the cost of removal shall be assessed
against the lot or parcel of land. [Added 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
§ 258-6 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 258-8
246:657
to take such steps as will effectively remove such violation from said land
within 10 days after receipt of said notice.
§ 258-9. Reinspection.
The Health Officer or Police Chief or their designated agents shall reinspect
said lands after the ten-day period shall have expired and shall report in
writing to the Borough Clerk for the Mayor and Council whether or not the
unlawful condition complained of and previously found to exist in violation
of this article has been abated or remedied.
§ 258-10. Remedial action by Borough.
In the event that the owner or possessor of said lands shall refuse or neglect
to abate or remedy the condition complained of and which constitutes a
violation of this article after said 10 days' notice, the Mayor and Council
shall cause the condition complained of to be abated and remedied.
§ 258-11. Assessment of costs.
Upon the removal of any of the materials prohibited to be stored or
abandoned on lands by this article by or under the direction of such officer
or officers of the Borough in cases where the owner or tenant shall have
refused or neglected to remove same in the manner and within the time
provided above, such officer or officers shall certify the cost thereof to the
Mayor and Council, who shall examine the certificate and, if found correct,
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against such lands, and
such cost shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon said lands, the same to bear interest at the same
rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and
in the same manner as taxes.
§ 258-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6; 6-26-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-16]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
Each violation of any of the provisions of this article and each day that such
violation continues shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 258-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 258-12
246:658
ARTICLE III
Vacant Properties
[Adopted 9-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-17109 (Ch. 151, Art. III, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 258-13. Definitions. [Amended 2-24-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-04]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Shall include any private title holder, any agent of a private
title holder having authority to act with respect to an abandoned or vacant
property, any foreclosing entity that has filed a notice with the Municipal
Clerk pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127,
Sec. 17, as amended by P.L. 200, c. 296), or any other entity determined by
the Code Enforcement Officer to have authority to act with respect to the
property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Any building used or to be used for a commercial
or residential use, which is not legally occupied or at which substantially
all lawful construction operations or occupancy has ceased, and which is
in either an unsafe condition or where the exterior of such property is not
maintained in accordance with the Borough's property maintenance code;
provided, however, that any property that contains all building systems
in working order and is being actively marketed by its owner for sale or
rental shall not be deemed vacant. Properties that meet the aforementioned
criteria and are subject to a summons and complaint in an action for
foreclosure shall be deemed vacant property in accordance with P.L. 2014,
c. 35.110 Property deemed to be "abandoned property" in accordance with
the meaning of such term in the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act,
N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall also be deemed to be vacant property for the
purposes of this section.
§ 258-14. General requirements.
A. Sixty days after the effective date of this article or 30 days after a
building or lot becomes vacant as defined within this article, the owner
shall file a registration statement for each such vacant property with
the Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided by the Code
Enforcement Officer for such purposes. The registration shall remain
valid for one year. The owner shall be required to renew the registration
annually as long as the building or lot continues to be vacant as defined
herein and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the amount
prescribed within this article.
B. The owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer within 30 days of
any change in the registration information by filing an amended
109. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. III, Vacant or Unoccupied
Buildings, adopted 5-12-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-9, as amended.
110. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s.
§ 258-13 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 258-14
246:659
§ 258-15. Registration requirements.
registration statement on a form provided by the Code Enforcement
Officer for such purpose.
C. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Borough of South
River against the owner or owners of the property.
A. The owner of vacant property shall provide the following information to
the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee on the registration form
or form(s) prescribed by the Code Enforcement Officer:
(1) Name, address, e-mail address and contact telephone number of
the owner; the owner's address must include a street address; a
post office box is not acceptable;
(2) Name, address, e-mail address and contact telephone number of
any local agent(s) or representative for the building or lot;
(3) Name, address, e-mail address and contact telephone number of
the person assigned to the property for the security and
maintenance of the building or lot;
(4) Common address and tax assessor's block and lot designation of
the building or lot;
(5) The date on which the building became vacant;
(6) Proof of utility (gas, electric, water) connections or disconnections;
and
(7) Any other information reasonably required by the Borough to
ensure the safety of all persons and to prevent neglect.
B. Any government entity that owns vacant property will be exempt from
the provisions of this article. For purposes of this article, the holder of a
FHA mortgage, HUD mortgage, or any other federally insured
mortgage shall not be considered a government entity and shall not be
exempt from the provisions of this article. The owner of any property
that is acquired by the owner through the foreclosure of a FHA
mortgage, HUD mortgage or any other federally insured mortgage shall
also not be exempt from the provisions of this article.
C. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered vacant property by
service of the notice of process on the authorized agent. Any owner who
has designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
§ 258-14 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 258-15
246:660
§ 258-16. Vacant property inspection.
After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration statement
and upon reasonable notice, the owner of any vacant property shall provide
access to the Borough of South River to conduct an exterior and interior
inspection of the building to determine compliance with the municipal Code
during the period covered by the initial registration or any subsequent
renewal.
§ 258-17. Requirements for owners of vacant properties.
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the
Borough of a change of an authorized agent or until the owner files a
new annual registration statement.
D. The owner is required to update the form within 30 days of a change of
any information contained within the form.
E. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Borough of South
River against the owner or owners of the vacant property.
F. The Code Enforcement Officer may identify abandoned properties
through his/her routine inspection process, as well as through
notification by residents or other community groups that a property
may be eligible for inclusion on the registry. Notice will be served upon
or sent by mail to the owner and will be deemed received by the owner
upon personal delivery or five days after service by first-class mail.
A. The owner of any vacant property, and any person maintaining,
operating or collecting rent for any such property shall, within 30 days:
(1) Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Code of the
Borough of South River and as per the specifications established by
the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for
securing abandoned and/or vacant properties.
(2) Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized agent for
the purpose of service of process (if designated pursuant to this
article) and the person responsible for day-to-day supervision and
management of the property, if such person is different from the
owner or authorized agent. The sign shall be of a size and placed in
such a location so as to be visible from the nearest public street or
sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller than eight
inches by 10 inches and shall state "WARNING: THIS BUILDING IS
SECURED PURSUANT TO THE CODE OF THE BOROUGH OF
SOUTH RIVER. ANYONE ENTERING THIS BUILDING WITHOUT
AUTHORIZATION WILL BE SUBJECT TO ARREST"; and
§ 258-15 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 258-17
246:661
(3) Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign
until the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until
repair or rehabilitation of the property is complete.
B. The owner of any vacant property and any person maintaining such a
property shall within 60 days:
(1) Register the vacant property of which they are in possession.
(2) Ensure that all bushes and trees are trimmed and that they do not
interfere with neighboring properties.
(3) Ensure that grass does not exceed eight inches in height and that
all grass clippings are removed from the lot when the grass is cut.
(4) Vacant properties must be clear of all vehicles: cars, boats,
campers, etc.
(5) All sidewalks bordering vacant properties must be maintained and
be cleared of snow, ice, tripping hazards, obstructions, garbage,
litter and debris.
(6) The owner or owner's agent shall perform regular weekly
inspections of the vacant property to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this section.
(7) No unoccupied or vacant building shall contain any space utilized
for the storage of any junk, rubbage, waste, furniture, building
materials, flammable liquids or any other materials not intended to
be used in the existing building.
(8) The boarding up of doors and windows shall not be permitted
except with the permission of the Code Enforcement Officer. When
allowed, doors and windows shall be boarded up and covered with
no less than one-half-inch exterior plywood or equivalent and be
painted the same color as the body of the building. In no case shall
boarding up of doors and windows be permitted in excess of six
months.
(9) Any yard area (front, side and rear) adjacent to an unoccupied or
vacant building shall be cleared and maintained free of trash, solid
debris or any other materials that cause litter and accumulate to an
unhealthy and blighting proportion.
(10) Any yard area of an unoccupied or vacant building shall not be
utilized for the storage of any materials unless said materials are
being used on site for the renovation, construction, repair or
demolition of said building.
(11) If a vacant building is found to be infested with rodents, insects or
vermin, the owner shall immediately upon notice undertake an
expedient means of extermination of such nuisances. Such
§ 258-17 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 258-17
246:662
§ 258-17.1. Fees. [Amended 2-24-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-04]
The initial registration fee for each vacant property shall be $200. The fee
for subsequent renewals shall be $100. The renewal fee for the annual
registration shall be due on the yearly anniversary of the initial registration.
The registration fee will not be prorated or refunded.
§ 258-17.2. Violations and penalties.
extermination shall be certified by an approved exterminator and
proof of the same provided to the Code Enforcement Officer.
(12) If there are any doors or appliances in the structure, all such doors
shall be locked or removed in order to deny entry to individuals
where the potential for physical harm or death may result if said
door should close and prevent the individual's escape.
(13) Every foundation, exterior wall and exterior roof shall be
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed
thereon.
(14) Every yard shall be properly graded so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water.
(15) Any unoccupied or vacant building shall have all utilities, including
but not limited to gas, electric, water and sewer, turned off and/or
disconnected, with sewer service to be sealed at the trap of said
property.
(16) The exterior of the premises and condition of accessory structures
shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all
buildings thereon shall reflect the level of maintenance in keeping
with the standards of the neighborhood in such that the
appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute to a
blighting factor for adjoining property owners or an element
leading to the progressive deterioration and downgrading of the
neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of property value.
C. If the owner of the vacant property fails to comply with any provisions
of this section, the Borough of South River shall take the necessary
steps to bring the property into compliance with this section. All costs
incurred by the Borough in connection with its efforts to bring the
property into compliance shall be forwarded to the Tax Collector for
inclusion as a municipal lien on the property.
A. Any owner who is not in full compliance with this section or who
otherwise violates any provision of this section or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$250 and not more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
§ 258-17 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 258-17.2
246:663
Fines assessed under this section shall be recoverable from the owner
and shall be a lien on the property.
B. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement in
time, failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, and/or failure to comply with any other provisions of this
article shall be deemed to be a violation hereunder.
§ 258-17.2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 258-17.2
246:664
ARTICLE IV
Placement of Objects on Windowsills or Ledges of Buildings
[Adopted 4-19-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-12 (Ch. 151, Art. IV, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 258-18. Restrictions.
There shall not be allowed any type of container, pot, item, decorative
structure or any type of personal property to be stored, exhibited or placed
on a windowsill, window ledge or any other type of building ledge of any
building with said ledge, windowsill or other projection having a height of
greater than first-floor level, unless said items are permanently affixed to
said commercial/residential structure.
§ 258-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty. Each
violation of any of the provisions of this article and each day that such
violation continues shall be deemed and taken as a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 258-18 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 258-19
246:665

ARTICLE V
Unfit Buildings
[Adopted 8-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-30111]
§ 258-20. Definitions.
The definitions of the terms used in this chapter shall be the same as they
appear in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, as may be amended from time to time, and are
as follows:
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outhouse and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of
South River.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality,
county or state relating to health, fire, building regulations or to other
activities concerning buildings in the municipality.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The officer, officers, board or body who is authorized
by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed herein and by N.J.S.A.
40:48-3 et seq. The public officer authorized to enforce this chapter and
exercise the powers herein shall be a Public Officer Board comprised of
those officers in charge of any department or branch of the government
of the Borough relating to health, fire, building regulations or to other
activities concerning buildings in the Borough. The Business Administrator,
Chief of Police, Borough Attorney and Borough Engineer shall serve in an
advisory capacity to the Public Officer Board which shall meet at least six
times annually and report to the Mayor and Council every six months. The
Board shall identify and monitor abandoned and unfit buildings, unabated
violations, the status of notices of violation, placement of liens, imposition
of penalties and municipal court proceedings.
§ 258-21. Procedure for and service of complaints and orders;
abatement and demolition orders; costs; powers of public officer.
A. Complaint. Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a
public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality
charging that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use or whenever it appears to the public officer or any employee or
agent of the branches of government referenced herein (on his/her own
111. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. V, Abandoned Property List,
adopted 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-60.
§ 258-20 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 258-21
246:667
motion) that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a
basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner
of and parties in interest in such building a notice/complaint stating
the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will
be held before the business administrator as designated agent of the
public officer at a place therein fixed no less than seven days nor more
than 30 days after the serving of said complaint; that the owner and
parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at
the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence
prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings before the
public officer. In the event that the owner and/or parties in interest
cannot be located, the public officer shall cause said notice/complaint
to be published in a newspaper circulating in the Borough once a week
during two consecutive weeks at least seven days prior to the hearing
date. [Amended 7-13-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-27]
B. Order for abatement or demolition; costs to become lien.
(1) If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that
the building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use, he shall state, in writing, his findings of fact in
support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order
requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the said building
to be made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall
be set forth in the order or at the option of the owner to vacate or
have said building vacated and closed within the time set forth in
the order.
(2) If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the
owner fails to repair, alter or improve the said building within the
time specified in the order, then the owner shall be required to
remove or demolish said building within a reasonable time as
specified in the order of removal.
(3) If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve
or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
public officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or
improved, or to be vacated and closed. The public officer may cause
to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a
placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this
building is prohibited and unlawful."
(4) If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the building, the public officer may cause such building to be
removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or
§ 258-21 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 258-21
246:668
demolition thereof after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids
therefor.
(5) The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert
witnesses' fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the
course of any proceeding taken under this chapter determined in
favor of the municipality and such cost of such repairs, alterations
of improvements or vacating and closing or removal or demolition,
if any, or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after
deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials
derived from such building or from any contract for removal or
demolition thereof shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred.
(a) If the building is removed or demolished by the public officer,
he shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be
credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof,
including the clearance and, if necessary, leveling of the site,
the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived
from any contract for the removal or demolition of the building.
(b) If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs
exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the
aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the
custodian of the records of tax liens, and a copy thereof shall
be forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail.
(c) If the total of the credits exceed such costs, the balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be
directed by such Court and shall be disbursed according to the
order or judgment of the Court to the persons found to be
entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such Court.
(d) Any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the
date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary
manner in the Superior Court to contest the certificate.
(6) If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building,
the public officer may, after taking such measures as may be
necessary to make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment
in summary proceedings for the demolition thereof and the
imposition of costs as a lien on the real property.
(7) Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any
way the power of the Borough to define and declare nuisances and
to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or
otherwise, nor is anything in this chapter intended to limit the
authority of the enforcing agency or construction official under the
State Uniform Construction Code Act, P. L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A.
§ 258-21 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 258-21
246:669
52:27D-119 et seq.), or any rules or regulations adopted
thereunder.
C. Service of complaints and orders.
(1) Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this
chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by
certified mail.
(2) If the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit
to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon
such persons may be made by publishing the same once in a
newspaper printed and published in the municipality or, in the
absence of such newspaper, in one printed and published in the
county and circulating in the municipality in which the buildings
are located.
(3) A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on premises affected by the complaint or order.
(4) A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged
for record with the Middlesex County Clerk.
D. Powers of public officer.
(1) The public officer shall have the right to exercise such powers as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the
purposes and provisions of this chapter including the following
powers, in addition to the others granted herein:
(a) To investigate the building conditions in the Borough in order
to determine which buildings therein are unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use;
(b) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and
receive evidence;
(c) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making
examinations, provided that such entries shall be made in such
manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the
persons in possession,
(d) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and
employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of
this chapter;
(e) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter
to such officers and agents as he may designate.
(2) Any action taken using revenues derived from the local property
tax shall be taken only after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids
§ 258-21 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 258-21
246:670
§ 258-22. Building standards determination; remedies; assessment
and collection of costs; Emergency Demolition Fund;
administration.
therefor, pursuant to the provisions of the Local Public Contracts
Law, P.L. 1971, c. 198, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., unless the action
is necessary to prevent imminent danger to life, limb or property.
A. Standards.
(1) A public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in
such building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or
safety of the occupants of such a building, the occupants of
neighboring buildings or other residents of the Borough. Such
conditions shall be deemed to include the standards of habitability
of N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.1 et seq., and the following (without limiting the
generality of the foregoing):
(a) Defects herein increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other
calamities.
(b) Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities.
(c) Dilapidation.
(d) Disrepair.
(e) Structural defects.
(f) Uncleanliness.
(g) Failure to comply with the requirements of the Building or
Construction Codes or the certificate of occupancy.
(2) A vacant structure, which is not in danger of structural collapse,
may be deemed a public nuisance and an unsafe structure, inimical
to the welfare of the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents of the Borough, and the public officer may cause the
boarding of the structure or the abatement of the unsafe condition
pursuant to the procedures within this chapter.
(3) A building or buildings, or parts thereof, which have been damaged
to such an extent that nothing remains but the walls, or parts of the
walls and other supports, shall, regardless of the safety and
sturdiness of those remaining walls or parts thereof, be deemed
inimical to the welfare of the residents of the Borough, and the
public officer may cause the repair or the demolition of the
building, buildings or parts thereof pursuant to the procedures
within this chapter.
(4) The public officer may use any additional standards in any building
or structures code adopted by the Borough of South River.
§ 258-21 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 258-22
246:671
B. Remedies. Any person aggrieved by an order or complaint issued by a
public officer under this chapter may, within 30 days after the posting
and service of such order, bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain
the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order and for
any other appropriate relief. The court may proceed in the action in a
summary manner or otherwise. The remedy herein provided shall be
exclusive, and no person affected by an order of the public officer shall
be entitled to recover any damages for action taken pursuant thereto,
or because of noncompliance by any person with any order of the public
officer.
C. Assessment and collection of demolition costs. Whenever the Borough
undertakes the removal or demolition of any building or structure
which is dangerous to human life or the public welfare or which
constitutes a fire hazard, the Borough may, in addition to assessing the
cost of such removal or demolition as a municipal lien against the
premises, authorize the institution of an action at law for the collection
thereof in the Superior Court.
D. Emergency demolition fund.
(1) Any building or buildings, or parts thereof, which have come into a
state of disrepair through neglect, lack of maintenance or use, fire,
accident or other calamities or through any other act rendering the
building or buildings, or parts thereof, in a state of disrepair, to the
extent that the building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, shall be deemed inimical to the welfare of the residents of
the Borough of South River, and the public officer may exercise his
powers to repair, demolish or cause the repairing or demolition of
the building or buildings, or parts thereof, pursuant to Subsections
B and C of this section.
(2) The public officer, to finance the costs of accomplishing the
purpose of Subsection A, shall have the power to accept gifts or
grants from private or public agencies.
(3) All funds received pursuant to Subsection B shall be placed in
separate municipal fund, designated as the "Emergency Demolition
Fund," to be used for demolition-related activities. The public
officer shall have the sole discretion in determining which funds
will be accepted and the time and manner of all expenditures
necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
E. Administrative process and procedure. Process and procedures for the
administration of this chapter shall be governed by the sections herein
and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 and 40:48-2.12a et seq., as amended.
§ 258-22 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 258-22
246:672
ARTICLE VI
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 4-3-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-5]
§ 258-23. Adoption of standards by reference.
§ 258-24. Registration.
A. Property Maintenance Code. The International Property Maintenance
Code 2000, together with all amendments, supplements, revisions and
updates, as the same are approved and published every three years by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of South River in the State
of New Jersey for the control of all buildings and structures, both
residential and commercial, which are located within the Borough of
South River, and a copy of the International Property Maintenance Code
2000 shall be on file in the Office of the Borough Clerk of the Borough of
South River.
B. Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law. The Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:10-1, et seq. is hereby adopted
and incorporated herein, for the maintenance and control of all hotel
and multiple dwellings as defined by the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling
Law and copy of said documents shall be on file in the Office of the
Borough Clerk of the Borough of South River.
C. Uniform Fire Code. The Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:18-1 et seq.,112 is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein for the purpose of establishing a system for the enforcement of
minimum fire standards for all buildings and structures located within
the Borough of South River.
A. Every owner of any building or structure, other than owner-occupied
single-family, which comes under the provisions of this article, shall,
within 30 days of the enactment of this article, file with the Borough of
South River a written registration statement (hereinafter referred to as
an "owner registration statement") upon a form designated by the
Borough Clerk and made available to the public; said form shall contain
the following information:
(1) The names and addresses of the owners in title of the property.
(2) If the record owner is a corporation, the names of the register
agent that will accept all legal notices on behalf of the corporation.
(3) If the owner is an entity other than an individual, the name and
address of each partner and/or owner or person having a
beneficiary interest. In the case of a corporation, the names and
addresses of each stockholder if the total number of stockholders is
112. Editor's Note: See now N.J..A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq. of the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 258-23 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 258-24
246:673
§ 258-25. Inspections. [Amended 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
20 or fewer. In the event, with regard to corporate ownership, the
registry shall disclose the names and addresses of any stockholder
who either owns directly or beneficially 10% of the stock of the
corporation.
(4) The names, address and telephone number of the managing agent
of the premises, if any.
(5) The names, address and telephone number, including the dwelling
unit, apartment or room number, of the superintendent, janitor,
custodian or other individual employed by the record owner or
managing agent to provide regular maintenance service, if
applicable.
(6) The name, address and telephone number of an individual or
representative of the record owner or managing agent who may be
reached or contacted at any time in the event of an emergency
affecting the premises or property or any unit or dwelling or
commercial space therein, who has authority to make emergency
decisions concerning the building or property and any repair
thereto or expenditure in connection therewith.113
B. Said form shall be obtained from and filed with the Borough Clerk.
A. Property Maintenance Code. The Borough of South River shall have the
right to conduct inspections on all structures that come within this
article. All inspections conducted pursuant to this article shall be
performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the current
International Property Maintenance Code, with the exception that any
inspections conducted pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code shall be
performed in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Uniform
Fire Code and any inspections under the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling
Law shall be performed in accordance with the Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Law114. The Borough of South River may at any time contract
with third-party agencies to conduct said inspections.
B. Certificate of occupancy. No person, agency, corporation, partnership,
firm, company, owner, real estate agent, broker or any other individual
shall hereafter sell a newly constructed home or reconstruct a home or
business that cannot be occupied during construction, without first
obtaining from the office of the Construction Official a certificate of
occupancy stating that at the time of the proposed sale or
reconstruction by such person, the premises complies with all
applicable ordinances of the Borough of South River.
113. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection A(7), regarding number of units, which immediately
followed, was repealed 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10.
114. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.
§ 258-24 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 258-25
246:674
§ 258-26. Procedures. [Amended 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-29;
12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-50; 3-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-10]
C. Certificate of continuing occupancy. No person, agency, corporation,
partnership, firm, company, owner, real estate agent, broker or any
other individual shall hereafter sell an existing residential or
commercial property without first obtaining from the office of the Code
Enforcement Official a certificate of continuing occupancy stating that
at the time of the proposed sale by such person, the premises complies
with all applicable ordinances of the Borough of South River.
D. In the event the owner or lessor of a premises fails to correct a
nuisance, defect or other violation, following proper notice of same, the
Mayor and Council may adopt a resolution to abate said nuisance,
correct said defect or violation or put said premises in proper condition
in accordance with state laws and local ordinances, at the cost of the
owner or lessor. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12f, the cost expended by
the municipality for such purpose shall be charged to the owner or
lessor and shall become a lien against said premises as provided by law.
A. Property Maintenance Code. All inspections conducted pursuant to this
article shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth
in the International Property Maintenance Code, with the exception
that any inspections conducted pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety
Act115 shall be performed in accordance to said Act, and any inspections
pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law116 shall be conducted
in accordance with procedures set forth therein.
B. Certificate of occupancy. The Construction Official shall prepare
appropriate application forms for a certificate of occupancy and shall
make said forms available in the office of the Construction Official.
These forms shall be requested and completed by the owner, agent,
broker or other individual of such properties stated in § 258-25B,
inspections arranged for and completed, and the certificate granted
before any actual occupancy shall take place. The owner or his designee
shall make application for an inspection under this section at least 10
business days prior to taking occupancy, and the certificate of
occupancy inspection shall occur before occupancy is permitted. The
Construction Official or his designee shall make an inspection and issue
a certificate of occupancy if the building and property complies with the
Building Code and the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of
South River.
C. Certificate of continuing occupancy. The Code Enforcement Official
shall prepare appropriate application forms for a certificate of
continuing occupancy and shall make said forms available in the office
of the Code Enforcement Official. These forms shall be requested and
completed by the owner, agent, broker or other individual of such
115. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
116. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.
§ 258-25 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 258-26
246:675
§ 258-27. Fees.
Fees shall be as provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 258-28. Enforcement.
properties stated in § 258-25C, inspections arranged for and completed,
and the certificate granted before any actual change in occupancy
shall take place. The owner or his designee shall make application
for an inspection under this section at least 10 business days prior to
any change in occupancy, and the certificate of continuing occupancy
inspection shall occur before a change in occupancy is permitted. The
Code Enforcement Official or his designee shall make an inspection and
issue a certificate of continuing occupancy if the building and property
complies with the Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of South
River.
D. The certificate of continuing occupancy as set forth above shall be valid
for a period of 60 days from the date of issue.
E. Violations of the kind described within this chapter must be corrected
by the owner of the unit before the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or certificate of continuing occupancy. The responsibility for
correction of a violation may be assumed by the buyer, with the written
notification and approval of the seller, buyer and Department of Code
Enforcement. At the time of assumption of responsibility, a conditional
certificate of occupancy or a conditional certificate of continuing
occupancy may be issued, and the violation shall be corrected by the
buyer within 30 days of the date of issuance of the conditional
certificate of occupancy or conditional certificate of continuing
occupancy. Said conditional certificate of occupancy or conditional
certificate of continuing occupancy may be extended beyond 30 days
for two additional thirty-day periods to allow work to continue.
F. Any violation of the Electrical Code or Plumbing Code which poses a
major threat to the health, safety or welfare of any potential occupant in
the opinion of the Electrical or Plumbing Subcode Inspector shall be
corrected prior to the issuance of any conditional or final certificate of
occupancy or certificate of continuing occupancy.
A. Property Maintenance Code. As set forth herein and in the International
Property Maintenance Code which has been previously adopted by the
Borough of South River, said Code shall be enforced by the
Construction Official or the Code Enforcement Officers. All penalties
under the International Property Maintenance Code, which has been
adopted by the Borough of South River, are set forth in said Code and
are set forth below as it pertains to this article. The Fire Official shall
enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Code. The Borough of South River may
at any time contract with third-party agencies with respect to the
inspections and enforcement of said Code.
§ 258-26 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 258-28
246:676
§ 258-29. Appeals.
§ 258-30. Appeals Board.
B. The penalty for failure to register or maintain property as set forth in
this article shall be enforced by the Municipal Court of the Borough of
South River and shall be as follows:
(1) As to owners, pursuant to Section 106.4 of the International
Property Maintenance Code:
(a) First offense: $500 to $750.
(b) Second offense: $750 to $1,000.
(c) Third offense: $1,000 to $1,250.
(d) Fourth offense: the landlord/owner shall not be issued a
certificate of rental compliance for the rental unit at which the
offense occurred for a period of one year from the third and
each subsequent violation of this article.
(2) As to tenants, any tenant who is found to have violated this article
shall be subject to fines set forth in Subsection B(1)(a) through (c)
above, an eviction in accordance with applicable state law.
A. Any property owner shall have the right to make an appeal to the South
River Appeals Board with respect to any order and/or fine issued by the
Construction Official with respect to Sections 108, 109, and 110 of the
International Property Maintenance Code 2000, together with all of the
amendments, supplements, revisions and updates to the same.
B. All appeal requests shall be made on forms designated by the
Construction Official and filed within 10 days of said written order,
decision and/or fine of the Construction Official.
A. There shall be established within the Borough of South River an
Appeals Board, which shall have the sole responsibility as set forth
within this chapter. Said Appeals Board shall be comprised of five
members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Borough Council. Said terms of the members shall be three-year terms
and shall be appointed at the reorganization meeting of the governing
body each year, except that the first appointments shall be staggered in
such a way that two members shall be appointed upon the effective date
of this article and shall remain in effect until the reorganization meeting
of the governing body, which shall take place in the year 2009; two
members shall be appointed as of the effective date of this article and
shall remain in effect until the reorganization meeting of the governing
body in the year 2008; and one member shall be appointed as of the
effective date of this article and shall remain in effect until the
reorganization meeting of the governing body in the year 2007.
§ 258-28 PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS § 258-30
246:677
B. The Appeals Board shall meet once per month on a schedule as set forth
by the Appeals Board during its first meeting of each calendar year,
however, if no appeals are filed, said monthly meeting need not take
place.
C. All appeals filed with the Construction Official shall be forwarded to the
Appeals Board within five days of receipt and shall be heard at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Appeals Board as set forth above;
however, said appeal must be received by the Appeals Board at least
five business days prior to said meeting or said appeal shall be heard at
the next succeeding monthly meeting.
§ 258-30 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 258-30
246:678
Chapter 262
RENTAL PROPERTIES
§ 258-30 RENTAL PROPERTIES § 258-30
262:679

ARTICLE I
Landlord/Tenant Registration
[Adopted 4-19-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-13 (Ch. 151, Art. V, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 262-1. Information required.
All landlords, including residential and commercial, shall be required to
keep the following information on all tenants, including tenants commonly
known as "boarders" who rent by the day, week and/or month, for a period
of one year beyond the tenant's vacation of said premises:
§ 262-2. Maintenance of information; duration; cooperation with
law enforcement.
§ 262-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General
Penalty.
A. Name.
B. Address.
C. Forwarding address.
D. Driver's license number, if available.
A. Said information shall be maintained in written form for all tenants
during the term of the tenancy and for one year after the vacation of the
rental unit, and said information shall be supplied to local law
enforcement organizations upon request with respect to any ongoing
investigations of said individuals.
B. The landlord shall not be responsible for updating said information if
information provided by the tenant shall later become invalid due to the
tenant's mobility/move from the forwarding address.
§ 262-1 RENTAL PROPERTIES § 262-3
262:681
Chapter 263
ROLL-OFF DUMPSTERS AND REFUSE CONTAINERS/
DUMPSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Fees — See Ch. 155.
§ 262-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 262-3
262:682
ARTICLE I
Roll-Off Dumpsters
[Adopted 3-13-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-3]
§ 263-1. Permit required.
No person or entity, other than duly authorized servants or agents employed
or engaged by the Borough of South River on behalf of the Borough of
South River, shall park or leave unattended any waste or refuse container
commonly known as a "roll-off dumpster" or "roll-off" container along any
public road, street, right-of-way or public property, under the jurisdiction
of the Borough of South River without first obtaining a written permit
approved by the Chief of Police, or his designee, and issued by the Borough
Clerk upon payment of a fee as set forth hereinafter.
§ 263-2. Application for permit.
§ 263-3. Fees.
A. Application for permit shall be made on forms obtained at the Municipal
Building from the Borough Clerk.
B. Before the permit is issued to park or leave unattended any roll-off
dumpster or roll-off container, the application shall be reviewed and
approved by the Chief of Police, or his designee, who shall certify that
the placement of a roll-off dumpster or roll-off container on or along the
public road, street, right-of-way or public property shall not create an
unreasonable hazard or risk to the health, safety or welfare of the
residents of the Borough of South River.
C. No roll-off dumpster or roll-off container shall be allowed in the
sidewalk area or create a blockage of pedestrian traffic along said
property at which the roll-off dumpster or roll-off container is located.
A. No person shall be granted a permit to park or leave unattended any
roll-off dumpster or any roll-off container along any public road, street,
right-of-way or public property under the jurisdiction of the Borough
unless a refundable deposit has been paid to the Borough Clerk in cash
or by certified check in the amount provided in Chapter 155, Fees,
which deposit shall be used to pay the expenses of repairing and/or
replacing said road, street, right-of-way or other public property in the
event it is deemed that damages have occurred during the time said
roll-off dumpster or roll-off container is left parked or unattended. Upon
removal of the roll-off dumpster or roll-off container, the permittee shall
notify the Director of Public Works who shall dispatch an inspector to
the sight to determine if damage has occurred, and if damage has
occurred, the extent of said damages. Following the inspection of the
sight and determination of damages, if any, the Director of Public Works
shall notify the Borough Clerk who shall promptly notify the permittee if
a refund is available and the amount, if any, of said refund. The
§ 263-1 RENTAL PROPERTIES § 263-3
262:683
§ 263-4. Rules and regulations.
Any roll-off dumpster or roll-off container parked or left on or along any
public road, street, right-of-way or public property under the jurisdiction
of the Borough of South River shall be equipped with a display markers
consisting of all yellow reflective diamond-shaped panels having a minimum
size of 18 inches by 18 inches. These panels shall be mounted at the edge
of the dumpster or container at both ends nearest the path of the passing
vehicles and facing the direction of oncoming traffic. These markers shall
have a minimum mounting height of three feet from the bottom of the
panels to the surface of the roadway. Said mountings shall be to warn
operators of oncoming vehicles of the presence of a traffic hazard requiring
the exercise of unusual care.
§ 263-5. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this chapter shall be by the South River Police
Department who shall issue the appropriate summonses in the event that
any roll-off dumpster or roll-off container is placed along any public road,
street, right-of-way or public property under the jurisdiction of the Borough
of South River without first obtaining the required permits.
§ 263-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person and/or entity who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
permittee shall be forwarded any refund due within 30 days of said
inspection.
B. The fee for permit to park or leave unattended a roll-off dumpster or
roll-off container upon any public road, street, right-of-way or public
property shall be as provided in Chapter 155. Said permit shall be valid
and remain in effect for a period of not more than 30 days. Said permit
made be renewed upon application therefor for an additional period of
30 days at a fee as provided in Chapter 155. No permit shall extend
beyond 60 days.
§ 263-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 263-6
262:684
ARTICLE II
Refuse Containers/Dumpsters
[Adopted 7-12-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-21]
§ 263-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this Chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by Borough of South River or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Means water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface,
is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage
facilities, or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Means the ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 263-8. Prohibited conduct.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semiliquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of South
River.
§ 263-7 RENTAL PROPERTIES § 263-9
262:685
§ 263-9. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions are as follows:
§ 263-10. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of South River.
§ 263-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 263-12. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 263-9 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 263-12
262:686
Chapter 267
SECURITY FOR BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Alarm systems — See Ch. 99.
§ 267-1. Purpose; scope.
§ 267-2. Closing hours; security personnel.
No business or commercial establishment to which the public is invited shall
be open between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Eastern standard
time (2300 and 0500 hours) unless:
A. The purpose of this chapter is the regulation of the opening and closing
hours of all business and commercial establishments to which the
public is invited in the interest of the protection of the employees,
patrons and law enforcement officers. It has been determined that
unprotected and understaffed business and commercial enterprises are
prey to the criminal element in our society during the late night and
early morning hours and that certain security devices must be provided
in order to protect the general public who use these establishments.
B. The provisions and requirements of this chapter shall not apply to nor
include any business or commercial establishment issued a license or
permit for on-the-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or
permitted to carry on a business or commercial activity under the laws
of the United States, the State of New Jersey or other municipal
ordinance not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. The
provisions and requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the
establishment and operation of automated teller machines. [Amended
1-25-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-1]
A. There are two employees on continuous duty in that part of the business
or commercial establishment to which the public is invited; and
B. In addition thereto, the business or commercial establishment shall
employ a security officer or the premises has in operation a security
device approved by the Chief of Police of the Borough of South River
which may consist of a silent and/or audible burglar alarm connected to
a central security monitoring system designed to activate police
response; a closed circuit television connected to a central security
monitoring system designed to activate police response or such other
device which can be activated instantaneously to notify law
enforcement officers that a crime or disorderly persons activity is in
progress.
§ 263-12 SECURITY FOR BUSINESSES § 267-3
267:687
§ 267-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General
Penalty. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 275
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
295.
§ 267-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 267-3
267:688
ARTICLE I
Vacant Property Connections
[Adopted 5-26-1958 (Ch. 157 of the 1977 Code)]
§ 275-1. Legislative declaration.
The failure of the owners of vacant lots to install sanitary sewer and
water main connections to the curbline constitutes a detriment to the
maintenance of well-paved streets in the Borough.
§ 275-2. Duty of Borough Engineer.
Henceforth, prior to the resurfacing of any Borough street, it shall be the
duty of the Borough Engineer to report to the Mayor and Council whether
any vacant properties suitable for construction of buildings or any occupied
properties not having sewer and water connections are located on such
street.
§ 275-3. Procedure for installation; costs.
The Mayor and Council may direct the Borough Clerk to send to the owner
of any such property written notice that sanitary sewer and water main
connections must be installed from the mains to the curbline within 30 days
after the receipt of said notice. Failure of the owner to comply therewith
shall result in the necessary work being accomplished at Borough expense,
with the cost thereof to be assessed against the owner and paid within one
year from the date of the expenditure.
§ 275-1 SECURITY FOR BUSINESSES § 275-3
267:689

ARTICLE II
Sewer Use Charges and Connections
[Adopted 5-14-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-20 (Ch. 158 of the 1977
Code)]
§ 275-4. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall be deemed to have the
meanings herein specified:
DWELLING UNIT — Residential space designed for more or less permanent
occupancy by a family, an individual or group of individuals maintaining a
household with cooking facilities.
HOUSE CONNECTION — The sewer line running from a building to the
property line and connecting with the sewer connection.
PERSON — Any person, firm, association or corporation.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The sewer line extended from the property line
to the main in the street.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — The sanitary sewerage system of the Borough of
South River.
USER CLASSES — Three classes of users shall be established:[Amended
12-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-55]
§ 275-5. Connection to sewer line required.
Any building used, in whole or in part, as a dwelling or which requires or
uses sanitary sewage disposal, now or hereafter erected on any lot abutting
a street in which a sanitary sewer line is now or hereafter constructed, shall
be connected with such sewer line and a toilet or toilets installed therein,
within the appropriate following time period applicable to such building:
"Tax exempt" includes institutions which pay no ad valorem taxes or
receive substantial credits in paying such taxes, except publicly owned
facilities performing local government functions which discharge solely
domestic wastes.
A.
"Industrial and commercial" includes all users which discharge the
equivalent of 25,000 gallons or more of domestic sanitary wastewater
per day.
B.
"Residential" includes single and multifamily dwellings and small
nonresidential and industrial users which introduce no more than the
equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of domestic sanitary wastes.
C.
A. Existing buildings: within 90 days after adoption of this article.
B. New buildings: prior to occupancy thereof.
§ 275-4 SECURITY FOR BUSINESSES § 275-5
267:691
§ 275-6. Application for connection; fee. [Amended 8-14-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-23; 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-37; 8-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-12]
§ 275-7. Compliance with rules and regulations.
Said connection to the sewer system shall comply with the rules and
regulations of the proper municipal department, either now existing or
hereafter adopted.
§ 275-8. Cost of service and house connections. [Amended
12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-34]
Service connections and house connections shall be made at the expense
of the person wishing to connect with the sewer system. The cost of
restoration of the pavement, sidewalks, curb or gutters resulting from the
making of such connection shall be borne by the person connecting with
the sewer system. Maintenance or replacement of service connections,
C. Buildings on a street in which a sanitary sewer line is hereafter
constructed: within 90 days after completion of the construction of such
sewer line.
A. Hereafter, before any new construction shall be made to the sewer
system by any owner of property along the line thereof, said owner shall
make application, in writing, on proper blanks furnished for that
purpose to the Borough. All connection fees to be paid to the Borough
shall be determined annually on January 1 of the calendar year by
calculating the total past capital costs of the Borough's sewer system to
date and dividing that total cost by the number of equivalent, or service,
connections made by the Borough, in order to enable the Borough to
receive the capital cost of its sewer system for users as they enter the
system. The rates for the different size connections shall be posted by
the Utility Department annually in a conspicuous place where permits
are issued.
B. In the event an application requires a determination that a property
may need an increase in sewer capacity, an escrow deposit of $2,500
shall be paid to the South River Utilities Department. The escrow shall
be utilized for the professional services of the Borough Engineer in
conducting a review and analysis of the potential increase in capacity
for the development. The escrow shall be deposited by the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough, or his/her designee, in an account for
such purposes under the sole control of the Borough. Said escrow may
be commingled with similar escrows from other applicants, but
accurate accounts and records shall be kept so as to identify particular
escrows and charges made against the same. At the conclusion of the
Municipal Engineer’s report and analysis, the applicant shall be entitled
to the return of the balance of the escrow.
C. Said rates shall be as provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 275-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 275-8
267:692
house connections and lateral service lines up to the sewer main are the
responsibility of the property owner.
§ 275-9. Factory effluents and industrial wastes.
No factory effluents or industrial or commercial wastes, comprising wastes
other than domestic, shall be discharged into the sewerage system, except
upon compliance with the following rules, regulations and conditions:
A. Each industrial plant making application for permission to discharge
industrial waste into the sewerage system shall furnish all the
information necessary to determine the quantity of such waste and the
nature or quality of the materials therein and other characteristics of
such waste. The industrial plant shall agree in such application to bear
the cost of the original and any subsequent chemical analysis and
laboratory tests.
B. Adequate means shall be provided at each industrial plant connection
with the sewerage system for periodic determination of all
characteristics and concentrations of wastes. Such determination shall
be made at least twice each year, or, if deemed necessary by the
Borough, such determination may be made quarterly. Samples shall be
collected in such manner as to be truly representative of the actual
quality of the wastes, and standard methods of analysis shall be used.
C. Industrial waste discharged or proposed to be discharged into the
sewerage system shall be subject to analysis by the Borough.
D. Industrial plants shall cooperate by adopting such schedules of
discharge as will, without interfering with factory production, minimize
peak concentration.
E. So far as practicable, industrial wastes may be discharged into the
sewerage system with a minimum of pretreatment or without
pretreatment, provided that the consent of the Borough is first
obtained.
F. In the event that the materials in wastes discharged or proposed to be
discharged from any industrial plant or the chemicals in or
characteristics of such wastes cause or threaten injury to the sewers or
sewage treatment plant or impair the sewage treatment process or
unduly increase the cost of operation thereof, said industrial plant shall
produce wastes of acceptable quality before discharge thereof into the
sewerage system, by reducing its peak discharges, by construction of
equalizing tanks, by pretreatment, by partial pretreatment, by
elimination of troublesome wastes or by other approved means.
G. Inasmuch as the difficulties involved in treatment and disposal of
industrial wastes from a particular industry may be mitigated or
aggravated by waste from another industry and the cost of such
treatment and disposal may be decreased or increased thereby, it is not
deemed practicable at this time to fix any numerical standards or
§ 275-8 SECURITY FOR BUSINESSES § 275-9
267:693
§ 275-10. Types of discharge restricted.
No person shall discharge into any public sewer of the Borough of South
River any waste, substance or waters other than such kinds or types of
waters or water-carried wastes for the conveyance of which the particular
public sewer is intended, designed or provided.
§ 275-11. Discharge of unpolluted waters into sanitary sewers
prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any sanitary sewer
any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, cooling water, air-conditioning and refrigerating wastewaters or
unpolluted industrial process waters.
§ 275-12. Regulation of discharge of unpolluted waters.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage or uncontaminated process
water in excessive quantities shall be discharged to storm sewers or to a
natural outlet. Such water shall be discharged only after approval of any
local, county or state regulatory agency having jurisdiction.
§ 275-13. Prohibited discharges into sewers.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewer:
limitations with respect to concentration or quality of industrial wastes.
It is, therefore, the intention of these rules, regulations and conditions
to allow maximum latitude in the use of the sewerage system and to
require control or special procedure by industries only in such cases as
the failure so to do would seriously affect the operation of the sewage
treatment and disposal works or would entail unwarranted expense for
treatment and disposal thereof at said treatment and disposal works.
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
B. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 milligrams per
liter by weight of fat, oil, wax or grease or containing other substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and
150° F.
C. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, alcohol, tar, fuel oil or other flammable
or explosive liquid, solid, gas or vapor.
D. Any garbage, except properly shredded garbage. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Superintendent.
§ 275-9 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 275-13
267:694
E. Any ashes, cinders, stones, sand, mud, straw, shavings or sawdust,
metal, sticks, coarse rubbish, glass, rags, tar, feathers, plastics, waste
rubber, animal guts or tissues, entrails, blood, hair, hides, wood, paunch
manure or any other substance likely to damage, destroy or cause an
obstruction to the flow in any sewer or which may interfere with the
proper operation of the sewage works.
F. Any waters, sewage or wastes having a pH lower than five 5.0 or higher
than 9.5 or having any other corrosive or detrimental property capable
of causing damage or hazard to the sewage works or personnel.
G. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic, poisonous or radioactive
substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process or to constitute a hazard to humans, animals or
marine life or create any hazard in the receiving waters. Radioactive
wastes or materials may be discharged into a public sewer if Conditions
I and II below are met and if either Condition III or IV is also met,
provided that such discharges are in compliance with applicable state
or federal regulations:
(1) Condition I. Such wastes must be readily soluble or dispersible in
water.
(2) Condition II. The gross quantity of all radioactive materials so
discharged must not exceed one curie per year.
(3) Condition III. The daily quantity of any radioactive material, if
diluted by the average daily volume of sewage discharged into the
system from the installation, must not exceed the maximum
concentrations allowed by regulations of the United States Atomic
Energy Commission.
(4) Condition IV. Daily quantities of radioactive materials up to the
maximum permitted by the United States Atomic Energy
Commission may be so discharged, provided that the total monthly
quantities, if diluted by the average monthly volume of sewage
discharged from the installation, do not exceed the concentrations
permissible under Condition III above.
H. Any noxious, malodorous or taste-producing gas, vapor or substance,
such as phenols, capable of creating a public or private nuisance or
which may prove toxic to sewage treatment processes or which may
exceed acceptable limits for discharge to receiving waters.
I. Materials which exert or cause:
(1) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as but not
limited to Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues, or of
dissolved solids, such as but not limited to sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate.
§ 275-13 SECURITY FOR BUSINESSES § 275-13
267:695
§ 275-14. Pretreatment requirements.
(2) Excessive discoloration, such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions.
(3) Unusual biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, chemical
oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
(4) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein.
J. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or
are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
K. Any substance prohibited by any federal, state, county or municipal
regulatory agency or government body, including but not limited to the
Federal Environmental Protection Agency, the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, the Middlesex County Sewage Authority
or the Utility Department of the Borough of South River, as set forth or
determined by the rules, regulations or requirements of such regulatory
agencies or bodies.
A. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 275-9 and which may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment
or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Borough may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
B. If the Borough permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the Borough and of any or all state
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in
writing.
§ 275-13 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 275-15
267:696
§ 275-15. Determination of exclusion of wastes.
In determining whether any waste discharged or proposed to be discharged
into any public sewer is to be excluded, consideration will be given to
the quantity, time or times, rate and manner of discharge, dilution and
character of the waste in question, the size of the sewer into which the
waste is to be discharged, the probable quantity of sewage or other wastes
likely in said sewer and other pertinent facts. Minute quantities of a waste
which would be objectionable in larger quantity may be accepted if
sufficiently diluted when and as discharged or if the quantity discharged is
small as compared to the flow in the receiving sewer, but any permission
to discharge minute quantities of an otherwise excluded waste shall be
revocable at any time by the Borough.
§ 275-16. Pretreatment facilities.
A. At all premises where wastes or substances specified to be excluded
from public sewers by these regulations are present and liable to be
discharged, directly or indirectly, into said sewers, suitable and
sufficient piping layouts, oil, grease, sand and flammable waste traps or
separators, screens, settling tanks, diluting devices, storage or
regulating chambers, treatment, cooling or other equipment and
devices shall be provided. These shall be maintained and properly
operated by the owner of the premises or his agent, at his expense, to
ensure that no waste or substance is discharged in violation of the
requirements of these regulations.
B. On premises where wastes or substances specified to be excluded from
public sewers are present, the Borough may require the owner to
provide, operate and maintain, at his expense, a sampling well or wells,
flow-measuring devices, manholes or other appurtenances, all readily
accessible on the building sewer or drain from said premises near the
point where said sewer or drain connects to the public sewer. By means
of said sampling well or wells, flow-measuring devices or other
appurtenances, the Borough or any public officer having legal
jurisdiction may secure samples of or examine the wastes being
discharged into the public sewer for the purpose of determining
compliance or noncompliance with the requirements of these
regulations.
C. The Borough shall have the right to enter and inspect any part of the
premises served by public sewers upon which there may be reason to
believe that violations of the requirements of these regulations have
occurred or are likely to occur, for the purpose of ascertaining the facts
to such violations or suspended violation or of obtaining samples of
wastes or of inspecting flow-measuring devices or treatment facilities
provided to prevent prohibited discharges.
§ 275-15 SECURITY FOR BUSINESSES § 275-17
267:697
§ 275-17. Excluded wastes prohibited in storm sewers.
No wastewaters or substances which are excluded from sanitary sewers
shall be discharged into any storm sewer.
§ 275-18. Standard of measurement.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be determined
in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Sewage. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
§ 275-19. User charge. [Amended 12-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-55]
Commencing April 1, 1982, and thereafter, an annual sewer user charge
will be paid by all users of the facilities provided by the Borough of South
River and the Middlesex County Utilities Authority (hereinafter referred to
as "MCUA") in accordance with the terms and provisions of this article.
§ 275-20. Review of use and charges; establishment of schedule.
[Amended 12-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-55]
§ 275-21. Flow measurement. [Amended 12-10-1981 by Ord. No.
1981-55]
Wherever actual readings of sewage flow are available, those readings shall
be used in determining flow charges. All industrial users shall be monitored
A. At least once each year, the Borough of South River shall review and
revise, as necessary, sewer use and sewer user charges and shall
establish a schedule of charges by flow, biochemical oxygen demand,
suspended solids, chlorine demand and such other criteria as the
Borough of South River shall deem appropriate. Any charges so
established may provide for the equitable distribution of:
(1) MCUA operations and maintenance charges.
(2) MCUA debt service charges.
(3) Sewer system maintenance and operations charges incurred by the
Borough of South River.
(4) Borough of South River debt service related to the sewer system.
B. The schedule of user charges shall provide for revenue in an amount
equal to the total of the above costs. The schedule of charges, amended
yearly at the time of adoption of the Borough's annual budget or at such
other times as the Borough determines, may reflect changes and/or
adjustments in the charges.
§ 275-17 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 275-21
267:698
for actual flow. Where actual readings of sewage flow are unavailable, flow
will be estimated by any of the following ways:
§ 275-22. Strength measurement. [Amended 12-10-1981 by Ord.
No. 1981-55]
Wherever actual readings of biochemical oxygen demand or suspended
solids or chlorine demand of a user are available, those readings shall be
used in determining charges for the strength of sewage. All industrial and
commercial users shall be monitored or their sewage sampled periodically
to determine the biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids and
chlorine demand characteristics of the sewage. The industrial or
commercial user shall, at its own expense, sample the biochemical oxygen
demand, suspended solids and chlorine demand characteristics of its
sewage at the frequency and according to the method assigned by the
Borough and shall report the results of such sampling to the Borough timely.
§ 275-23. Extraneous flows and prohibition of inflow services.
§ 275-24. Objections to estimates. [Amended 12-10-1981 by Ord.
No. 1981-55]
Any user objecting to any estimate of flow or strength hereunder shall have
the option, at its own expense and cost, of installing metering equipment
on its discharge lines to record actual flow and strength readings. The
metering equipment used, its installation, the location of installation and
the method of sampling shall be subject to review and approval by the
A. For commercial and industrial and tax exempt users, by taking 100% of
the average water flow and/or other meter reading for the year. Credit
for water not discharged into the sanitary sewer may be given to the
user by the Borough, if the user presents proof satisfactory to the
Borough which establishes the amount of water not discharged.
B. The volume of sewage and/or industrial waste from each industrial
establishment may be determined by meters paid for and installed by
users and records combined with municipal and/or private company
water records or from estimates or measurements made by
representatives of the municipality.
A. Any flows or strengths which are not chargeable to a particular user,
whether by reason of the user's being exempted from charges or by
reason of the flow entering the system by infiltration or inflow, shall be
charged to all users proportionately on the basis of flow.
B. No roof drainage, cellar drainage, unpolluted industrial process water,
surface water, waste from hydrants or groundwater from underground
drainage fields shall be admitted or be permitted to drain into the
sewage system. The sewer system is intended to convey sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes only.
§ 275-21 SECURITY FOR BUSINESSES § 275-24
267:699
Borough of South River or its designated representative. The Borough may
order the installation of meters or sampling pits.
§ 275-25. Toxic pollutants.
Any user who discharges into the system toxic pollutants which cause an
increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the treatment
works shall pay for the increased costs.
§ 275-26. Proration of charges.
Any user who connects to the system during any calendar month shall pay
a pro rata user charge based upon the user charge assessed for the current
quarter.
§ 275-27. Method of payment. [Amended 12-10-1981 by Ord. No.
1981-55]
§ 275-28. Exemptions. [Amended 12-10-1981 by Ord. No. 1981-55]
"Public buildings" are defined as those used solely for local municipal
purposes and are excluded from the user charge called for in this article.
The usage of said public buildings shall be treated as extraneous flow, as
defined in § 275-23 above.
§ 275-29. Violations and penalties.
A. Tax exempt and industrial and commercial users shall be invoiced
directly for their use of the sewage treatment system. Industrial and
commercial users shall receive credit for the amount of such charges
which are included in their ad valorem taxes.
B. Sewer user charges shall continue to be charged to residential users
through ad valorem taxes rather than through direct sewer use
charges.
A. Any person found to be violating any provision of these regulations shall
be served by the Borough of South River with a written notice, stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty. Each day
that any violation of these regulations continues and each day that any
person continues to discharge prohibited wastes or substances into any
public sewer shall be deemed to be a separate offense for the purpose
of applying the penalty provided in this section.
C. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable
to the Borough of South River for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the municipality by reason of such violation.
§ 275-24 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 275-29
267:700
ARTICLE III
Illicit Discharges to Storm Sewers
[Adopted 8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-22]
§ 275-30. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by he Borough of South River, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 275-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of South River or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 275-32. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of South
River is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 275-33. Exceptions to prohibition.
The following are exceptions to the prohibition set forth in § 275-32:
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
§ 275-30 SECURITY FOR BUSINESSES § 275-33
267:701
§ 275-34. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Borough of South River Police
Department and/or the South River Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 275-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the
above situation, is limited to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 275-33 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 275-35
267:702
ARTICLE IV
Illicit Connections to Storm Sewers
[Adopted 8-7-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-25]
§ 275-36. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of South River, so
as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 275-37. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of South
River, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of South River or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
§ 275-36 SECURITY FOR BUSINESSES § 275-37
267:703
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 275-38. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of South River any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 275-39. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Borough of South River Police
Department and/or the South River Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 275-40. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 275-37 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 275-40
267:704
Chapter 279
SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Teen Night — See Ch. 103, Art. IV.
Curfew — See Ch. 133.
§ 279-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
SKATEBOARD — A platform or other board which is mounted on wheels
or a board with roller-skate wheels or other similar wheels affixed to the
underside, having no other mechanism or other device with which to steer
or control the direction or movement thereof while being used, operated or
ridden.
§ 279-2. Operation prohibited in certain areas.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to ride or operate a
skateboard upon any sidewalk adjacent to property owned by the South
River Board of Education or upon any property owned or operated by the
South River Board of Education, including but not limited to sidewalks,
parking lot areas, fields and/or steps.
§ 279-3. Rules and regulations.
§ 279-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Persons riding or operating skateboards shall comply with the traffic
laws of the State of New Jersey, the traffic ordinances of the Borough of
South River and such other rules and regulations as may be adopted
from time to time by the governing body of the Borough of South River.
B. The above regulations shall not apply on paths or parts of roadways or
parks set aside for the exclusive use of skateboards.
C. No person riding upon a skateboard shall attach him or herself to any
bicycle or motor vehicle.
D. Any persons riding a skateboard upon an allowed area shall yield the
right-of-way to any pedestrians.
A. Any person under the age of 18 years of age who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter shall have his or her skateboard impounded;
said skateboard shall only be released to the parent or guardian of said
minor, upon issuance of a warning as to the effect of this chapter.
§ 275-40 SKATEBOARDS § 279-4
279:705
§ 279-5. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Borough of South River Police Department to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 282
SOIL ADDITION AND GRADE ALTERATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 174.
Soil removal — See Ch. 284.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 295.
Tree removal and woodlands
management — See Ch. 319.
§ 282-1. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter shall be deemed and construed to have the
same meanings as said definitions located in Chapter 284 of the Code of the
Borough of South River. In addition, the following terms shall be deemed
and construed to have the following meanings:
EXCAVATE — The moving or removal of topsoil, soil, rock or mineral
substance from, in or upon any land in the Borough.
§ 282-2. Permit required; exceptions.
B. Any person under the age of 18 years of age who shall be convicted of a
second offense shall, in addition to having his/her parents or guardians
contacted with respect to said offense, forfeit the skateboard to the
Borough of South River.
C. Any person 18 years of age or older violating any of the provisions of
this chapter may be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, General Penalty.
A. No owner, developer, excavator or other person shall dig, excavate,
scrape or otherwise disturb, add or cause to be added any soil to any
property within the Borough of South River without first making an
application to the Planning Board which shall hear all applications
pertaining to this chapter, except for those applications which are
coterminous with an application which statutorily lies within the sole
jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Both the owner and
operator of the property shall have the responsibility to remove that
portion of soil which was added or changes or alters the grade of the
property within 30 days after due notice is given. Any approved soil
removal permit shall be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 279-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 282-2
282:706
§ 282-3. Applications.
§ 282-4. Consideration of application.
B. Subsection A shall not apply in the following situations:
(1) For the addition of soil used for ornamental plantings and gardens;
provided, however, that said addition does not create an adverse
effect or change or impact the existing drainage patterns or flows
on said property or adjoining properties or any change in the
topography of the premises; or
(2) The addition of soil is not in connection with the construction or
alteration of any basement, foundation, structural retaining wall,
primary or accessory structures on said property and the addition
of said soil does not change the drainage of water or runoff of water
on or from said property.
C. Applications for exemption of the requirements of this chapter shall be
made to the Secretary of the appropriate Board who shall forward said
exemption request to the Borough Engineer. Upon review, the Borough
Engineer shall determine in writing if the exemption is granted or if the
applicant must apply for a soil addition permit.
A. Applications made for the addition of soil shall be made to the South
River appropriate Board and notice shall be given of the hearing in
accordance with the land use procedures set forth in the South River
Borough Code or state statute and the application shall be accompanied
by the following items:
(1) A map of the premises showing the present contour lines and the
proposed future contour lines resulting from the intended addition
or grading of soil based upon a current survey prepared by a New
Jersey licensed professional land surveyor and to be signed and
sealed by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer.
(2) The grades resulting from the intended addition to soil or
regrading in relation to the topography of the premises
demonstrating no adverse impacts to any neighboring properties.
This information may be included in the map required by
Subsection A. [Amended 12-6-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-62]
(3) The proposed dates for the commencement and completion of said
work.
B. Any application to the appropriate Board in furtherance of this chapter
must be accompanied by a filing fee and escrow fee as provided in
Chapter 155, Fees, said escrow fee to be used for professional review of
said application.
A. In considering the application, the appropriate Board shall be guided by
the following factors:
§ 282-2 SOIL ADDITION AND GRADE ALTERATION § 282-4
282:707
§ 282-5. Appeals.
If the application is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision of the
appropriate Board to the Borough Council by filing a notice in writing to
that effect with the Borough Clerk within 10 days after receiving notice
of the decision of the approving Board of the Borough of South River. The
Borough Council shall set a time and place for a hearing and shall so notify
the applicant. The decision of the Council rendered after a hearing shall be
final.
§ 282-6. Enforcement.
The Borough Code Enforcement Officer is hereby designated as the officer
whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter. He shall
from time to time, upon his own initiative and whenever directed by the
Borough Council, inspect the premises for which permits have been granted
to ensure compliance with the terms of the permit and of this chapter.
He shall immediately report all violations to the Borough Council and take
such actions as may be deemed necessary in the chapter. The Borough
Engineer's office shall provide any needed assistance to the Code
Enforcement Officer on an as-authorized basis.
§ 282-7. Compensation of engineer.
The Borough Engineer shall be paid for his services and carrying out his
duties and responsibilities under the terms of this chapter at fees to be set
forth in the Annual Salary Ordinance of the Borough of South River.
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Any other factor which is relevant and coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious to the development of the Borough of South River.
B. If, after considering the above factors, the appropriate Board
determines that the proposed addition and/or regrading of soil will not
be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the Borough of South
River or its inhabitants, said Board shall approve the application.
Otherwise, said Board shall deny the application and shall notify the
applicant. Notice of the grant or denial of the application shall be given
to the applicant within a reasonable time after the application is filed.
C. A permit for the addition of soil shall be issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer in conformance with the approvals of the Board.
§ 282-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 282-8
282:708
§ 282-8. Right of entry.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter, any duly authorized officer, agent or employee of the Borough
shall have the right to enter into and upon any lands in or upon which soil
addition operations are being conducted in order to examine and inspect
such lands and operations thereon.
§ 282-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall
upon conviction be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article I, General
Penalty, at the discretion of the Municipal Court. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered and shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 284
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Soil addition and grade alteration — See Ch.
282.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 289, Art. VI.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 295.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 282-8 SOIL REMOVAL § 282-9
284:709

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 284-1. Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter shall be deemed and construed to have the
following meanings:
DEVELOPER — Any person who, either directly or through agent or
independent contractor, engages or intends to engage in land subdivision
or development or in the construction of two or more dwelling houses,
business or industrial buildings in any subdivision for the purpose of sale to
or occupancy by another person or persons.
EXCAVATOR — Any person, firm or corporation, partnership or association
engaged in the moving, removal or excavation of soil or topsoil from, in or
upon any land in the Borough.
MAJOR SOIL REMOVAL OPERATIONS — All soil removal operations
involving the removal of more than 50,000 cubic yards of material.[Added
5-16-1973 by Ord. No. 1973-14]
MINING — An extractive process involving the removal of sand, clay, gravel,
humus, peat and other organic or mineral materials.
MINOR SOIL REMOVAL OPERATIONS — All soil removal operations which
involve the removal of less than 50,000 cubic yards of material and which
do not present unique physical features, drainage problems or conditions
causing unusual amounts of engineering and inspection work.[Added
5-16-1973 by Ord. No. 1973-14]
MOVE — To dig, excavate, to remove; to deposit; to place and to fill; to
grade, regrade, level or otherwise alter or change the location or contour;
to transport and to supply. (See exclusions as more particularly set forth in
§ 284-27 of Article X.)
OWNER — Any person seized in fee simple of any land or having such other
interest or estate therein as will permit the exercise of effective possession
thereof or dominion or control thereover.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation, or
any group of two or more of them.
PREMISES — One or more contiguous parcels of land in single ownership.
Parcels shall not be deemed to be contiguous if separated by a road,
railroad, right-of-way, brook, stream or other natural division.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, irrespective
of the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth
and is composed of 2% or more by weight of organic matter and has the
ability to support vegetation.
§ 284-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 284-1
284:711

ARTICLE II
Preliminary Determination
§ 284-2. Required preliminary determination; soil removal permit
required.
§ 284-3. Determination of necessity. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
The owner of any premises in the Borough who claims that he cannot
develop his property for a use permitted by Chapter 350, Zoning, without
the excavation and removal of soil therefrom to places within or without
the Borough shall make application to the Planning Board of the Borough
for a determination by it that such premises cannot be developed for a use
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance without the excavation and removal of
soil from said premises, and of the amount and extent of such excavation
and removal. Accompanying said application, the owner shall submit a
preliminary map or plat as provided for in the Chapter 295, Subdivision
of Land, and in addition thereto, shall clearly delineate thereon the place
or places from which the soil is sought to be removed. The application
shall also specify the number of cubic yards of soil to be removed and the
length of time necessary to do so, and shall contain a concise statement
A. No owner, developer, excavator or other person shall dig, excavate,
scrape or otherwise disturb nor move or cause, allow, permit or suffer
to be moved the soil on any premises in the Borough for use other than
on the premises from which it shall be taken unless and until, after
application to and a public hearing by the Planning Board of the
Borough of South River, such Board shall first determine that the
excavation and removal of the amount of soil applied for is necessary
and essential to the development of the premises from which such soil
is to be excavated or removed, for a use that is permitted under Chapter
350, Zoning, or unless and until, if it is claimed that the removal of the
soil from the premises is a nonconforming use, the Board of Adjustment
of the Borough, after hearing, shall find and determine that the removal
and sale or other disposition of such soil from such premises is a valid
nonconforming use and the extent thereof.
B. Should the Planning Board find and determine that the removal of the
amount of soil applied for is necessary and essential to the development
of the premises for a use permitted by Chapter 350, Zoning, or should
the Board of Adjustment find and determine the existence of a
nonconforming use of such premises for the removal, sale or other
disposition of the soil from said premises and the extent thereof, no
owner, developer, excavator or other person shall still be permitted to
excavate, dig, scrape or otherwise disturb nor move or cause, allow,
permit or suffer to be moved any soil on any premises in the Borough
for use other than on the premises from which it shall be taken until a
soil removal permit therefor shall have been first obtained from the
Borough Engineer as hereinafter provided.
§ 284-2 SOIL REMOVAL § 284-3
284:713
indicating why it is essential and necessary to the development of the
property to remove such amount of soil. The Planning Board shall thereupon
and forthwith schedule and conduct a public hearing on such application
in accordance with the applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
Following such public hearing, the Planning Board shall determine the
question submitted to it as to whether the removal of soil as applied for
is necessary and essential to the development of the premises for a use
permitted by the Zoning Ordinance, taking into account the grades of
abutting streets and lands, adjacent land values and uses, drainage and
such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated, adjusted
and harmonious physical development of the Borough as a whole.
§ 284-4. Determination of nonconforming use.
Any owner of lands who claims the right to excavate, remove or sell or
dispose of soil from his premises by reason of a valid nonconforming use
shall, before continuing such operation, apply to the Board of Adjustment
of the Borough for a finding and determination of such nonconforming use
and the extent thereof. Such Board shall accept and process said application
under the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 284-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 284-4
284:714
ARTICLE III
Application for Soil Removal Permit
§ 284-5. Presentation of application.
Following a determination by the Planning Board that the removal of soil
is essential and necessary to the development of the premises as provided
for in § 284-3, or a determination by the Board of Adjustment that a
nonconforming use exists and the extent thereof as provided for in § 284-4,
an application for a permit to remove the soil shall be presented to the
Mayor and Borough Council, to the attention of the Borough Clerk, and
shall be in writing and presented at least 10 days prior to a meeting of the
Borough Council.
§ 284-6. Determination by Clerk.
The Borough Clerk shall determine if the application is in proper form and
complete as prescribed in Article IV hereof.
§ 284-7. Preliminary study by Mayor and Council.
The Mayor and Borough Council shall make a preliminary study of said
application; and if it shall be determined that the application is in order,
they shall refer said application to the Borough Engineer for study and
report.
§ 284-8. Study and report by Engineer.
The Borough Engineer shall immediately make a complete engineering
study and report in writing to the Mayor and Borough Council within the 31
days of the date of referral by the Mayor and Borough Council. However, the
governing body may disapprove the application without forwarding same to
the Borough Engineer, upon a factual finding that the said application is not
in the best interest of the public health, safety or general welfare.
§ 284-9. Action by Mayor and Council.
Upon receipt of the aforementioned report, the governing body shall take
action which it deems appropriate not later than the second regular meeting
following the receipt of the recommendations of the Borough Engineer.
§ 284-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 284-9
284:715

ARTICLE IV
Procedure
§ 284-10. Application for and issuance of soil permit. [Amended
5-16-1973 by Ord. No. 1973-14]
The procedure for filing an application for the issuance of a soil permit shall
be as follows:
A. On a form to be supplied by the Borough Engineer, the application shall
set forth in triplicate the following:
(1) The identity and address of the applicant.
(2) A description of the land in question.
(3) The identity and address of the owner of the land.
(4) An estimate of the quantity of soil, in cubic yards, to be moved,
broken down into two figures, namely, topsoil and other soil.
(5) In the case of removal of topsoil, an estimate of the amount to be
removed from the Borough of South River.
(6) The proposed dates of commencement and completion of the work.
(7) An estimate of the type and number of machines and other
equipment to be used in said operation; the daily starting and
finishing time during which such machines are to be operated; and
what protection will be provided to keep children and others having
no business on the land from gaining access thereto.
B. Accompanying the application there shall be filed a topographical map
in triplicate of the land upon which the proposed soil moving operations
are to be conducted and a reasonable engineering estimate of all
surrounding lands within 200 feet of the perimeter of the land which is
the subject matter of the application, prepared and certified by a
licensed professional civil engineer and land surveyor of the State of
New Jersey, on the scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet and
referred to the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey data, showing
both as to the land in question and as to all of said surrounding land:
(1) The dimensions of the land and the lot and block numbers of the
land and of each lot surrounding the land within 200 feet thereof as
shown on the last Tax Assessment Map of the Borough of South
River.
(2) Present grading on a fifty-foot grid layout, with contour lines at
one-foot intervals up to a grade of 5% and over a grade of 5%,
contour lines at five-foot intervals. When access to adjoining lands
is not permitted, the contour lines of the perimeter lands shall be
taken from the available State of New Jersey or United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey Map of the particular area.
§ 284-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 284-10
284:717
(3) The existing elevations of all buildings, structures, streets, streams,
bodies of water and watercourses, natural or artificial.
(4) All existing surface and/or subsurface water drainage conditions
and provisions therefor.
(5) All wooded areas.
(6) The proposed grades at points set forth in Subsection B(2) above
when the work has been completed, with same requirements as
contained therein.
(7) The quantity, in cubic yards, of the soil involved in the work.
(8) The average depth of topsoil as determined by taking borings in
approximate center of each one-hundred-foot grid.
(9) The grades of all abutting streets and lands.
(10) Proposed slopes and lateral supports at the limits of the area upon
completion of the proposed work.
(11) The proposed details of entry and egress for surface water
drainage and of any streams, bodies of water and watercourses,
natural or artificial.
C. In addition to the above requirements of Subsections A and B of this
section, the applicant shall furnish such other pertinent data as the
Borough Engineer may require after he has had an opportunity to
examine the proposed project, including the extent (in cubic yards) of
topsoil to be removed and whether such topsoil is to be replaced on the
site in question or moved to some other place and, if so, whether inside
or outside of the Borough of South River.
D. Fees. [Added 8-15-1973 by Ord. No. 1973-24]
(1) The application shall be submitted with a fee to the order of the
Borough of South River, per the schedule in Chapter 155, Fees.
(2) In the event of a refusal to issue such soil permit as hereinafter
provided, all expenses to the Borough of South River shall be
deducted from the aforesaid fee paid and any balance remaining
shall be returned to the applicant.
E. There shall also be paid to the Borough of South River, in addition to the
fee provided in Subsection D, a further sum to cover the cost of
inspection and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, based
upon the schedule in Chapter 155, Fees. [Added 8-15-1973 by Ord.
No. 1973-24]
F. In order to ensure conformity with the requirements of this chapter
with reference to but not limited by the conditions laid down in
Subsection A and B above, inspections shall be made by the Borough
Engineer of the Borough of South River or his duly authorized or
§ 284-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 284-10
284:718
qualified agent, of the land in or upon which soil moving operations are
being conducted.
§ 284-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 284-10
284:719

ARTICLE V
Guiding Considerations
§ 284-11. General standards for operations.
In the removal of soil, when the permit has been duly granted, the owner
or person in charge shall so conduct the operations that there shall be no
sharp declivities, pits or depressions, that there shall be no interruption
with natural drainage and in such a manner that the area shall be properly
leveled off, cleared of debris and graded to conform to the contour lines and
grades as approved by the Borough Engineer. The conduct of the operation
shall be under the responsibility and control of the Borough Engineer, who
shall make periodic inspections to determine that there is no deviation from
the information and requirements of the application as approved.
§ 284-12. Guiding considerations for Mayor and Council.
A. The governing body, in considering and reviewing the application and in
arriving at its decision, and the Borough Engineer, in supervising and
inspecting the operation of soil removal, shall be guided by and take
into consideration the public health, safety and general welfare, and
particular consideration shall be given to the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by wind and water.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Borough.
B. In the event permission is not granted, the applicant, upon written
request for a hearing made to the governing body, shall be given an
opportunity to be heard within 30 days thereafter.
C. If, after examining the application and the maps provided for in this
chapter and the reports of the Borough Engineer, the governing body
shall be of the opinion that the proposed soil removal will not create
conditions inimical to the public health, safety and welfare and will not
result in the creation of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil
erosion or fertility problems, depressed land values, nor create any
drainage, sewerage problems or other conditions of danger, permission
to remove soil shall be granted.
§ 284-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 284-12
284:721

ARTICLE VI
Conduct of Operations
§ 284-13. Sectioning of property.
The applicant shall be required to section the entire property which is the
subject of his permit into areas of not more than five acres, and he shall
so schedule the work of soil removal that the operation conducted in one
section shall be complete and that section at final grade before work shall
commence in any other section of the premises.
§ 284-14. Removal of bank.
In the event the application for a soil removal permit involves the complete
removal of a bank which extends above the elevation of the surrounding
lands or above the elevation of a public road or street adjacent to said land
upon which such removal project is to take place, said moving or removal
of soil shall be conducted so as to leave the final grade of the land or lot
from which the bank is to be removed at a grade that will not create a
hazardous condition with respect to the surrounding lands or such public
road or street. Wherever practical, the final grade shall not be lower than
the grade of the surrounding lands or of such public road or street, and the
final grade shall be established and maintained at a minimum of 1/2 of 1%
to ensure proper drainage. In establishing final grades, the factors to be
considered shall be the same as those listed in § 284-12 above.
§ 284-15. Partial removal of bank.
A. Slope standards.
(1) In the event the application for a soil moving permit involves the
partial cutting down of a bank, such project shall be conducted in a
manner so as to leave the final slope of all sides of the remaining
portion of the bank at slopes that conform to minimum slope
standards as follows:
(a) Wet clay, clay and sand: one vertical to three horizontal.
(b) Gravel loom boulders and earth: one vertical to 1 1/2
horizontal.
(c) Large rock slabs into earth hill: one vertical to one horizontal.
(d) Disintegrated rock: one vertical to one horizontal.
(e) Solid rock: one vertical to 1/4 horizontal.
(2) Under no conditions shall any such slope be left which is in excess
of one vertical to 1/4 horizontal. If slopes are made up of several
types of the above, the minimum standards shall apply to each
section in progressively decreasing slopes. Definitions of soil shall
§ 284-13 SOIL REMOVAL § 284-15
284:723
§ 284-16. Topsoil removal.
§ 284-17. Safety precautions.
Every soil removal project carried out and authorized under and pursuant
to a permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be
conducted and completed in such a manner as to not create any condition
hazardous to life or limb of any member of the public who has access to the
property or hazardous to the health, safety or welfare of the Borough. All
boulders, tree stumps and other debris shall be removed from the property
or completely burned, except that boulders may be buried.
§ 284-18. Hours and manner of operation.
No excavating operation shall be conducted except as follows:
be in conformity with Highway Engineering Handbook by Harger
and Bonney, for areas of rain and heavy frost.
B. Where earth is moved in order to lower a grade or to alter an existing
slope, the upper crown or brink shall not be closer to any property line
than five feet and this distance shall be increased at a rate of one foot
for each one foot of vertical height of the slope up to a maximum
required distance of 25 feet from any property line. If for any reason the
final grade shall be higher than the level of the surrounding lands, the
same formula shall be used in determining the distance of the bottom of
the slope from the nearest property line.
A. Whenever any owner, developer or excavator shall remove topsoil in or
upon any land in the Borough, provision shall be made for the storage of
said topsoil within the boundary lines of said property.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, all topsoil so stored shall be uniformly
replaced over the entire area or surface of the land on or before the
completion date set forth in the soil removal permit so that the final
grades of said replaced soil shall conform to the proposed final grades
shown on the topographical map.
C. No owner, developer or excavator shall remove to any point beyond the
boundary lines of the land in question any topsoil whatsoever unless
and until topsoil not inferior in quality to that to be removed shall have
first been replaced as originally found or in any case not less than six
inches of compacted topsoil uniformly placed over the entire surface
area of the land, excepting only such portions thereof as shall be or
shall have become since the date of the filing of said topographical map
permanently covered by a building or structure, street, pavement, curb,
sidewalk, driveway or other paved area or by any body of water or
waterway. In no event shall the owner, developer or excavator remove
from the land more topsoil than that comprising the surplus or excess
remaining after the replacement of the topsoil as aforesaid.
§ 284-15 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 284-18
284:724
A. In the daytime between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
B. On weekdays between Monday and Saturday.
C. Excavating operations shall not be conducted on Sunday.
D. In such a manner that the noise from trucks or equipment so engaged,
which is audible, will not be a source of annoyance or discomfort to any
of the residents of the Borough.
§ 284-18 SOIL REMOVAL § 284-18
284:725

ARTICLE VII
Operation of Vehicles; Bonds
§ 284-19. Highway cleanliness; revocation of permit.
Every person who shall transport over the streets, roads or highways in
the Borough of South River any soil removed from any land or premises
pursuant to a soil removal permit issued in accordance with this chapter
shall daily sweep, pick up and remove or cause to be swept, picked up and
removed all dust, dirt and mud from said road, streets or highways and
shall apply or cause to be applied to said road, streets or highways a dust
preventative whenever the same shall be deemed necessary and such fact
is communicated to the holder of the permit by the Borough Engineer. In
the event of failure, neglect or refusal of any person so to sweep, pick up
and remove such dust, dirt and mud or to apply a dust preventative when
required by this section, the Borough Engineer is authorized to suspend any
soil removal permit issued for a period of not less than three days or may
revoke the same after notification in writing by a duly authorized officer,
agent or employee of the Borough to the holder of said permit. In the event
of such revocation, no soil removal permit shall again be issued to such
person unless application therefor is made as required by Article III of this
chapter.
§ 284-20. Bond requirements.
A. No soil removal permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant
therefor shall have posted with the Borough of South River a
performance bond in such form and with such surety as may be
acceptable to the Borough and in such amount as the Borough Engineer
shall deem to be reasonable, using the following as a standard: from
$1,000 per 50,000 cubic yards or part thereof to a maximum of $5,000
per 50,000 cubic yards or part thereof, but in no case in an amount less
than $7,500.
B. The Borough Engineer shall determine the amount of the bond, taking
into account the nature and extent of work to be done; the type and
character of the soil; the extent of the area over which the operations
are to be conducted; the extent and depth of the various cuts and fills;
the extent to which the area of operation is wooded; the proximity of
proposed operations to streets, buildings, structures, natural or
artificial streams or watercourses and the general drainage conditions;
and such other factors as may bear on the operation. Said performance
bond shall be conditioned upon the full and faithful performance by the
applicant and the principal, within the time specified in the application,
of all the proposed work in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and of the soil removal permit issued pursuant thereto.
§ 284-19 SOIL REMOVAL § 284-20
284:727

ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 284-21. Enforcement by Engineer.
The Borough Engineer is hereby designated as the officer whose duty it
shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter. He shall, from time
to time, upon his own initiative and whenever directed by the Borough
Council, inspect the premises for which permits have been granted to
ensure compliance with the terms of the permit and of this chapter. He
shall immediately report all violations to the Borough Council and take such
action as may be deemed necessary in the circumstances.
§ 284-22. Compensation of Engineer.
The Borough Engineer shall be paid for his services in carrying out his
duties and responsibilities under the terms of this chapter at fees to be set
forth annually in the Salary Ordinance of the Borough of South River.117
§ 284-23. Right of entry.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter, any duly authorized officer, agent or employee of the Borough shall
have the right to enter into and upon any lands in or upon which such soil
removal operations are being conducted in order to examine and inspect
such lands and the operations thereon.
117. Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 284-21 SOIL REMOVAL § 284-23
284:729

ARTICLE IX
Existing Permits
§ 284-24. Effect upon existing permits.
Immediately upon final adoption of this chapter, all present holders of soil
removal permits under any previous authority by the Borough of South
River shall be given 30 days to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
Upon compliance with this chapter, the permits existing prior to the
adoption of this chapter shall be validated by the Borough Engineer in
writing, and he shall report to the Mayor and Council the status of each soil
removal permit heretofore granted in the Borough of South River within 45
days of the adoption of this chapter.
§ 284-25. Revocation of permits.
Upon the failure to so comply with the provisions of this chapter within 30
days, the existing permits shall be automatically revoked and the holders
thereof shall immediately deliver to the Borough Engineer any and all
permit or permits in their possession, and all such permits shall thereafter
be null and void.
§ 284-24 SOIL REMOVAL § 284-25
284:731

ARTICLE X
Penalties; Conflicting Provisions
§ 284-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article I, General
Penalty, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court. Each day that
a violation continues shall be considered and shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 284-27. Exceptions and conflicts.
This chapter shall not apply to the removal of soil for building excavation
or for a private sewage disposal system or for landscaping, nor shall this
chapter apply to or be construed to include plowing, spading, cultivating,
harrowing or disking of soil or any operation usually and ordinarily
associated with the tilling of the soil for agricultural or horticultural
purposes. This chapter shall not be construed to include any operations for
the purpose of soil and water conservation as defined or prescribed by the
Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall conflict with the present or any
future Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of South River, and in the case of
such a conflict, said Zoning Ordinance118 shall prevail. Anything herein to
the contrary notwithstanding, no permits shall be required in connection
with the removal of excess soil resulting from the construction or alteration
of a building, structure or off-street loading or parking areas on such
premises and new streets, roadways or driveways and excavation or grading
incidental thereto.
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ 284-26 SOIL REMOVAL § 284-27
284:733
Chapter 287
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 198.
Littering — See Ch. 214.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 258.
Roll-off dumpsters — See Ch. 263.
Nuisances — See Ch. 373.
§ 284-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 284-27
284:734
ARTICLE I
Collection
§ 287-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Food and beverage containers made entirely of
aluminum.
APPROVED CONTAINERS — Those containers of a metal-type can with
tight-closing lid, plastic-type can with tight-closing lid, plastic garbage bags
sufficiently strong for collection purposes that are properly tied off at the
top, but not including cardboard boxes.
BOROUGH-COLLECTED RECYCLABLES — The following designated
recyclables generated within the geographic boundaries of the Borough:
newspapers, glass containers, aluminum cans, corrugated cardboard from
residential and commercial sources, steel cans, plastic containers, mixed
paper and textiles.
BRUSH — Branches, woody plants and other like vegetative materials that
do not exceed five inches in diameter and Christmas trees. "Brush" does not
include leaves and grass clippings.
BUILDING MATERIALS — Includes concrete, cement, plaster, stones,
cinder blocks, concrete blocks, plasterboard, plaster, wood, brick, soil and/
or trees for clearing and any other material common to the building trades
and which are accumulated from excavating or from construction, building,
demolishing or repairing any structure or from construction or repairing
any sidewalk, driveway or street or roadway. The term "building materials"
or "building debris" shall not be construed as garbage.
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLES CONTAINERS — Twenty-gallon, plastic
containers to be used by the residents of the Borough to place plastic
containers, glass containers, aluminum cans and steel cans at the curb
for collection by the Borough, or such other container designated by the
Borough for such use.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLES — All recyclable materials that are
designated by the County of Middlesex, State of New Jersey and the
Middlesex County District Solid Waste Management Plan, as the same may
be amended from time to time, and any other material when so designated
by the Borough Administrator in accordance which the provisions of this
article. On the effective date of this article, "designated recyclables" are
newspaper, aluminum cans, glass containers, corrugated cardboard, steel
cans, plastic containers, mixed paper, textiles, grass clippings, leaves, yard
vegetation, motor oil, brush along with the following mandatory source
separated items as of December 1, 2007, shall be considered "designated
recycables."
For residential (including multifamily), commercial, industrial and
institutional, governments and office parks:
A.
§ 287-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 287-1
284:735
GARBAGE — Includes any office or kitchen waste, as well as refuse in the
nature of animal and vegetable matter of a similar nature, together with
paper or plastic bags and linings used to contain same.
GLASS CONTAINERS — All glass containers used for packaging food or
beverages.
HEAVY TRASH — Includes all large appliances, television receivers,
furniture, bed springs, tires, large automobile parts and similar materials.
MANUFACTURING, RETAIL OR COMMERCIAL WASTE — The residue from
any manufacturing, commercial or retail outlet which participates in all
recycling programs instituted by the Borough and which residue shall not
exceed five approved containers on any collection day nor include any
recyclable materials.
MIXED PAPER — Glossy inserts, magazines, telephone books, junk mail,
colored paper, computer paper, office paper, paperboard (chipboard and
pressboard), nonmetallic wrapping paper, soft cover books, hard cover
books with covers removed and fine paper.
Masonry/paving material: asphalt, block, brick, cinder and
concrete.
(1)
Rechargeable batteries: Nickel Cadmium (Ni-Cd), Nickel Metal
Hydride (Ni-MH), Lithium Ion (Li-ion) and Small Sealed Lead (Pb).
(2)
(3) Tires: rubber-based scrap automotive, truck and equipment tires.
White goods: washers, dryers, ranges, refrigerators, air
conditioners. Note: all devices that contain CFCs must be properly
evacuated by licensed individuals, and all CFCs recovered must be
sent to an EPA approved reclaimer.
(4)
For commercial, industrial and institutional, governments and office
parks:
Electronics: televisions, CPUs, monitors, laptops, and mercurycontaining
devices.
(1)
(2) Fluorescent bulbs: lamps that contain mercury.
Plastic film: stretch/shrink wrap, plastic shopping bags only for
warehouses, retail establishments and supermarkets with 25 or
more employees.
(3)
Wood scrap: unfinished lumber from new construction projects
including pallets. Unfinished shall mean nonchemically treated (not
pressure treated, impregnated with preservatives, insecticides,
fungicides, creosote, or other chemicals, and not painted, resincoated
or otherwise surface treated and not laminated or bonded;
and not similarly altered from its natural condition) only for new
construction sites.
(4)
B.
§ 287-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 287-1
284:736
MIXED PAPER CONTAINER — A covered, eight-gallon container in which
Borough residents will place mixed paper at the curb for collection by
the Borough, or such other container designated by the Borough for such
purpose.
PERSON — Includes all individuals, partnerships, corporations, owners,
tenants, lessees, occupants, associations, organizations, residing or owning,
operating, managing, leasing or occupying any premises or business,
commercial or industrial use within the Borough of South River. The word
"person" shall include and be synonymous with the word "resident."
PLASTIC CONTAINER — Soda bottles made of PETE (SPI code No. 1) and
milk, water and laundry product bottles made of HDPE (SPI code No. 2).
STEEL CANS — Tin-plated, bimetal and other ferrous food and beverage
containers.
TEXTILE BAG — A special bag to be provided by the Borough for the
collection of textiles, or such other container to be designated by the
Borough for such purpose.
TEXTILES — Clean, dry clothing or other fabric measuring at least one foot
by one foot in size.
TRASH — Includes all manner of refuse generally designated as paper,
cardboard, rags, glass, metal containers, ashes and all debris of a similar
nature that accumulates incidentally to the use and occupancy of a
residential unit.
USED MOTOR OIL — Discarded petroleum-based or synthetic lubricating
oil from automobile and other engines.
WEIGHT LIMITATION — All approved-type containers or plastic bags
containing no more than 50 pounds of waste material.
§ 287-2. Collection.
A. Collection and ownership of designated recyclables. No person shall
dispose of designated recyclables with regular trash. Designated
recyclables must be recycled through a program established by the
Borough of South River for resale by said Borough for recycling
purposes or by private collection when permitted. From the time that
any person places designated recyclables at the curb for collection, the
designated recyclables shall become the property of the Borough of
South River. It shall be a violation of this article for any person other
than the Borough of South River, its agents, servants, employees or duly
authorized contractors to tamper with or remove such materials, except
as otherwise set forth herein. Each violation of this section shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
B. Rules and regulations to be promulgated. The Borough Administrator is
hereby authorized to establish and promulgate rules and regulations,
and amendments thereto, governing the collection of all garbage and
trash within the Borough, including but not limited to the manner, days
§ 287-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 287-2
284:737
and times of such collections and the bundling, handling, location and
time of placement of all garbage and trash, including all recyclable
materials and vegetative waste. All rules and regulations shall be
published at least once in the official newspaper of the municipality and
shall be posted in such place or places designated by the Mayor and
Council for the posting of public notices within the Borough. No rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to this section shall become effective
until 30 days following the first date of publication and posting, as
provided herein. A complete and current copy of all rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article shall be distributed to
all residents at least twice yearly.
C. Mandatory compliance. On and after the date fixed in the regulations as
promulgated by the Borough Administrator, it shall be mandatory for all
persons to separate designated recyclables from all other solid waste
generated or disposed of by persons subject to this article and to
further separate all recyclable materials required under the program,
rules and regulations established thereunder or by this article.
D. Collection by others. The Borough Council, may, in accordance with its
statutory authority, negotiate and enter into franchises or agreements
with qualified persons to make the collections of designated recyclables
and for the sale or disposition of designated recyclables for the
resultant benefit of the Borough.
E. Additional collection requirements.
(1) No person shall dispose of grass clippings, leaves, branches, brush
and other yard vegetation with regular trash. Collection shall be
made on designated and scheduled days for collection or by
appointment.
(2) No garbage shall be placed for collection in paper bags, cardboard
boxes or corrugated receptacles.
(3) No person shall at any time place curbside more than the permitted
number of approved containers, as set forth in the rules and
regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, for collection
thereof.
(4) No person shall place at curbside any garbage container earlier
than one hour before sunset the night before a scheduled
collection, nor later than the normal hour of collection on the
regularly scheduled day of such collection. No call-backs for a
regularly scheduled collection shall be permitted. [Amended
6-27-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-22]
(5) No person shall dispose of designated recyclables with regular
trash. Collection and/or disposal of designated recyclables shall be
in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to
this article.
§ 287-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 287-2
284:738
§ 287-3. Noncollectible items.
The following refuse shall be considered not acceptable for collection by the
Department of Public Works:
§ 287-4. Placement of heavy trash and bulk items for collection.
[Amended 3-9-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-08]
F. Collection and ownership of designated recyclables. From the time that
any person places any designated recyclables at the curb for collection
or in any Borough receptacle designated for the collection of any
designated recyclables, said designated recyclables shall become the
property of the Borough of South River. It shall be a violation of this
article for any person, other than the Borough of South River, its
agents, servants, employees or duly authorized contractors to tamper
with or remove such materials. Each violation of this section shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
A. Industrial/commercial waste materials or substances such as poisons,
acids, caustics, noxious chemicals, infected materials, explosives,
ammunitions, motor oil or any other materials likely to cause injury to
persons employed by the Department of Public Works or to equipment
used in the collection system.
B. Materials in an amount greater than that permitted by this article
resulting from the demolition, repair of construction of buildings or
structures such as earth, plaster and/or mortar.
C. Vegetative waste, including but not limited to grass clippings, leaves,
branches, brush and other yard vegetation.
D. Any material which cannot be disposed of in accordance with the
standards and regulations set forth or prescribed by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or the South River Board of
Health for disposal of waste materials in the sanitary landfill site.
A. Placement of bulk items for collection, residential, non-rental
properties.
(1) All residential properties requesting collection of bulk items must
adhere to the policy established by the Director of the Department
of Public Works.
(2) Residents must schedule an appointment with the Public Works
Department for collection of heavy trash and bulk items.
(3) Bulk items shall be placed at the curb for collection the evening
before the scheduled date of pick up.
(4) Residents are limited to four bulk item collections per calendar
year.
§ 287-2 SOIL REMOVAL § 287-4
284:739
§ 287-5. (Reserved)119
§ 287-6. Tampering with container prohibited.
No ragpicker, scavenger or any unauthorized person shall break into, untie
or otherwise unbundle any container, bundle or pack of papers, ashes,
refuse, garbage or trash that has been placed outside for the collection
thereof.
§ 287-7. Exclusions.
The Department of Public Works shall not be responsible for the collection
of garbage, trash, debris, etc., from a garden apartment complex,
townhouse complexes or such other areas or locations similarly described
or defined.
§ 287-8. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough of South River, the Director of the Department of
Public Works and the South River Police Department.
§ 287-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
Each violation of any of the provisions of this article and each day that such
violation continues shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
(5) Disposal of refrigerators and freezers must comply with federal
regulations regarding chlorofluorocarbon removal. All doors shall
be removed from appliances scheduled for bulk collection.
B. Placement of bulk items for collection, commercial and rental
properties.
(1) No bulk waste will be collected from any residential rental
properties, commercial, office or other business establishments
unless specifically permitted pursuant to Subsection B(3).
(2) Removal and disposal of bulk waste for rental properties shall be
the sole responsibility of the commercial/rental property owner.
(3) If the commercial or rental property is the property owner's
primary residence, the Borough will collect bulk items as set forth
in Subsection A two times per calendar year.
119. Editor's Note: Former § 287-5, Use of Borough vehicles, was repealed 3-9-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-08.
§ 287-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 287-9
284:740
ARTICLE II
Yard Waste Collection and Disposal
§ 287-10. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the Borough of South River, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 287-11. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, so as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or blowing
out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 287-12. Yard waste collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and yard waste
shall not be placed closer than 10 feet to any storm drain inlet. Placement
of such yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any
other manner is a violation of this article. If such placement of yard waste
occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove
the yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of
this article.
§ 287-13. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Borough of South
River Police Department and/or the South River Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 287-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 287-14
284:741
§ 287-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 287-14 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 287-14
284:742
ARTICLE III
South River Recycling Design Standards
§ 287-15. Outdoor storage of refuse and recycling.
§ 287-16. Enforcement.
§ 287-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
Each violation of any of the provisions of this article and each day that such
violation shall continue shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and
distinct offense.
A. Residential. Each major application for residential development shall
include provisions for the collection, disposition and recycling of
recyclable materials and refuse. Each multifamily complex must
provide bins in a convenient location or locations in a common area as
drop-offs for storing refuse and recyclables until collection occurs. The
holding area shall provide for truck access and loading, shall be
suitably screened from view and set back from property lines. The
screening shall include a solid wall and evergreen vegetation equal to
or greater than the height of the storage receptacles.
B. Nonresidential.
(1) Each application for a nonresidential use which utilizes 1,000
square feet or more of land shall include provisions for the
collection, disposition and recycling or recyclable materials and
refuse. The applicant shall provide a screened storage area. The
storage area shall be designed for truck access of pickup of
materials and shall be suitably screened from view if located
outside of building by a solid wall and evergreen vegetation equal
to or greater than the height of the storage receptacles.
(2) All nonresidential uses shall provide a screened area for the
storage of pallets, trash and recyclable materials.
A. At the time of issuance of any building permit, the Building Code
Official will provide written instruction on proper disposal and
recycling of construction and demolition waste and furnish a
Notification of Construction/Demolition Activity Form that must be
filled out by the permittee and faxed to the Middlesex County Division
of Solid Waste Management (MCSWM) within 48 hours of the issuance
of a municipal building permit.
B. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough of South River, the Director of the Department of
Public Works, the Building Code Official, and the South River Police
Department.
§ 287-15 SOIL REMOVAL § 287-17
284:743
Chapter 288
SOUND CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 99.
Animals — See Ch. 108.
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 124.
Nuisances — See Ch. 373.
§ 288-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services, including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas,
electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities,
removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational
waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound-dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
A.
§ 287-17 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 288-1
284:744
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which injuries or endangers the safety
or health of a human, annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensibilities or endangers or injures personal or real property.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The investigating officer
need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist performing the
song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either:
§ 288-2. Applicability.
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
The imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one
parcel of real property from another;
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of
a multi-dwelling-unit building; or
B.
On a multi-use property, the interface between the two portions of the
property on which different categories of activity are being performed
(e.g., if the multi-use property is a building which is residential upstairs
and commercial downstairs, then the real property line would be the
interface between the residential area and the commercial area).
C.
A. This chapter applies to sound from the following property categories:
(1) Industrial facilities;
(2) Commercial facilities,
(3) Public service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities;
(5) Residential properties;
§ 288-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 288-2
284:745
§ 288-3. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer
and Police Department of the Borough of South River. These enforcement
officials shall have the power to:
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Public and private rights-of-way;
(8) Public spaces;
(9) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings; and
(10) Motor vehicles.
B. This chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(1) Commercial facilities;
(2) Public service facilities;
(3) Service facilities;
(4) Community service facilities
(5) Residential properties;
(6) Multi-use properties;
(7) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings; and
(8) Industrial facilities.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. Coordinate the noise control activities of all the departments in the
Borough of South River and cooperate with all other public bodies and
agencies to the extent practical;
B. Review the actions of the Borough of South River and advise of the
effect, if any, of such actions on noise control;
C. Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
chapter;
D. Investigate, resolve and/or pursue possible violations of this chapter
and refer complaints to an appropriate Borough department for
enforcement if deemed appropriate; for example, referring complaints
related to § 288-4D to the Borough Construction/Zoning Department.
§ 288-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 288-3
284:746
§ 288-4. Restricted uses and activities.
The following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set
forth below:
E. Refer complaints to the Middlesex County Health Department in those
instances that require the measurement of sound levels or sound
pressure so that the Middlesex County Health Department can pursue
possible violations under state regulations, and if appropriate, assist in
the investigation; and
F. Cooperate with and provide assistance to other departments and/or
county noise control officers in enforcing noise violations in the
Borough.
A. Noncommercial or nonindustrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment shall not be operated between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. All motorized equipment used in these activities
shall be operated with a muffler.
B. Commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be
operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a residential
property line when operated on commercial or industrial property
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends or federal holidays.
C. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall be operated with
a muffler.
D. Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work, shall
not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends and federal holidays. All motorized equipment used in
construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a muffler.
E. Motorized snowblowers, snow throwers, and lawn equipment with
attached snow plows shall be operated at all times with a muffler.
F. An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle must be
activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its
operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated.
G. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly
audible at a residential property line between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
H. Personal vehicular music amplification equipment shall not be operated
in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any
§ 288-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 288-4
284:747
§ 288-5. Exceptions.
Nothing contained herein shall apply to:
§ 288-6. Violations and penalties.
direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.
I. Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a public space or
public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., sound from such equipment shall not be plainly audible by any
person other than the operator.
J. Music or sound amplification or reproduction equipment, radios,
televisions, phonographs, CD players, musical instruments, percussion
instruments, or other sound-generating devices shall not be operated in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a residential property line or
through partitions common to two parties within a building between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
K. It is prohibited to own, possess, or harbor any pet animal that
frequently or for continued duration makes sounds that create a noise
disturbance across a real property line or through partitions common to
two parties within a building. For purposes of this provision, a noise
disturbance from a pet animal shall be defined as that created by a pet
animal making noise continuously for 10 minutes or intermittently for
30 minutes unless provoked.
L. It is prohibited to willfully make or cause to be made any audible noise
which is deemed objectionable because of volume, frequency, or beat
and/or which creates a noise disturbance.
A. The use of bells, chimes or sound amplifiers used by religious facilities
engaged in religious activities.
B. Municipal departments in the performance of their duties, drills, or
other necessary activities.
C. Activity conducted under the permission or authority of municipal
officials.
D. Warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or other vehicles
used for traffic safety purposes.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for the issuance
of a summons. The recipient of a summons shall be entitled to a hearing
in a municipal court having jurisdiction to contest such action and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine for each offense of not more
§ 288-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 288-6
284:748
§ 288-7. Severability and repealer.
Chapter 288A
SPECIAL EVENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 103.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 110.
Entertainment — See Ch. 151.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Littering — See Ch. 214.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 253.
Solid waste — See Ch. 287.
§ 288A-1. License required; exemptions; term defined.
than $2,000. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day on
which it occurs shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct
offense.
B. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or
from other law.
A. If any provision or portion of a provision of this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional, preempted by federal or state law, or otherwise
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions
of this chapter shall not be invalidated.
B. All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
A. No person, persons, firm, corporation or entity shall permit any outdoor
special event within the Borough of South River without having first
obtained a license from the Borough of South River in the manner and
upon the conditions hereinafter set forth.
B. The following shall be exempt from obtaining an outdoor special event
permit:
(1) The Borough of South River or any of its boards, commissions or
agencies.
(2) Bona fide scholastic and interscholastic contests or officially
sponsored affairs.
C. As used in this chapter, the following term shall have the meaning
indicated:
§ 288-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 288A-1
284:749
§ 288A-2. Application for license. [Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-28]
All applications for such licenses shall be directed to the Mayor and
Borough Council of South River and shall clearly state in writing the
following information:
OUTDOOR SPECIAL EVENT — Includes any kind of outdoor show,
concert, circus, carnival, theatrical or live musical performance and/or
rally held out-of-doors within the Borough of South River.
A. The type of outside special event.
B. The number of admission tickets to be sold, if any, and approximate
capacity of all lands and/or buildings to be used in conjunction with said
outside special event.
C. The address and amount of space and plan of the area where said
outside special event would take place.
D. The number of entrances to be open for admittance to the area in which
the outside special event is to take place, including but not limited to
the number of entrances to any building, if any should be used, and to
any seating areas or arenas.
E. The number of staff, including security personnel, and, in addition,
setting forth what each staff position shall be responsible for.
F. The address of any parking facilities to be used along with the number
of vehicles to be parked at said parking facility.
G. The number of sanitary facilities for the people expected, including but
not limited to the location of said sanitary facilities.
H. The number and placement of trash, litter and recyclable receptacles
for outside performances and outside special events, including whose
responsibility it shall be for the collection and removal of said
receptacles.
I. The dates and times the outside special events shall take place.
J. Any and all such other relevant information as the Business
Administrator, Police Department, Board of Health, Fire Department
and/or Code Enforcement Officer shall require.
K. If the outside special event is being conducted by a company other than
that which owns the property, a letter of consent from the property
owner allowing said company to use the property.
L. Signature by the applicant or, if an organization, firm or corporation, by
an individual authorized to sign on its behalf. The application shall be
notarized.
§ 288A-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 288A-3
284:750
§ 288A-3. Requirements.
In addition to the information requested by the application as set forth in
this chapter, the following items shall be required for issuance of a license,
upon favorable review of the application:
§ 288A-4. License application procedures.
A. The applicant shall furnish evidence of a public liability insurance
policy, in an amount not less than $500,000 for one person and
$1,000,000 for any one accident, which shall be in force and effect at
the time during which the special event will be operating. The applicant
shall provide an insurance certificate in conjunction therewith in the
amounts set forth herein for any one person or any one accident which
shall name the Borough of South River as additional insured and the
certificate of same shall be filed with the Borough Clerk at least seven
days prior to the event.
B. If the applicant has previously held an outside special event where the
Borough of South River was required to clean up and remove litter,
trash, and rubbish from the grounds used and/or streets adjacent to the
premises, the applicant shall furnish to the Borough a good and
sufficient bond in the sum of $2,500, on condition that it will leave the
streets of the Borough in as good a condition as it found them and that it
will immediately clean up and remove any litter, trash and rubbish from
the grounds used and streets adjacent thereto.
C. The applicant shall submit to the Borough Clerk any Legalized Games of
Chance Control Commission applications required for raffles which will
be held at the event.
D. The applicant shall furnish sufficient evidence of current inspections of
any rides and/or safety equipment to be used at the outside special
event, if any.
E. The applicant shall furnish sufficient evidence indicating compliance
with Chapter 287 of the Borough Code with respect to solid waste, said
evidence to include but not be limited to placement of recyclable
containers, pickup of recyclables and whose responsibility it shall be for
compliance with Chapter 287.
A. Upon receipt of an application as set forth above, the Borough Clerk
shall immediately provide the Business Administrator, Police
Department, Board of Health, Fire Department and Code Enforcement
Officer with a copy of the application for review and/or approval.
B. Upon receipt of an application, the said department heads shall review
the application and recommend approval or denial of the application
setting forth reasons for the recommendation and forwarding it to the
Borough Clerk within 10 days of receipt thereof.
§ 288A-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 288A-4
284:751
§ 288A-5. Additional requirements.
The Mayor and Borough Council may, as a condition of approval of any
application, require additional staffing or other conditions to ensure the
safety of the patrons, Borough residents and the public.
§ 288A-6. Hours of operations.
All outside special events shall operate between the following hours only:
§ 288A-7. Application fee.
An application fee as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, shall be paid by the
applicant at the time of application to defray any and all costs in the
processing of the application.
§ 288A-8. Liability.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in any fashion whatsoever as
limiting the liability of those responsible for the management and
operations of the event, including the employment of adequate personnel
for security, safety, health and sanitation.
§ 288A-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-16-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-28]
Any person, partnership, corporation and/or entity violating any provision
of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be subject to the penalties provided
in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty. A separate offense shall be deemed
for each and every day said violation exists. Should any person, partnership,
corporation and/or entity fail to obtain a special events permit prior to
holding a special event as defined herein, the minimum penalty shall be
$500.
C. Upon receipt by the Borough Clerk of the recommendations, same shall
be provided to the Mayor and Council for official action with respect to
granting or denying a permit for the special event.
D. The Mayor and Borough Council shall act upon an application within 15
days of presentation of all of the reports by the Borough Clerk, and the
applicant shall be notified of such action within three business days
thereafter.
A. Sunday through Thursday: 12:00 noon to 9:00 p.m.
B. Friday: 12:00 noon to 10:00 p.m.
C. Saturday: 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
§ 288A-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 288A-9
284:752
Chapter 289
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 77.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Fiber optic cable — See Ch. 157.
Outdoor cafes and restaurants — See Ch. 241.
Subdivision and site plan review; stormwater
management — See Ch. 295.
§ 288A-9 SOIL REMOVAL § 288A-9
284:753

ARTICLE I
Street Acceptances
[Adopted 6-11-1906 (Ch. 163, Art. III, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 289-1. Requisites for acceptance.
No ordinance shall be introduced accepting any street or road unless the
same has been surveyed by the Borough Engineer and the lines thereof by
him have been fully described and fixed by monument; unless said street
or road shall be at least 50 feet in width through its entire length; unless
said street or road is well rounded and shaped and in good condition for the
safe and easy use of the traveling public; unless the lines of the sidewalks
are well defined and the sidewalks are well formed and shaped; unless the
street or road is well guttered and drained and unless the right of naming
the street or road is absolutely reserved to the Borough.
§ 289-2. Investigation prior to acceptance.
Immediately upon the presentation to the Council of the proposed
dedication to public use of any street or road, such proposed dedication
shall be at once referred to the Committee on Streets and Roads which shall
investigate the conditions, and unless the Committee reports and certifies
that all the prerequisites set forth in § 289-1 of this article have been
complied with, such proposed dedication shall be rejected.
§ 289-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article
I, General Penalty, in the discretion of the court.
§ 289-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 289-3
284:755

ARTICLE II
Cleanliness of Sidewalks
[Adopted 11-27-1963 (Ch. 163, Art. II, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 289-4. Duty to keep sidewalks clean.120
The owners, managers, agents or occupiers of premises or tenements,
or vacant lots owned by them, under their charge or occupied by them,
shall keep the sidewalks and gutters in the public highway adjacent to the
property owned, controlled or occupied by them swept and clear of mud,
dirt and filth.
§ 289-5. Removal of snow and ice. [Amended 6-9-1993 by Ord. No.
1993-8; 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-31]
§ 289-6. Enforcement. [Amended 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-31;
3-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-6
It shall be the duty of the police and Code Enforcement Officer to enforce
the provisions of this article.
§ 289-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article
I, General Penalty, in the discretion of the court.
A. The owners, managers, agents and/or occupants of all premises and
tenements within the Borough of South River shall, within 24 hours of
the cessation of any fall of snow or formation of ice, remove all snow
and ice from the sidewalks, including handicapped access ramps and
fire hydrants, adjacent to said premises. Ice which is so frozen as to
make removal impractical shall either be treated with rock salt or other
chemicals which will thaw it sufficiently to permit removal or be
thoroughly covered with sand, ashes or cinders. [Amended 3-14-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-6]
B. (Reserved)121
C. The obligations imposed by this section shall be suspended during any
period in which the Governor of the State of New Jersey or the Mayor of
the Borough of South River shall declare a state of snow emergency.
120. Editor's Note: Original § 163-8, Advertising matter and signs, which immediately preceded
this section, was deleted 9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-31.
121. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding written warnings, was repealed 3-14-2011
by Ord. No. 2011-6.
§ 289-4 SOIL REMOVAL § 289-7
284:757

ARTICLE III
Sidewalk Construction and Maintenance
[Adopted 10-4-1965 (Ch. 163, Art. IV, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 289-8. Supervision by Borough.
All maintenance and repair of public streets, sidewalks, curbs and other
public ways shall be under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public
Works or the Borough Engineer.
§ 289-9. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street,
sidewalk, curb or other public way, or to repair the same, without first
having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be
made to the Borough Clerk and shall state the location of the intended work,
the extent thereof and the person or firm who is to do the actual work.
§ 289-10. Applicable specifications.
All such construction, maintenance and repair shall be made in conformity
with the specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the
Borough Council.
§ 289-11. Responsibility of landowners for maintenance, repair and
installation. [Added 3-23-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-13; amended
12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-32; 9-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-19]
A. The maintenance, repair and reconstruction of sidewalks and curbs
(Any combination curb and gutter shall be maintained, repaired or
reconstructed so that the abutting landowner shall be responsible for
the curb portion only and the Borough of South River shall be
responsible for the street gutter portion.) shall be the responsibility of
the abutting landowners and shall be repaired, altered, relaid or
maintained at the expense of the abutting landowners as provided by
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:65-14.
B. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of South River shall, by
resolution, cause notice to be served upon abutting landowners or
occupants of said lands requiring the necessary specified work to said
curb or sidewalk to be performed by the said owners or occupants
within a period of not less than 30 days from the date of such notice.
The Mayor and Council may, at its discretion, due to inclement weather,
extend said period for a longer period than 30 days, provided that said
period shall not exceed 90 days.
C. The Mayor and Council shall, whenever the abutting lands are
unoccupied and the owner in title cannot be found within the Borough
of South River, mail such notice, postage prepaid, to said owner's post
office address, and, in the event the said address cannot be ascertained,
§ 289-8 SOIL REMOVAL § 289-11
284:759
the governing body shall insert a notice for four weeks, once in each
week, in a newspaper published within the Borough of South River.
D. The Mayor and Council, upon expiration of the period of notice, shall, in
the event that the owner or occupant has not complied with the
requirements of said notice, file with the Borough Chief Financial
Officer due proof of service of publication of the aforesaid notice, and
the Mayor and Council shall, after the filing of said notice with the
Borough Chief Financial Officer, order the necessary work to be
performed in accordance with said notice and may cause the same to be
paid for from the funds of the Borough of South River.
E. The Director of Public Works or his duly designated representative shall
certify to the Borough Chief Finance Office and Borough Tax Collector
the cost of the performance of said work, and, upon the filing of the said
certificate by the Director of Public Works or his duly designated
representative, the Borough Tax Collector shall thereafter cause a lien
to be placed upon said abutting lands wherein said work was
performed.
F. The Tax Collector shall collect the moneys so expended, including costs
of publication of the notice required in Subsection C hereof as well as
other costs provided for by the statutes of the State of New Jersey, in
the same manner as assessments for local improvements as provided by
the statutes of the State of New Jersey, and said lien shall bear interest
at the same rate as an assessment for local improvements. The Tax
Collector may, with the consent of the Mayor and Council, institute a
suit in the courts of the State of New Jersey for the collection of the
amount of said lien from the owner of said lands, as disclosed on the tax
assessment list of the Borough of South River at the time of the
performance of said work.
G. The Tax Collector shall credit all moneys from the performance of said
work to an account to be established by the Tax Collector for
performance of said work, as set forth in this section, by the Borough.
H. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority under the
provisions of this section to designate subordinate employees in his
department as representatives in performing the duties required of the
Director in the administering of the provisions of this section, and the
Director may further designate employees within the Department of
Public Works for the purpose of inspecting streets and sidewalks. The
Director of Public Works, prior to the performance of any work on any
curb or sidewalk by the abutting landowner, shall ascertain through his
representatives the conditions affecting said existing sidewalks and
curbs on the land. The Director thereafter shall notify the governing
body of the condition existing and the work to be performed by the
abutting landowner prior to the governing body serving notice on said
landowner or occupant of said lands.
§ 289-11 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 289-11
284:760
§ 289-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article
I, General Penalty, in the discretion of the court.
I. For all newly constructed homes, a certificate of occupancy will not be
issued until:
(1) Sidewalks are installed in the public right-of-way along all portions
of the property that front a public road in accordance with the
Borough Code; or
(2) A bond in an amount not to exceed the reasonable estimate for the
cost of sidewalk installation as determined by the Construction
Official is posted with the Building Department by the property
owner. Said bond amount will be refunded upon installation of the
sidewalks and approval of same by the Borough Construction
Official.
(a) If the property owner does not install sidewalks in accordance
with the Borough Code within six months of posting of the
bond, the Borough shall have the right to install sidewalks at
the property owner's expense pursuant to the procedure set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:65-14.
(b) The bond shall be applied to the Borough's installation costs. If
the Borough's installation costs exceed the amount of the bond,
the property owner will be responsible for the additional cost.
(c) If said additional cost is not paid by the property owner within
30 days of receipt of an invoice by the Borough, the unpaid
amount will be forwarded to the Borough Tax Collector and will
be added to the next tax bill as a municipal lien pursuant to the
procedure set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:65-14.
(d) If the Borough's installation costs are less than the bond
amount, the excess balance shall be refunded to the property
owner within 30 days of completion of work.
§ 289-11 SOIL REMOVAL § 289-12
284:761

ARTICLE IV
Driveway Construction
[Adopted 4-5-1965 (Ch. 163, Art. V, of the 1977 Code)]
§ 289-13. Width, placement and number of driveways.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee of any real property in the
Borough of South River to lay out any driveway to be used for the purpose
of entering or leaving the premises owned or leased, which exceeds 30 feet
in width measured along the curbline; provided, however, that where the
property fronts on more than one street, the owner or lessee may use and
maintain one driveway on each street contiguous to the property for every
100 lineal feet of frontage or fraction thereof along that street, driveways
to be separated by at least five lineal feet measured along the curbline,
and provided further that where the property fronts on only one street,
two driveways separated by not less than five lineal feet measured along
the curbline may be maintained for the first 200 lineal feet of frontage or
fraction thereof and one driveway may be maintained for each additional
100 lineal feet of frontage or fraction thereof.
§ 289-14. Nonconforming driveways; new construction.
The maintenance of existing driveways which do not conform to the
provisions of § 289-13 of this article may be continued; provided, however,
that if and when existing buildings or structures are altered, rearranged,
reconstructed or repaired, or additional buildings added, or other
improvements made to the property wherein the cost of any and all of
such alterations, rearrangements, reconstruction, additions and other
improvements exceeds 50% of the assessed value of existing improvements
on the property, then the driveways shall be reconstructed so as to conform
to § 289-13 of this article.
§ 289-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article
I, General Penalty, in the discretion of the court.
§ 289-13 SOIL REMOVAL § 289-15
284:763

ARTICLE V
Excavations in Streets
[Adopted 10-4-1965 (Ch. 97 of the 1977 Code)]
§ 289-16. Term defined.
For the purpose of this article, the term "person" shall mean and include
the singular and plural and shall mean and include any firm, partnership,
corporation or association.
§ 289-17. Permit required. [Amended 12-15-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-54]
No person, other than duly authorized servants or agents employed or
engaged by the Borough of South River for the purpose, shall dig up or
make any excavation or opening in or upon any Borough-owned street
or right-of-way or portion thereof in the Borough of South River for the
purpose of installing, making, altering, replacing or repairing any water,
gas, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, telephone or other underground
utility therein or for any other purpose whatsoever without first obtaining a
written permit therefor.
§ 289-18. Application for permit. [Amended 12-15-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-54]
§ 289-19. Fee and deposit; bond.
A. Applications for such permits shall be made to the Borough Clerk and
shall include a detailed location plan and construction drawings when
applicable. The application shall describe the location of the intended
excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose thereof and the
person, firm or corporation doing the actual excavation work and the
name of the person, firm or corporation for whom or which the work is
being done and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will
comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done.
B. An application shall be required for all emergency repairs. Should the
repairs be required to protect the public safety, health and welfare, they
shall be performed immediately with an application filed with the
Borough Clerk within 24 hours or the next business day, whichever is
sooner.
A. Fee schedule. The fee schedule is found in Chapter 155, Fees.
[Amended 2-25-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-4; 12-15-1983 by Ord. No.
1983-54; 12-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-42]
B. Each applicant shall maintain the project specified in the permit for a
period of two years after the completion of repaving, and the deposit
posted hereunder shall be held by the Borough for said term to ensure
proper installation and maintenance.
§ 289-16 SOIL REMOVAL § 289-19
284:765
§ 289-20. Manner of excavating; protection of utilities; trees.
C. In lieu of the foregoing deposit set forth in Subsection A(1) and (2), any
responsible applicant for such permit may file with the Borough Clerk a
bond, renewable annually, in an amount to be determined by the
Borough Engineer, said bond to be conditioned upon the filling and
paving of all street openings and the restoring of them to their original
level and condition within 15 days after completion of the projects
specified in the permit, and, further, upon the proper maintenance of
said project for two years after completion and repaving.
A. It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way
contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper
bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground,
and protection of workers shall be in accordance with the regulations of
the New Jersey Department of Labor and Industry and the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration; and in excavations, the excavation
shall not have anywhere below the surface any portion which extends
beyond the opening at the surface. [Amended 12-15-1983 by Ord.
No. 1983-54]
B. No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making of
such excavations or tunnels; and notice shall be given to the persons
maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the Borough
department or officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may
be endangered or affected by the making of any such excavation or
tunnel, before such pipes, cables or conduits shall be disturbed.
C. No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or
the roots thereof.122
D. Safety. [Added 12-15-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-54]
(1) The person performing an excavation within the Borough street or
right-of-way shall continuously protect pedestrian and vehicle
traffic during the course of the work under which the permit has
been granted. Reflective barrels, blinking lights, warning signs,
flagmen, uniformed traffic officers and all other manpower and
equipment as required or directed by the Borough Police
Department, Engineer, Road Superintendent or other Borough
official shall be provided.
(2) The work area shall be continuously passable by all emergency
vehicles during all phases of the work.
(3) In the event that the work requires the detour of the vehicular
traffic, the person in possession of the permit shall submit a detour
plan for review and approval by the Borough Police Department
prior to the implementation of the work.
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 319, Tree Removal and Woodlands Management.
§ 289-19 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 289-21
284:766
§ 289-21. Temporary sidewalks.
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed or provided, which shall be safe for travel and convenient for
users.
§ 289-22. Restoration and repaving.
A. Any person, firm or corporation making any excavation or tunnel in or
under any public street, alley or other public place in the Borough shall
restore the surface to its original condition if there is no pavement
there. Refills shall be properly tamped down, and any bracing in such
tunnel or excavation shall be left in the ground.
B. Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be repaired
and the surface relaid by the applicant in compliance with the following
schedule of pavement restoration and with the ordinances of the
Borough and under the supervision of the Superintendent of Streets
and Roads or the lead person of said Department, whoever shall be
designated or available: [Amended 12-17-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-49; 12-15-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-54]
(1) Bituminous concrete.
(a) The edges of the excavated roadway shall be neatly trimmed to
a clean vertical edge. Bituminous-concrete stabilized base
complying with the requirements of New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications, latest revision, shall
be placed to a minimum compacted thickness of six inches on
top of the specified backfill material. The stabilized base shall
be placed in two lifts, minimum, and compacted to its optimum
density.
(b) The top course of bituminous concrete shall be FABC-1 as
specified in the New Jersey Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications, latest revision. The FABC-1 shall be
placed in a minimum compacted thickness of 1 1/2 inches and
compacted to its optimum density.
(c) The vertical edge shall be tack-coated with asphaltic oil, Grade
RC-D, or emulsified asphalt, Grade RS-1, as specified in the
New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications, latest revision.
(2) Portland cement concrete roadway.
(a) The edges of the excavated roadway shall be neatly trimmed to
a clean vertical edge. Welded-steel-wire fabric, six by six
inches, No. 6 gauge minimum, shall be placed in the excavation
on top of the specified backfill material and tied to the existing
roadway reinforcement exposed at the excavation vertical.
§ 289-21 SOIL REMOVAL § 289-22
284:767
(b) The portland cement concrete shall be air-entrained, 4,000
pounds per square inch, twenty-eight-day strength minimum,
poured to a minimum depth of nine inches. The concrete shall
be floated and finished with a stiff broom.
(3) Temporary pavement.
(a) When the roadway excavation restoration is to be performed
during seasonal periods which are not conducive to the
placement of bituminous concrete or portland cement
concrete, the applicant shall provide temporary pavement
restoration on top of the specified backfill material until such
time as suitable climatic conditions exist to effect the
permanent restoration.
(b) The temporary pavement shall consist of the placement of a
minimal compacted thickness of four inches of cold-mix
bituminous concrete Type HA or HT, in accordance with New
Jersey Department of Transportation Standard Specifications,
latest revision.
(c) It shall be the applicant's responsibility to continuously
maintain this temporary pavement as directed by the Borough
representatives.
(d) Prior to effectuating the permanent repairs, the temporary
pavement shall be completely removed, and the disturbed
backfill material recompacted.
(4) Bituminous concrete overlaid portland cement concrete roadway.
When excavations are made in bituminous concrete overlaid
portland cement concrete roadways, the requirements for
replacement shall be in accordance with the specifications for
portland cement concrete roadways, with a top course of
bituminous concrete of the same thickness as the existing overlay
complying with the specifications for same.
C. Backfilling. [Amended 12-17-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-49;
12-15-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-54]
(1) The backfilling of any excavation shall be done with Type 1, Class
C, soil aggregate in accordance with New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications, latest revision, for bankrun
sand and gravel. The backfill shall be placed in lifts which can
be compacted to a standard proctor density of 95%.
(2) The backfill material and method of compaction shall be subject to
the approval of the Superintendent of Streets and Roads. Under no
circumstances shall wet or frozen material be used as backfill.
Backfill containing organic material, brick, rock, tile or demolition
rubble is also unacceptable as backfill.
§ 289-22 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 289-23
284:768
§ 289-23. Repaving by Borough; cost.
In the event the applicant does not restore the ground and lay the pavement
in the manner and within the time provided for herein, then the Borough
shall properly restore said ground and lay said pavement, charging the
expense thereof to the deposit, if any, posted by the applicant. The deposit
or balance thereof after proper compliance with this article shall be
returned to the applicant without interest.
§ 289-24. Protection against injury or damage.
Any person who shall make an excavation or opening in or upon any street
for any of the purposes aforesaid shall maintain sufficient and appropriate
guards, barriers and signals and otherwise exercise such reasonable
precaution in the area as may be necessary to avoid damage to property and
injury to persons.
§ 289-25. Nonliability of Borough.
The Borough of South River shall not be liable for damages for any personal
injuries or damage to property sustained as the result of any excavation or
opening in any street made by any person by virtue of the provisions of this
article.
§ 289-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article
I, General Penalty, in the discretion of the court.
§ 289-23 SOIL REMOVAL § 289-26
284:769
Chapter 295
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW; STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 50.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 129.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 174.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 232.
Sewers — See Ch. 275.
Soil addition and grade alteration — See Ch.
282.
Soil removal — See Ch. 284.
Sidewalk construction and
maintenance — See Ch. 289, Art. III.
Street excavations — See Ch. 289, Art. V.
Tree removal and woodlands
management — See Ch. 319.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 289-26 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 289-26
284:770
Part 1
[Adopted 8-20-S1u9b8d0ivBiysiOonrd A. nNdo .S 1it9e8 P0l-a3n1 R(Cehvi.e 1w66 Of The 1977
Code); Amended In Its Entirety 12-27-2011 By Ord. No. 2011-39]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 295-1. Title; statutory authority.
This Part 1 shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision and
Site Plan Ordinance of the Borough of South River." This Part 1 is enacted
pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975,
commonly referred to as the "Municipal Land Use Law."123
§ 295-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 1 shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision and site development in the Borough
of South River in order to promote the public health, safety, convenience
and general welfare of the municipality. It shall be administered to ensure
orderly growth and development, the conservation, protection and proper
use of land and adequate provision for circulation, utilities and services.
§ 295-3. Approving agencies.
The approval provisions of this Part 1 shall be administered by the Borough
of South River Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, whichever
has jurisdiction of the development application, in accordance with Chapter
291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). Hereinafter,
all references to "Board" in this Part 1 shall include the Planning Board and/
or the Zoning Board, where applicable.
§ 295-4. Administrative officer.
It shall be the duty of the administrative officer to ensure that all
applications for development comply with the provisions of this Part 1
and are in accordance with the provisions of land use procedures, of the
land development ordinances of the Borough of South River and all other
applicable ordinances or requirements of the Borough of South River or
statutes of the State of New Jersey. For the purposes of this Part 1, in
the absence of an individual appointed as the administrative officer by the
Mayor/Borough Council, the Planning Board/Zoning Board, as the case may
be, shall act as administrative officer and shall carry out all duties assigned
as such when an application has been submitted to the Board.
§ 295-5. Minimum standards.
The rules, regulations, and standards set out in this Part 1 shall be
considered the basic requirements for the protection of the public health,
123. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 295-1 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-5
284:771
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough. Any action taken by the
Board and the Borough Council under the terms of this Part 1 shall give
primary consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare
of the entire community. However, if the applicant can clearly demonstrate,
in accordance with the requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law, that
the literal enforcement of one or more of these regulations is impracticable
or will constitute undue hardship, the Board may grant relief and/or permit
substantial compliance in lieu of literal compliance as may be reasonable
and within the general purpose and interest of the rules, regulations and
standards established by this Part 1, Chapter 350, Zoning, the Municipal
Land Use Law, and other related ordinances.
§ 295-6. Time of application.
When an application for development has been filed with or submitted to the
Board Secretary or administrative officer, the Board Secretary shall record
the date of submission. The application for development shall be subject to
the rules, regulations, and standards set out in this Part 1 at the time of
application submission.
§ 295-7. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Part 1, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning, all definitions set forth in Chapter 350, the Zoning
Ordinance of the Borough of South River, are incorporated herein by
reference.
§ 295-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-7
284:772
ARTICLE II
Development Review Classification
§ 295-8. Subdivision/site plan application review and approval
required.
A. Subdivision review and approval shall be required for all subdivisions of
land as defined in this Part 1. Site plan review and approval shall be
required before significant development of land, or any new structure
or use, change, addition or alteration in structure or use, construction
of or addition to a parking lot or use of vacant land as a parking lot,
change in use of any nonresidential use, or for any excavation, removal
of soil or placement of fill, or any change of use or modification to site
facilities of a commercial or industrial use or the further development of
the site. No building permit shall be issued for any building or use or for
the enlargement of any building or use and no excavation, removal of
soil or placing of fill shall be permitted unless a site plan is first
submitted and approved by the Board in accordance with this Part 1,
and no certificate of occupancy shall be given unless all construction
conforms to the approved plan, except that site plan approval shall not
be required for one- and two-family dwellings or for permitted
accessory uses incidental to single-family and two-family dwellings,
unless the same require the extension of municipal facilities.
B. A change in the occupancy of a building or the utilization of a building
or land which meets any of the following criteria shall be considered a
"change of use" and shall require site plan approval:
(1) The proposed use requires more off-street parking or loading
spaces than the previous use based upon parking/loading
requirements in this Part 1.
(2) The proposed use has significantly different hours of operation than
the previous use.
(3) The proposed use has special pickup and discharge or loading and
unloading requirements which affect on-site circulation.
(4) The proposed use involves the storage or handling of chemicals or
hazardous substances.
(5) The proposed use includes a change in intensity of exterior
lighting.
(6) The proposed use will generate a volume of solid waste which will
or should require additional refuse receptacles over what the
previous use required.
C. All changes of occupancy which satisfy any of the above criteria shall
require site plan approval prior to issuance of any required municipal
permits or certificates of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall
§ 295-8 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-8
284:773
§ 295-9. Site plan clarification.
§ 295-10. Minor/major site plan classification.
be issued unless all construction and development conforms to an
approved site plan.
D. A signed affidavit stating that a proposed use does not meet any of the
above criteria, and is a therefore a change of occupancy, not a "change
of use," and should be exempt from site plan requirements, must be
submitted to the Borough Zoning Officer prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. The Zoning Officer shall determine if the
information provided in the signed affidavit is sufficient to grant the
certificate of occupancy.
A. Site plan exemption. No site plan application and approval shall be
required prior to the issuance of a building permit or a certificate of
occupancy for any of the following types of development:
(1) Interior alterations, provided that no expansion of a nonconforming
use results from same.
(2) Erection of placement of signage which is in conformance with the
provisions of the Borough's Zoning Ordinance.124
(3) Single-family and two-family dwellings and accessory structures to
such uses unless the extension of municipal services is required.
(4) Changes in use in which said use is permitted and the required
parking for said use is provided on the subject site in conformance
with the Borough's Zoning Ordinance or where no increase in the
parking requirements result from the proposed change in use.
A. Minor site plan. The following types of development shall be classified
as a minor site plan:
(1) A development plan of one or more lots which proposes new
development on less than five acres, does not involve planned
development, or any new street or utility extension or any off-tract
improvement.
(2) Additions to buildings or the construction of accessory buildings
which would result in an increase of less than 10% to the existing
gross floor area (GFA) of the building(s) on the lot, and further
provided that the addition will not require an increase of greater
than 10% to the existing number of parking spaces on site, and
further provided that the proposed development must comply with
all existing zoning requirements.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ 295-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-10
284:774
§ 295-11. Minor/major subdivision classification.
§ 295-12. Standards for all conditional use applications.
Regulation of land development and the attachment of reasonable
conditions to development applications are exercises of valid police powers
delegated by the state to the Borough. The applicant shall comply with
all reasonable conditions laid down by the approving board for design,
dedication, improvements and the use of the land to conform to the physical
development of the municipality and to the safety and general welfare of the
future residents/owners in the development and the community at large, as
well as all conditional use criteria listed in the applicable zoning ordinance.
(3) Renovations or changes to exterior building facades, including
window and door size and location changes, but excluding simple
replacement of doors and windows with identical-sized fixtures or
texture changes to the exterior building facade.
B. Major site plan. All development of property not considered to be
exempt from site plan review or not classified as a minor site plan shall
be classified as a major site plan, which shall be divided into
preliminary and final stages of approval.
C. Exemptions. Interior alterations, facade resurfacing, routine window
and roof replacement and all additions to lawful single- and two-family
detached residential uses shall be exempt from this requirement.
A. Minor subdivision. The following types of development shall be
classified as a minor subdivision:
(1) A subdivision of land that does not involve the creation of more
than three lots, a planned development, and new streets or the
extension of any off-tract improvement.
(2) Only one minor subdivision shall be permitted on one parcel of land
during any three-year period.
B. Major subdivision. All development of property not considered to be
exempt or not classified as a minor subdivision shall be classified as a
major subdivision, which shall be divided into preliminary and final
stages of approval. In addition, any proposed subdivision which would
otherwise qualify as a minor subdivision shall be classified as a major
subdivision if the subdivision under consideration represents a further
subdivision of an original tract of land for which previous minor
subdivision(s) has been approved by the Board within the past three
years.
C. Exemption. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-7, agricultural divisions,
divisions of property by testament or intestate, court order, and
conveyances by deed are exempt from subdivision approval.
§ 295-10 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-12
284:775
A. In the course of subdivision and/or site plan review, the reviewing board
shall consider, but not be limited to, such factors as the following:
(1) The adequacy of access, for fire and police protection and
otherwise.
(2) The adequacy of provisions for drainage of surface waters and for
waste disposal, including recycling.
(3) The protection of life and property from flood hazards.
(4) The adequacy of conservation and protection of soil from erosion
caused by excavating or grading.
(5) Conformity with the standards of the Air Safety and Zoning Act of
1983125 and the State Highway Access Management Act of 1989.126
(6) The adequacy of protection of potable water supplies.
(7) The impact of the proposed development upon the environment,
with particular consideration for any type of pollution which may
result.
(8) The location and the layout of accessory off-street parking and offstreet
loading spaces, the width and grading of all entrances and
exits to such places, the location of such exits and entrances, the
traffic flow, together with:
(a) The distance from the street intersections;
(b) The likelihood of left-hand turns and other turning movements;
and
(c) The anticipated traffic generation on and through roadways
within the Borough.
(9) The arrangements for safe and convenient pedestrian circulation,
on the site and on its approaches.
(10) The impact of the proposed layout upon the surrounding area, and
particularly upon any nearby residences, including, but not limited
to:
(a) The location and height of buildings and the extent of their
shadows;
(b) The location, intensity and directions of any outdoor lighting
and the proposed times of its use;
(c) The location of any overhead power lines;
(d) The likelihood of any other nuisances; and
125. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.
126. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 27:7-89 et seq.
§ 295-12 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-12
284:776
§ 295-13. Relief; exceptions.
The approving board, when acting upon applications for subdivision or site
plan approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
design and performance standards of this Part 1 as may be reasonable and
within the general purpose and intent of the provisions for subdivision or
site plan review and approval if the literal enforcement of one or more
provisions of this Part 1 is impracticable or will exact undue hardship
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
§ 295-14. Exemptions.
In the performance of review of any development application, the approving
board may waive requirements of plat preparation and standard
improvement specifications for any site plan or subdivision based on the
particular conditions associated with a tract of land. Such waiver of
(e) Whether appropriate and adequate screening is provided.
(11) The size, location and type of any signs, and their appropriateness
in the area involved.
(12) The arrangements of any outdoor display or storage and how same
may impact upon the surrounding area and/or major transportation
corridors traversing the Borough.
(13) The proposed landscaping and its appropriateness in the area
involved. Preservation of all substantial trees over four inches'
caliper is to be encouraged to the maximum extent possible.
(14) The arrangements of buildings, structures and open space on the
site.
(15) The appropriateness of the proposed location of all infrastructure
and utilities.
(16) Compatibility with adjacent uses and the adequacy of any proposed
buffering and screening methods.
B. In its review, where practical, the approving board shall encourage
creative design of the site to provide an environmentally sound
development and to encourage the conservation of energy resources.
C. Where County Planning Board review or approval is required on a
subdivision or site plan, the approving board shall condition any
approval it grants upon either timely receipt of a favorable report by the
County Planning Board or approved by the County Planning Board due
to its failure to submit a report within the required time period. If the
county's report is negative or attaches conditions, the original action by
the municipal approving board may be null and void, and a new
resolution may be adopted which considers the County Planning
Board's report.
§ 295-12 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-14
284:777
requirements shall not apply to fees, performance or maintenance
guarantees, inspections, or any development regulation in the zoning
ordinance requiring a variance or conditional use approval.
§ 295-15. Concept plan and informal review.
§ 295-16. (Reserved)
A. At the request of an applicant, the Planning Board/Zoning Board shall
grant a concept review or informal review of a concept plan for a
development for which the applicant intends to prepare and submit an
application for development.
B. The purpose of the concept plan is to provide Board input in the
formative stages of subdivision or site plan design.
C. Applicants seeking concept plan informal review shall submit the items
stipulated in this section 20 days before the concept plan meeting.
These items provide the applicant and the Board with an opportunity to
discuss the development proposal in its formative stages. No formal
action shall be taken by a Board hearing a concept review.
§ 295-14 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-16
284:778
ARTICLE III
Application Requirements
§ 295-17. Concept plan.
The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer the following
documents, materials and information when making a conceptual plan
application:
§ 295-18. Minor subdivision.
A. Six completed copies of the concept plan application form.
B. Twenty blue-on-white or black-on-white copies of the concept plan.
C. Application fees.
D. Escrow fees.
A. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer the following
documents, materials and information when making a minor
subdivision application:
(1) Six completed copies of the minor subdivision application form;
(2) Twenty blue- or black-on-white copies of the sketch plat, plus at
least one copy of the sketch plat printed on a Mylar, sepia, or other
reproducible material;
(3) Three completed copies of the sketch plat checklist;
(4) Application fee and escrow fee;
(5) Certification of the Tax Collector that all applicable taxes have been
paid to date;
(6) Three copies of any protective covenants, deed restrictions,
easements, court decisions or board decisions affecting the
property;
(7) Twenty copies of the drainage calculations, utility reports and soil
erosion and sediment control data, if required; and
(8) Twenty copies of any required traffic, environmental or other study
or report as may be required by the Board.
B. In lieu of the above required documents, an applicant may choose to file
with the administrative officer a deed which clearly describes the
proposed minor subdivision and four copies of the proposed subdivision
plat. In all cases, an application fee as required by Chapter 155, Fees.
C. If the applicant is not the owner of record of the land, then all
contractual agreements concerning its use shall be submitted.
§ 295-17 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-18
284:779
§ 295-19. Preliminary major subdivision.
§ 295-20. Final major subdivision.
D. If the application is found to be incomplete, the applicant shall be
notified in writing within 45 days of submission of such application or it
shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
A. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer the following
documents, materials and information when making a preliminary
major subdivision application:
(1) Twenty completed copies of the major subdivision application form;
(2) Twenty blue- or black-on-white copies of the preliminary
subdivision plat, which shall be in accordance with the provisions
of this Part 1 and all application statutes of the State of New Jersey,
plus at least one copy of the preliminary subdivision plat printed on
a Mylar, sepia, or other reproducible material;
(3) Three completed copies of the preliminary subdivision plat
checklist;
(4) Application fee and escrow fee;
(5) Certification of the Tax Collector that all applicable taxes have been
paid to date;
(6) Three copies of any protective covenants, deed restriction
easements, court decisions, or board decisions affecting the
property;
(7) Twenty copies of drainage calculations, utility reports and soil
erosion and sediment control data, if required; and
(8) Twenty copies of any required traffic, environmental, or other study
or report as may be required by the Board.
B. If the applicant is not the owner of record of the land, then all
contractual agreements concerning its use shall be submitted.
C. If the application is found to be incomplete, the applicant shall be
notified in writing within 45 days of submission of such application or it
shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
A. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer the following
documents, materials and information when making a final major
subdivision application:
(1) Twenty completed copies of the major subdivision (final)
application form.
(2) Twenty blue- or black-on-white copies of the final subdivision plat,
which shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Part 1 and
§ 295-18 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-20
284:780
§ 295-21. Minor site plan.
all applicable statutes of the State of New Jersey, plus at least one
copy of the final subdivision plat printed on Mylar, sepia or other
reproducible material.
(3) Three completed copies of the final subdivision plat checklist.
(4) Application fee and escrow fee.
(5) Certification of the Tax Collector that all applicable taxes have been
paid up to date.
(6) Three copies of any protective covenants, deed restrictions,
easements, court decisions or board decisions affecting the
property.
(7) Twenty copies of the drainage calculations, utility reports and soil
erosion and sediment control data, if required.
(8) Twenty copies of any required traffic, environmental or other study
or report as may be required by the Board.
B. If the applicant is not the owner of record of the land, then all
contractual agreements concerning its use shall be submitted.
C. If the application is found to be incomplete, the applicant shall be
notified in writing within 45 days of submission of such application or it
shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
A. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer the following
documents, materials and information when making a minor site plan
application:
(1) Twenty complete copies of the site plan review application form.
(2) Three completed copies of the minor site plan checklist.
(3) Application fee and escrow fee.
(4) Certification of the Tax Collector that all applicable taxes have been
paid to date.
(5) Three copies of any protective covenants, deed restrictions,
easements, court decisions or board decisions affecting the
property.
(6) Twenty copies of the drainage calculations, utility reports and soil
erosion and sediment control data per the requirements set forth in
this Part 1.
(7) Twenty copies of a survey of the property.
(8) Letter of principal points describing the proposed development.
§ 295-20 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-21
284:781
§ 295-22. Preliminary major site plan.
(9) Three copies of floor plans depicting all room dimensions and
showing all means of ingress and egress.
(10) A written statement of anticipated traffic impacts of the proposed
development.
(11) Twenty copies of the site plan (in accordance with § 295-36), which
must also include the following:
(a) A landscaping plan which lists the species of plants to be
provided, the calipers and/or height of any trees, the spacing
proposed between each plant, and details of any proposed
planters.
(b) A lighting plan which shows a detail of any proposed lighting
fixture and includes photometric contours to indicate the
intensity of any lighting.
(c) A utility plan showing the dimensions and locations of all
existing and proposed utilities, including water, electric, gas,
sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
B. Submittal of all of the above-mentioned items shall constitute a
complete application as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. Failure to submit all
of the above-mentioned items shall constitute an incomplete
application, and the administrative officer shall notify applicant of
same, in writing, within 45 days of submission of the application.
C. If the applicant is not the owner of record of the land, then all
contractual agreements concerning its use shall be submitted.
A. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer the following
documents, materials and information when making a preliminary
major site plan application:
(1) Twenty copies of the site plan review application form.
(2) Three completed copies of the preliminary site plan checklist.
(3) Application fee and escrow fee.
(4) Certification of the Tax Collector that all applicable taxes have been
paid to date.
(5) Three copies of any protective covenants, deed restrictions,
easements, court decisions or board decisions affecting the
property.
(6) Twenty copies of the drainage calculations, utility reports, and soil
erosion and sediment control data per the requirements set forth in
this Part 1.
§ 295-21 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-22
284:782
§ 295-23. Final major site plan.
(7) A certified list of all property owners within 200 feet of the subject
property.
(8) Twenty copies of a survey of the property.
(9) Letter of principal points describing the proposed development.
(10) Twenty copies of a completed variance application form (if
applicable).
(11) Twenty copies of any required traffic study, environmental study or
other study or report.
(12) Twenty copies of the site plan (in accordance with § 295-37), which
must also include the following:
(a) A landscaping plan which lists the species of plants to be
provided, the calipers and/or height of any trees, the spacing
proposed between each plant, and details of any proposed
planters.
(b) A lighting plan which shows a detail of any proposed lighting
fixture and includes photometric contours to indicate the
intensity of any lighting.
(c) A utility plan showing the dimensions and locations of all
existing and proposed utilities, including water, electric, gas,
sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
B. Submittal of all of the above-mentioned items shall constitute a
complete application as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. Failure to submit all
of the above-mentioned items shall constitute an incomplete
application, and the administrative officer shall notify applicant of
same, in writing, within 45 days of submission of the application.
C. If the applicant is not the owner of record of the land, then all
contractual agreements concerning its use shall be submitted.
A. The applicant shall submit to the administrative officer the following
documents, materials and information when making a final major site
plan application:
(1) Twenty completed copies of the site plan review application form.
(2) Three completed copies of the final site plan checklist.
(3) Application fee and escrow fee.
(4) Certification of the Tax Collector that all applicable taxes have been
paid to date.
§ 295-22 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-23
284:783
(5) Three copies of any protective covenants, deed restrictions,
easements, court decisions or board decisions affecting the
property.
(6) Twenty copies of the drainage calculations, utility reports, and soil
erosion and sediment control data per the requirements set forth in
this Part 1.
(7) A certified list of all property owners within 200 feet of the subject
property.
(8) Twenty copies of a survey of the property.
(9) Letter of principal points describing the proposed development.
(10) Completed variance application form (if applicable).
(11) Twenty copies of any required traffic study, environmental study or
other study or report.
(12) Twenty copies of the site plan (in accordance with § 295-38), which
must also include the following:
(a) A landscaping plan which lists the species of plants to be
provided, the calipers and/or height of any trees, the spacing
proposed between each plant, and details of any proposed
planters.
(b) A lighting plan which shows a detail of any proposed lighting
fixture and includes photometric contours to indicate the
intensity of any lighting.
(c) A utility plan showing the dimensions and locations of all
existing and proposed utilities, including water, electric, gas,
sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
B. Submittal of all of the above-mentioned items shall constitute a
complete application as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. Failure to submit all
of the above-mentioned items shall constitute an incomplete
application, and the administrative officer shall notify applicant of
same, in writing, within 45 days of submission of the application.
C. If the applicant is not the owner of record of the land, then all
contractual agreements concerning its use shall be submitted.
§ 295-23 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-23
284:784
ARTICLE IV
Application and Hearing Procedures
§ 295-24. Minor subdivision application.
A. Waiver of notice and hearing for fully compliant subdivision. The
approving board may waive public notice and hearing for a plan if it is
found that the subdivision of land contains not more than three lots
fronting on an existing street, does not involve any new street, road,
extension of municipal facilities, planned development, and does not
adversely affect the development of the remainder of the parcel or
adjoining property and is not in conflict with any provision of the
Borough Master Plan or this Part 1, and does not involve any variance
relief.
B. Filing. Minor subdivision applications shall be filed with the
administrative officer at least 21 days prior to the regular meeting of
the Board at which the applicant wishes to be heard. At the time of
submission, the developer shall pay all fees and submit the required
number of copies of the application, maps and other documents as
specified in this Part 1.
C. Distribution of plans. Copies of the minor subdivisions shall be
forwarded by the Board Secretary to the Borough Engineer, Board
Planner, County Planning Board, the Borough Police Chief, and Borough
Fire Chief prior to public hearing, and the Borough Engineer and
Planner shall file a written report on their review, where applicable.
Notice of the application for development shall also be filed with the
Zoning Officer, Tax Assessor and Tax Collector.
D. Determination of completeness. The administrative officer shall
forward the application to the approving board. If the application for
development is found to be incomplete, the developer shall be notified
in writing of the deficiencies therein within 45 days of submission of
such application or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted. An
application will be determined to be complete if fees have been paid
and if it contains the details required in this Part 1. No application will
be determined to be complete until all taxes have been paid. After
determining an application to be complete, the Board shall establish the
date of public hearing.
E. Time for approval.
(1) Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45
days of the date of submission of a complete application to the
administrative officer or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision
approval, and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the
failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
§ 295-24 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-24
284:785
endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required and
shall be so accepted by the County Recording Office for purposes
of filing subdivision plats.
(2) Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of
the subdivision, provided that the Board may condition such
approval on terms ensuring the provision of improvements.
F. Outside agency review and approval. Whenever review or approval of
the subdivision by the Middlesex County Planning Board or Freehold
Soil Conservation District is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285
(N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3), the Board shall condition any approval that it
grants upon timely receipt of an approval or exemption from the said
outside agencies of approval. The same conditions shall apply with
regard to all outside agencies having jurisdiction, including but not
limited to the Department of Transportation, the Department of
Environmental Protection, the Department of the Treasury, the
Department of Community Affairs, the Federal Communications
Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, or similar
government agencies.
G. Recording. Except as provided in Subsection I of this section, approval
of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date on which the
resolution of municipal approval is adopted unless within such period a
plat in conformity with such approval and the provision of the Map
Filing Law127 or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer,
the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor.
H. Effect of approval. The zoning requirements and general terms and
conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor
subdivision approval was granted shall not be changed for a period of
two years after the date on which the resolution of minor subdivision
approval is adopted, provided that the approved minor subdivision shall
have been duly recorded as provided in this section.
I. Extension period for filing.
(1) The approving board may extend the period of 190 days for filing a
minor subdivision plat or deed pursuant to Subsection G of this
section if the developer provides to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Planning Board that:
(a) The developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly,
from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental
entities; and
(b) The developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals.
127. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 295-24 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-24
284:786
§ 295-25. Preliminary major subdivision application.
(2) The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of the delay
caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the
approving board. The developer may apply for the extension either
before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
J. Extension of approval. The Planning Board may grant an extension of
minor subdivision approval for a period determined by the Board but
not exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the expiration
date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the
approving board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly
or indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays
in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental
entities and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently
pursued the required approvals. A developer shall apply for the
extension before:
(1) What would otherwise be the expiration date of minor subdivision
approval; or
(2) The 91st day after the developer receives the last legally required
approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
K. Distribution of approved plans. The Board shall retain four copies of the
approved maps to be distributed as follows:
(1) One copy for its files;
(2) One copy to the Building Inspector;
(3) One copy to the Borough Engineer; and
(4) One copy to the Tax Assessor.
A. Filing. Preliminary plats of major subdivisions shall be filed with the
administrative officer at least 21 days prior to the regular meeting of
the Board at which the applicant wishes to be heard. At the time of
submission, the developer shall pay all fees and submit the required
number of copies of the application, plat and such other information in
accordance with all appropriate sections of this Part 1. The plat and any
other engineering documents to be submitted shall be required in
tentative form for discussion purposes for preliminary approval.
However, if the applicant desires to be considered for a waiver of
providing detailed final construction plans as required by this Part 1 for
final approval, then the preliminary plans submitted must be of
sufficient detail and accuracy to permit such waiver. If the applicant is
not the owner of record of the land, then all contractual agreements
concerning its use shall be submitted.
B. Distribution of plans: the same as specified in § 295-24C of this article.
§ 295-24 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-25
284:787
C. Determination of completeness: the same as specified in § 295-24D of
this article, except that the application must contain the details
required in this Part 1. If the application is found to be incomplete, the
applicant shall be notified in writing within 45 days of submission of
such application or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
D. Amendments. If the Board requires any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the applicant that have been the
subject of a hearing, an amended application shall be submitted and
proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application for
development. The Board shall, if the proposed subdivision complies
with the standards and provisions of this Part 1, grant preliminary
approval to the subdivision.
E. Time for approval. Upon the submission to the administrative officer of
a complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the
approving board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45
days of the date of such submission or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Upon the submission to the
administrative officer of a complete application for a subdivision of
more than 10 lots, the approving board shall grant or deny preliminary
approval within 95 days of the date of such submission or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
approving authority to act within the above-prescribed time periods
shall be deemed to have granted preliminary subdivision approval.
F. Notice. Notice of hearings on major subdivision applications shall be
given by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12, and affidavits of publication and service shall be required
before public hearings are held.
G. Outside agencies: the same as specified in § 295-24F of this article.
H. Recording. Two preliminary plans shall be filed by the applicant with
the Middlesex County Planning Board. If the Middlesex County
Planning Board fails to act on the subdivision application within a
thirty-day period, the application shall be deemed to have been
approved by the County Planning Board. However, by mutual
agreement between the County Planning Board and the approving
board, and with the approval of the applicant, the thirty-day period may
be extended for an additional thirty-day period. Any such extension
shall so extend the time within which the municipal approving board
shall be required by law to act. Should the Middlesex County approving
board fail to receive an approved extension of time, and the Secretary
of the County Planning Board shall attest on the final plan to the failure
of the County Planning Board to report within the required time period,
such attestation shall be sufficient authorization for further Borough
action on the application.
I. Effect of preliminary approval. Preliminary approval of a major
subdivision shall, except as provided in Subsection I(4) of this section,
§ 295-25 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-25
284:788
confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three-year period
from the date on which the resolution of preliminary approval is
adopted:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including, but not
limited to, use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements, except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the municipality from modifying by ordinance such general
terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public
health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the approving board may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of
two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
(4) In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of 50 acres or
more, the approving board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsection I(1), (2) and (3) of this section for such period of time,
longer than three years, as shall be determined by the approving
board to be reasonable, taking into consideration a) the number of
dwelling units permissible under preliminary approval, b)
economic conditions and c) the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the
Planning Board may thereafter grant, an extension of preliminary
approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined
by the approving board to be reasonable, taking into consideration
a) the number of dwelling units permissible under preliminary
approval, b) the potential number of dwelling units of the section or
sections awaiting final approval, c) economic conditions, and d) the
comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards may govern.
(5) Whenever the approving board grants an extension of preliminary
approval pursuant to Subsection I(3) or (4) of this section and
preliminary approval has expired before the date on which the
extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would
otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may apply for the
extension either before or after what would otherwise be the
expiration date.
(6) The approving board shall grant an extension of preliminary
approval for a period determined by the approving board but not
exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the expiration
§ 295-25 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-25
284:789
§ 295-26. Final major subdivision application.
date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the
approving board that the developer was barred or prevented,
directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from
other governmental entities and that the developer applied
promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. A
developer shall apply for the extension before what would
otherwise be the expiration date of preliminary approval or the
91st day after the developer receives the last legally required
approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not preclude
the approving board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection I(3) and (4) of this section.
J. Distribution of approved plans: the same requirements as specified in
§ 295-24K of this article.
A. Filing. Final plats of major subdivisions shall be filed with the
administrative officer at least 21 days prior to the regular meeting of
the Board at which the applicant wishes to be heard and within three
years from the date of preliminary approval. At the time of submission,
the developer shall pay all fees and submit the required number of
copies of the application, plat and such other information in accordance
with all appropriate sections of this Part 1. Unless the preliminary plat
for subdivision approval was approved without changes, the final plat
and final construction plans shall have incorporated all changes or
modifications as were required by resolution of the Board. The
approving board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established by this Part 1 for final approval,
the conditions for preliminary approval and the standards prescribed by
the Map Filing Law.128
B. Status of improvements. The final plat shall be accompanied by a
statement from the Borough Engineer that he is in receipt of a map
showing all utilities or extensions thereof in exact location and
elevation, identifying those portions already installed and those to be
installed, and that the applicant has complied with one or both of the
following:
(1) He has installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations and the conditions of preliminary
approval.
(2) A performance guarantee has been posted in favor of the Borough
of South River of sufficient amount to assure completion of all
required improvements.
128. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 295-25 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-26
284:790
C. Determination of completeness. The administrative officer shall
forward the application to the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, depending upon which agency has jurisdiction. If the
application for development is found to be incomplete, the developer
shall be notified in writing of the deficiencies therein within 45 days of
submission of such application or it shall be deemed to be properly
submitted. An application will be determined to be complete if fees
have been paid and if it contains the details required in Article V of this
Part 1. No application will be determined to be complete until all taxes
have been paid and until all necessary stream encroachment permits,
sanitary sewer extension permits, soil erosion and sediment control
approvals and other required approvals have been obtained. After
determining an application to be complete, the Board shall establish the
date of public hearing.
D. Time for approval. The Board shall grant final approval if the detailed
drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for final
approval conform to the standards established by ordinance for final
approval, the conditions of preliminary approval and the standards
prescribed by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9
et seq.). Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
notification that the application is complete or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval, and a
certificate of the Board Secretary as to the failure of the Board to act
shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in
lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein
required and shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer for
purposes of filing subdivision plats.
E. Outside agency approval: the same as specified in § 295-24F of this
article.
F. Recording. After final approval, an applicant shall file the final
subdivision plan which conforms to the Map Filing Law, clearly
describing the approved subdivision, with the County Clerk, the
Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor.
G. Conditions of approval. Where the final approval contains conditions, if
all conditions are not complied with within 180 days from the date of
final approval, or within such additional time as the approving board
shall allow, the final approval shall lapse.
H. Signing. Approved final plats shall be signed by the Board Chairman
and Secretary.
I. Extension of approval.
(1) The Board may extend the ninety-five-day period if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that:
§ 295-26 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-26
284:791
(a) The developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly,
from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental
entities; and
(b) The developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals.
(2) The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay
caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the
Board. The developer may apply for an extension either before or
after the original expiration date.
J. Effect of final approval.
(1) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the applicant,
whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date of final approval, provided that in
the case of a major subdivision, the rights conferred by this section
shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the time
periods provided herein. If the applicant has followed the standards
prescribed for final approval and, in the case of a subdivision, has
duly recorded the plat as required, the approving board may extend
such period of protection by extensions of one year, but there shall
not be more than three extensions. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this Part 1, the granting of final approval terminates
the time period of preliminary approval for the section granted final
approval.
(2) In the case of a subdivision for a planned development of 50 acres
or more or major conventional subdivision or site development plan
for 150 acres or more, the approving board may grant the rights
referred to herein for such period of time, longer than two years, as
shall be determined by the approving board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration a) the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, b)
economic conditions, and c) the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the
approving board may thereafter grant, an extension of final
approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined
by the approving board to be reasonable, taking into consideration
a) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval, b) the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed, c)
economic conditions, and d) the comprehensiveness of the
development.
(3) Whenever the approving board grants an extension of final
approval pursuant to Subsection J(1) or (2) of this section and final
approval has expired before the date on which the extension is
§ 295-26 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-26
284:792
§ 295-27. Minor site plan application.
granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the
expiration date. The developer may apply for the extension either
before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
(4) The approving board shall grant an extension of final approval for a
period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from
what would otherwise be the expiration date if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued
these approvals.
(a) A developer shall apply for the extension before what would
otherwise be the expiration date of final approval or the 91st
day after the developer receives the last legally required
approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs
later.
(b) An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not
preclude the approving board from granting an extension
pursuant to Subsection J(4)(a) of this section.
(5) After Board approval of a final plat, the plans shall not be subject to
change except for minor engineering changes approved by the
Borough Engineer. If problems are experienced with construction
on the site, all means of construction necessary to remedy the
problems as required by the Borough Engineer shall be so
performed by the developer. However, any change in site design
subsequent to approval shall be regarded as a separate plan, and
site development plans showing the proposed new design shall be
submitted under the requirements of this section and shall be
separately approved under the provisions set forth herein.
K. Distribution of approved plans: the same as specified in § 295-24K of
this article, except that an additional copy of an approved major
subdivision shall be retained and distributed to the Board of Education.
A. Minor site plan waiver of hearing. The Planning Board may waive notice
and public hearing for an application for development if the Planning
Board finds that the application for development conforms to the
definition of "minor site plan," does not adversely affect the remainder
of the site or adjoining property and is not in conflict with any provision
of the Borough Master Plan and this Part 1.
B. Filing. Minor site plan applications shall be filed with the administrative
officer at least 21 days prior to the regular meeting of the Board at
which the applicant wishes to be heard. At the time of submission, the
§ 295-26 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-27
284:793
developer shall pay all fees and submit the required number of copies of
the application, maps and other documents as specified in this Part 1. If
the applicant is not the owner of record of the land, then all contractual
agreements concerning its use shall be submitted.
C. Distribution of plans. Copies of the minor site plan shall be forwarded
by the Board Secretary to the Borough Engineer, Board Planning
Consultant and County Planning Board prior to public hearing, and the
Borough Engineer and Planner shall file a written report on their
review, where applicable. Notice of the application for development
shall also be filed with the Zoning Officer, Tax Assessor and Tax
Collector.
D. Determination of completeness. The administrative officer shall
forward the application to the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, depending upon which agency has jurisdiction. If the
application for development is found to be incomplete, the developer
shall be notified in writing of the deficiencies therein within 45 days of
submission of such application or it shall be determined to be properly
submitted. An application will be determined to be complete if fees
have been paid and if it contains the details required in Article V of this
Part 1. No application will be determined to be complete until all taxes
have been paid. After determining an application to be complete, the
Board shall establish the date of public hearing.
E. Time for approval.
(1) Minor site plan approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days
of the date of submission of a complete application or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
approving board to act within 45 days shall constitute minor site
plan approval, and a certificate of the Board Secretary as to the
failure of the Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required and
shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer for purposes
of filing site plans.
(2) Minor site plan approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the
site plan by the Board, provided that the Board or said
subcommittee may condition such approval on terms ensuring the
provision of improvements.
F. County Planning Board review: the same requirement as specified in
§ 295-24F of this article.
G. Recording. Minor site plan approval shall expire 190 days from the date
on which the resolution of municipal approval is adopted unless within
such period a plan in conformity with such approval is filed by the
applicant with the County Recording Officer, the Borough Engineer and
the Borough Tax Assessor. Any such plan for filing shall have been
signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the approving board.
§ 295-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-27
284:794
§ 295-28. Preliminary major site plan application.
H. Effect of approval. The zoning requirements and general terms and
conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site
plan approval was granted shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of minor site plan approval. The Planning Board
shall grant an extension of this period for a period determined by the
Board, but not exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the
expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in
obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities
and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
approvals. A developer shall apply for this extension before what would
otherwise be the expiration date or the 91st day after the date on which
the developer receives the last of the legally required approvals from
the other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
I. Distribution of approved plans: the same requirements as specified in
§ 295-24K of this article.
A. Filing. Preliminary site plans shall be filed with the administrative
officer at least 21 days prior to the regular meeting of the Board at
which the applicant wishes to be heard. At the time of submission, the
developer shall pay all fees and submit the required number of copies of
the application, site plan and such other information in accordance with
all appropriate sections of this Part 1. The site plan and any engineering
documents to be submitted shall be required in tentative form for
discussion purposes for preliminary approval. If any architectural plans
are required to be submitted for site plan approval, the preliminary
plans and elevations shall be sufficient. If the applicant is not the owner
of record of the land, then all contractual agreements concerning its
use shall be submitted.
B. (Reserved)
C. Distribution of plans.
(1) Copies of the preliminary site plan or notice of the application shall
be forwarded by the Board Secretary to the following agencies
prior to public hearing:
(a) Agencies to receive a copy of site plan:
[1] The Borough Engineer.
[2] The Borough Planning Consultant.
[3] The County Planning Board.
[4] The Utilities Department.
[5] The Shade Tree Commission.
§ 295-27 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-28
284:795
[6] The Bureau of Fire Prevention.
[7] The Police Chief.
(b) Agencies to receive notice of the application:
[1] The Zoning Officer.
[2] The Tax Assessor.
[3] The Tax Collector.
[4] The Board of Health.
[5] The environmental commission.
(2) The Borough Engineer and the Planner shall file a written report on
their review, where applicable.
D. Determination of completeness: the same as specified in § 295-24D of
this section, except that the application must contain the details
required in Article V of this Part 1.
E. Amendments. If the Board requires any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been the
subject of a hearing, an amended application for development shall be
submitted and proceeded upon as in the case of the original application
for development. The Board shall, if the proposed development
complies with the requirements of this Part 1 and other applicable
ordinances, grant preliminary site plan approval.
F. Time for approval. Preliminary site plan approval for a site plan of 10
acres of land or less and 10 dwelling units or less shall be granted or
denied within 45 days after notification that the application is complete
or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer.
Preliminary site plan approval for a site plan for more than 10 acres and
more than 10 dwelling units shall be granted or denied within 95 days
after such notification or within such further time as consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the Board shall be deemed to have granted
approval of the site plan.
G. Notice. Notice of hearings on major subdivision applications shall be
given by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12, and affidavits of publication and service shall be required
before public hearings are held.
H. County Planning Board: the same as specified in § 295-24F of this Part
1.
I. Recording. Two preliminary plans shall be filed by the applicant with
the Middlesex County Planning Board. If the Middlesex County
Planning Board fails to act on the subdivision application within a
thirty-day period, the application shall be deemed to have been
approved by the County Planning Board. However, by the mutual
§ 295-28 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-28
284:796
agreement between the County Planning Board and the approving
board, and with the approval of the applicant, the thirty-day period
may be extended for an additional thirty-day period. Any such extension
shall so extend the time within which the municipal approving authority
shall be required by law to act. Should the Middlesex County Planning
Board fail to receive an approved extension of time and the Secretary
of the County Planning Board shall attest on the final plan to the failure
of the County Planning Board to report within the required time period,
such attestation shall be sufficient authorization for further Borough
action on the application.
J. Effect of preliminary approval. Preliminary approval of a major site plan
shall, except as provided in Subsection J(4) of this section, confer upon
the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date
on which the resolution of preliminary approval is adopted:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including, but not
limited to, use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements, except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the municipality from modifying by ordinance such general
terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public
health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary site plan.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the approving board may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of
two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
(4) In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the
approving board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection
J(1), (2) and (3) of this section for such period of time, longer than
three years, as shall be determined by the approving board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration a) the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, b) economic conditions and c) the comprehensiveness of
the development. The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the
Planning Board may thereafter grant, an extension of preliminary
approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined
by the approving board to be reasonable, taking into consideration
a) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval, b) the potential number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the section or
sections awaiting final approval, c) economic conditions, and d) the
§ 295-28 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-28
284:797
§ 295-29. Final major site plan application.
comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards may govern.
(5) Whenever the approving board grants an extension of preliminary
approval pursuant to Subsection J(3) or (4) of this section and
preliminary approval has expired before the date on which the
extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would
otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may apply for the
extension either before or after what would otherwise be the
expiration date.
(6) The approving board shall grant an extension of preliminary
approval for a period determined by the approving board, but not
exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the expiration
date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the
approving board that the developer was barred or prevented,
directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from
other governmental entities and that the developer applied
promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. A
developer shall apply for the extension before what would
otherwise be the expiration date of preliminary approval or the
91st day after the developer receives the last legally required
approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not preclude
the approving board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection J(3) or (4) of this section.
K. Distribution of approved plans: the same requirements as specified in
§ 295-24K of this section.
A. Filing. Final plans of major site plans shall be filed with the
administrative officer at least 21 days prior to the regular meeting of
the Board at which the applicant wishes to be heard and within three
years from the date of preliminary approval.
(1) At the time of submission, the developer shall pay all fees and
submit the required number of copies of the application, plat and
such other information in accordance with all appropriate sections
of this Part 1.
(2) Unless the preliminary site plan approval was approved without
changes, the final plan and final construction plans shall have
incorporated all changes or modifications as were required by
resolution of the Board.
(3) The approving board shall grant final approval if the detailed
drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for final
§ 295-28 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-29
284:798
approval conform to the standards established by this Part 1 for
final approval and the conditions for preliminary approval.
B. Status of improvements. The final plat shall be accompanied by a
statement from the Borough Engineer that he is in receipt of a map
showing all utilities or extensions thereof in exact location and
elevation, identifying those portions already installed and those to be
installed, and that the applicant has complied with one or both of the
following:
(1) He has installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations and the conditions of preliminary
approval.
(2) A performance guarantee has been posted in favor of the Borough
of South River in sufficient amount to assure completion of all
required improvements.
C. Determination of completeness. The administrative officer shall
forward the application to the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, depending upon which agency has jurisdiction. If the
application for development is found to be incomplete, the developer
shall be notified in writing of the deficiencies therein within 45 days of
submission of such application or it shall be deemed to be properly
submitted. An application will be determined to be complete if fees
have been paid and if it contains the details required in Article V of this
Part 1. No application will be determined to be complete until all taxes
have been paid and until all necessary stream encroachment permits,
sanitary sewer extension permits, soil erosion and sediment control
approvals and other required approvals have been obtained. After
determining an application to be complete, the Board shall establish the
date of public hearing.
D. Time for approval. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the
detailed drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for
final approval conform to the standards established by ordinance for
final approval, provided that in the case of a planned unit development,
planned unit residential development or residential cluster, the
Planning Board may permit minimal deviations from the conditions of
preliminary approval necessitated by change of conditions beyond the
control of the developer since the date of preliminary approval without
the developer being required to submit another application for
development for preliminary approval. Final approval shall be granted
or denied within 45 days after notification that the application is
complete or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute final approval, and a certificate of the Board Secretary as to
the failure of the Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or
other evidence of approval herein required and shall be so accepted by
the County Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
§ 295-29 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-29
284:799
E. Outside agency approval: the same as specified in § 295-24F of this Part
1.
F. Recording. After final approval, an applicant shall file the final
subdivision plat which conforms to the Map Filing Law,129 clearly
describing the approved subdivision, with the County Clerk, the
Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Final approval of a
major site plan shall expire 95 days from the date of signing of the plats
unless within such period the plat shall have been duly filed by the
developer with the County Recording Officer. The Planning Board may,
for good cause shown, extend the period of recording for an additional
period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
G. Conditions of approval. Where the final approval contains conditions, if
all conditions are not complied with within 180 days from the date of
final approval, or within such additional time as the approving board
shall allow, the final approval shall lapse.
H. Signing. Approved final plans shall be signed by the Board Chairman
and Secretary.
I. Extension of approval. The approving board may extend the ninety-fiveday
or one-hundred-ninety-day period if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board that 1) the developer was
barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays
in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental or
quasi-governmental entities, and 2) the developer applied promptly for
and diligently pursued the required approvals. The length of the
extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the wait for the
required approvals, as determined by the Planning Board. The
developer may apply for an extension either before or after the original
expiration date.
J. Effect of final approval.
(1) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer,
whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date on which the resolution of final
approval is adopted. If the developer has followed the standards
prescribed for final approval, the Planning Board may extend such
period of protection for extensions of one year but not to exceed
three extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this act,
the granting of final approval terminates the time period of
preliminary approval.
(2) In the case of a site plan for a planned development of 50 acres or
more, site plan for 150 acres or more, or site plan for development
of a nonresidential floor area of 200,000 square feet or more, the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection J(1)
129. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 295-29 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-29
284:800
§ 295-30. Approval requirements for all subdivisions and site plan
applications.
of this section for such period of time, longer than two years,
as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration a) the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, b)
economic conditions and c) the comprehensiveness of the
development. The developer may apply for thereafter, and the
Planning Board may thereafter grant, an extension of final approval
for such additional period of time as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration a) the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval, b) the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed, c) economic
conditions, and d) the comprehensiveness of the development.
(3) Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of final approval
pursuant to Subsection J(1) or (2) of this section and final approval
has expired before the date on which the extension is granted, the
extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration
date. The developer may apply for the extension either before or
after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
(4) The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a
period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year from
what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued
these approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension before
what would otherwise be the expiration date of final approval or the
91st day after the developer receives the last legally required
approval from other government entities, whichever occurs later.
An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall not preclude
the Planning Board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection J(1) or (2) of this section.
K. Distribution of approved plans: the same as specified in § 295-24K of
this article, except that an additional copy of an approved major
residential site plan shall be retained and distributed to the Board of
Education.
A. Subdivision and site plan approval requirements. Board approval of the
subdivision or site plan shall be granted upon a finding that the plan
complies with the following standards and regulations:
(1) That the applicant has submitted a plat containing all of the
information and data as provided for in this Part 1.
§ 295-29 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-30
284:801
(2) That the details of the plat are in accord with the standards of this
Part 1 and of all ordinances of the Borough, including the Master
Plan, as may be in existence at the time of the application.
(3) That all parking and traffic problems shall be reasonably resolved
and that all parking areas shall provide for safe passage of traffic.
(4) That adequate provisions are made so as to prevent any surface
and subsurface drainage problems.
(5) That the location, power, direction and time of any outdoor lighting
will not have an adverse effect upon any properties in adjoining
residential districts by impairing the established character or the
potential use of the properties in such districts.
(6) That the details of the plat for the authorized use will be such that
the operation will not be detrimental to the public interest.
(7) That adequate and suitable water supply, sewerage and electrical
facilities are available for use by the proposed use.
B. Simultaneous review and approval.
(1) The approving board, when acting upon applications for
preliminary or minor subdivision approval, shall have the power to
grant such extensions from the requirements for subdivision
approval as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and
intent of the provisions for subdivision review and approval of an
ordinance adopted pursuant to this article, if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of the ordinance is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
(2) The approving board, when acting upon applications for
preliminary site plan approval, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for site plan approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
provisions for site plan review and approval of an ordinance
adopted pursuant to this article, if the literal enforcement of one or
more provisions of the ordinance is impracticable or will exact
undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question.
(3) The Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for
subdivision approval without the developer being required to hold
further hearings. The longest time period for action by the Planning
Board, whether it be for subdivision, conditional use or site plan
approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is
requested by the developer pursuant to this subsection, notice of
the hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for
such conditional use.
§ 295-30 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-30
284:802
C. Time periods. Whenever an application for approval of a subdivision
plat, site plan or conditional use includes a request for relief pursuant
to Section 47 of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60), the
Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the application within
120 days after submission by a developer of a complete application to
the administrative officer or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. In the event that the developer elects to
submit separate consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall
apply to the application for approval of the variance or direction for
issuance of a permit. The period for granting or denying any
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this Part 1.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall
be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of
the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required
and shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer for purposes
of filing subdivision plats.
D. Conditions of approval.
(1) Conditions binding. All conditions of any preliminary and final
approval shall be binding upon all present and future owners,
tenants, occupants, lessors, lessees, heirs, assignees, developers,
contractors and subcontractors.
(2) Failure to maintain. All persons receiving development approval for
property or their successors in title shall be responsible for
installing, maintaining and properly utilizing on-site, off-site and
off-tract improvements required by the Board, including, but not
limited to, parking arrangements, buffer zones, drainage facilities,
exterior lighting plans, and other requirements of the Board as
reflected on the plans in the Board minutes. Failure of the property
owner to install, maintain and/or utilize improvements as provided
by the site plan approval shall constitute a violation of this Part 1
and shall be subject to the enforcement procedures set forth
herein.
§ 295-30 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-30
284:803

ARTICLE V
Plan Content Requirements for Completeness
§ 295-31. Conformity with requirements.
No development application in which a plat is required shall be accepted
unless such plat conforms to the following requirements as to form, content,
and accompanying information and complies with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq. (Map Filing Law), as amended. All plats shall be drawn by
a land surveyor as required by law, licensed to practice in the State of New
Jersey, and shall bear the signature, seal, license number and address of
the land surveyor, except that sketch plats of minor subdivisions are exempt
from this requirement. All drawings of improvements shall be signed and
sealed by a licensed professional engineer of the State of New Jersey.
§ 295-32. Concept plans.
For the concept plan state, only preliminary project and area information,
which for the most part is readily obtained, is required and shall include
a Tax Map sheet, showing the property to be developed and any abutting
streets, with names, North arrow, and topographic features from the United
States Geodetic Survey (USGS) maps.
§ 295-33. Minor subdivision.
The following shall apply to minor subdivisions:
A. In order to be deemed complete by the administrative officer, the sketch
plat shall be based on Tax Map information or some similarly accurate
base at a scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch, to enable the entire
tract to be shown on one of three standard sizes, namely, 11 inches by
17 inches, 18 inches by 24 inches, or 24 inches by 36 inches, and shall
show or include the following information:
(1) A key map at a scale of one inch equals 500 feet showing the
location of the tract to be subdivided and its relationship to
surrounding areas within 1,000 feet of its boundaries. All zoning
boundaries and classifications affecting the tract to be subdivided,
as well as the intersection of at least two public streets together
with the names of such streets, shall also be shown.
(2) A title box containing the title of the map, the name of the
development, if applicable, the Tax Map sheet, block and lot
numbers, the name, address, license number, signatures and
embossed seal of the engineer who prepared the engineering
details, if any, the date of original plan preparation, and a box for
recording revision dates, all to appear in the lower right-hand
corner of the plat.
(3) A survey prepared by a surveyor licensed in the State of New
Jersey, or certification of a licensed land surveyor as to boundaries
§ 295-31 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-33
284:805
and topographic conditions. Such certification shall include name,
address, license number, signature and seal.
(4) Notes adjacent to the title box shall include the name and address
of the owner of the tract being subdivided and of the subdivider, if
different from the owner. The current zoning and a schedule
showing compliance with zoning district bulk requirements shall
also be shown.
(5) Names of all adjacent landowners and owners of property directly
across any official street, as disclosed by current tax records. All
block and lot numbers shall also be provided.
(6) North arrow and graphic scale.
(7) The location of the tract to be subdivided in relation to any larger
tract of which it is a part.
(8) The layout of the proposed subdivision, indicating all lot lines and
the dimensions thereof in feet and tenths, as well as the acreage of
each proposed lot and minimum setback lines.
(9) The location, size, type and specifications of all existing and
proposed utilities and storm drainage facilities necessary to service
the site.
(10) The location, size, and use of all existing structures, wooded areas,
watercourses and drainage facilities on the site and within 200 feet
of the property in question, as well as the location of all easements,
rights-of-way, existing fences, walls, culverts, bridges, roadways,
curbs, sidewalks and driveways on the tract. All trees with a caliper
of six inches or more as measured three feet above the ground shall
also be shown, as shall floodway and food hazard boundaries when
applicable.
(11) A copy of any covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions that are
intended to cover all or part of the tract.
(12) Certification that the applicant is the agent or owner of the land or
that the owner has given consent under an option agreement or
that the applicant is a contract purchaser or lessee. If the applicant
is not the owner of record of the land, then all contractual
agreements concerning its use shall be submitted.
(13) A certificate from the Tax Collector that no taxes or assessments
for local improvements are due or delinquent.
(14) A signature block for signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of
the Board.
(15) The subdivision plan shall indicate the following improvements:
necessary water and sewer services, curb, sidewalk, site grading,
paved driveway, concrete driveway apron, improved roadway
§ 295-33 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-33
284:806
§ 295-34. Preliminary major subdivision.
The following shall apply to preliminary major subdivisions:
pavement or pavement repairs along frontage of all adjoining
streets, and all other improvements required for the development
of the proposed subdivision.
(16) A soil erosion and sediment control plan, if applicable.
(17) Trees proposed to be saved must be located and tree save details
provided; limit of disturbance line must be shown.
(18) The location and dimensions of surface or subsurface structures
proposed for demolition must be provided.
(19) Such other information as may be required by the Board in order to
make an informed decision.
B. Submittal of all of the above-mentioned items shall constitute a
complete application as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. Failure to submit all
of the above-mentioned items shall constitute an incomplete
application, and the administrative officer shall notify the applicant of
same, in writing, within 45 days of submission of the application.
C. Any applicant may request the administrative officer to waive any of the
above required documents. Said request must be made in writing and
must specifically state the reasons for the waiver request. Upon receipt
of a request to waive certain requirements, it shall be the duty of the
administrative officer to render a decision regarding the request within
10 days of receipt of same.
A. The preliminary plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced
at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet, and it shall be one of
three standard sizes, namely, 18 inches by 24 inches, 24 inches by 36
inches or 30 inches by 42 inches. Preliminary plats shall be designed
and drawn by a person duly licensed for such purpose by the State of
New Jersey. The plat shall be designed in compliance with the
provisions of this Part 1 and shall show or be accompanied by the
following information in order to be deemed complete by the
administrative officer:
(1) All items required for a minor subdivision sketch plat.
(2) The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners, as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records, within 200 feet
of the perimeter of the entire tract.
(3) Elevations, to be based upon U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey,
showing existing contours with interval of one foot where slopes
are 10% or less and two feet where slopes are more than 20%.
Where changes in grade are proposed, finished grades shall be
indicated. Topographic data shall be provided for the entire site as
§ 295-33 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-34
284:807
well as a one-hundred-foot overlap onto adjacent properties as
deemed necessary to determine the existing drainage and grading
patterns.
(4) Existing spot elevations on structures, pavements, walks, or other
physical features with sufficient detail to determine existing
conditions.
(5) Identification of any wetlands, floodways, flood hazard areas, etc.,
or any other environmentally sensitive areas.
(6) Proposed elevations of the site shall be indicated by spot elevations
at all corners of all buildings and lot corners and at changes in
grade, and by curb elevations at lot corners. Finished first-floor and
garage floor elevations shall also be shown for all buildings.
Designed proposed grading contours shall be provided.
(7) A drainage plan based on the USGS Quadrangle Map with the
drainage area delineated, contributory access given in acres, the
anticipated existing and proposed runoff based on a twenty-fiveyear
storm, and the upstream drainage area being fully developed.
The size, location and capacity of existing downstream facilities
shall be shown.
(8) A design report for the water, sewer and drainage facilities, and
plans of proposed water, sanitary sewer (gas and electricity, if
ordered) and storm sewers designed in accordance with Borough
standards, showing all adjacent existing and proposed facilities,
connections, proposed method of connections, pipe sizes, types and
slopes, structures as necessary for satisfactory operation. Plans,
profiles and details are required for all water, sewer and drainage
facilities.
(9) Plans of all roadways, including improvements in accordance with
Borough requirements for pavement width, thickness, center line,
radius, grade, transitions, curbs, sidewalks, driveway aprons and
other applicable requirements.
(10) Plans and profiles of all existing and proposed roadways, pipelines,
manholes, structures and proposed facilities showing all existing
and proposed pavement elevations, inverts, rim elevations, grate
elevations and the clearance of all crossing utilities.
(11) A soil erosion and sediment control plan indicating the proposed
methods of preventing erosion, and situation of property in
question as well as downstream properties or watercourses.
(12) A landscaping plan which shall locate, detail, quantify and indicate
the proposed vegetation and landscaping of the site and scheduling
of placement of same.
(13) Statement of anticipated environmental impact.
§ 295-34 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-34
284:808
§ 295-35. Final major subdivision.
The following shall apply to final major subdivisions:
(14) Traffic impact study.
B. Submittal of all of the above-mentioned items shall constitute a
complete application as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. Failure to submit all
of the above-mentioned items shall constitute an incomplete
application, and the administrative officer shall notify the applicant of
same, in writing, within 45 days of submission of the application.
C. Any applicant may request the administrative officer to waive any of the
above required documents. Said request must be made in writing and
must specifically state the reasons for the waiver request. Upon receipt
of a request to waive certain requirements, it shall be the duty of the
administrative officer to render a decision regarding the request within
10 days of receipt of same.
A. The final plat shall be drawn in ink or on Mylar or cloth at a scale of not
less than one inch equals 50 feet and in compliance with all provisions
of the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.). The following shall be
shown on the final plat in order to be deemed complete by the
administrative officer:
(1) All items required for the preliminary major subdivision plat.
(2) Certification by a surveyor authorized to practice in the State of
New Jersey as to the accuracy of the details of the plat, and
certification of engineering details by an engineer licensed in New
Jersey.
(3) Tract boundary lines, indicating the bearings of all lot lines and
dimensions thereof, as well as the acreage of each lot and minimum
building setback lines.
(4) The location and description of all proposed or existing monuments
in accordance with the Map Filing Law.
(5) Boundaries and designation of the purpose of any easements or
land reserved or dedicated for public use.
(6) Right-of-way lines of all existing and proposed streets, easements
and other rights-of-way, deflection angles, radii, arcs and central
angles for all curves, all with accurate dimensions and bearings
and minimum width as required by Borough standards.
(7) Acreage of the tract being subdivided and the proposed use of all
nonresidential lots.
(8) Final construction plans providing all information required for the
preliminary plat. However, said plans shall be based on final
elevations and final lot dimensions. The requirement for final
§ 295-34 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-35
284:809
construction plans may be waived by the Board if it can be
determined that the preliminary plat was prepared to an accuracy
and detail acceptable to the Borough Engineer.
(9) Copies of all approvals for sanitary sewer extension permits,
stream encroachment permits, soil erosion and sediment control
permits, Middlesex County Planning Board approval, and all other
applicable approvals required for construction of the project from
all other agencies with jurisdiction.
(10) The titles and dates of all filed maps for lands abutting the tract.
(11) Title policy certifying that all proposed streets are free and clear of
any encumbrances.
(12)Name and address of the corporate secretary of all public utilities
and the general manager of all cable television companies that own
land or any facility or that possess a right-of-way or easement
within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject
of the proposed subdivision.
(13) All details as required by this Part 1.
(14) The final plat shall contain the following statements, certifications
and endorsements:
(a) Signature of the applicant's surveyor certifying compliance
with the Map Filing Law.
(b) Signature of the owner consenting to the filing of the plat at
the Middlesex County Clerk's office.
(c) Signature of Borough Clerk certifying that the required cash
and bonds guaranteeing the setting of monuments have been
posted.
(d) Signature of the Borough Engineer certifying compliance with
the Map Filing Law and applicable municipal requirements.
(e) Signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the Board
certifying the approval of the final plat.
(f) Signature of the Borough Clerk certifying compliance with the
Map Filing Law and consenting to filing of the plat in the
Middlesex County Clerk's office.
(15) A performance guarantee in favor of the Borough of South River
and inspection fees if improvements have not already been
constructed, approved as to size by the Borough Engineer and
approved as to form by the Board Attorney.
(16) Such other information as may be required by the Board in order to
make an informed decision.
§ 295-35 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-35
284:810
§ 295-36. Minor site plan.
The following shall apply to minor site plans:
B. Submittal of all of the above-mentioned items shall constitute a
complete application as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. Failure to submit all
of the above-mentioned items shall constitute an incomplete
application, and the administrative officer shall notify the applicant of
same, in writing, within 45 days of submission of the application.
C. Unless the preliminary plat is approved without any changes or
modifications being required, the final plat shall have incorporated all
changes or modifications as required by the Board. Nothing in this Part
1 shall preclude an applicant from seeking both preliminary and final
major subdivision approval at the same time.
D. Any applicant may request the administrative officer to waive any of the
above required documents. Said request must be made in writing and
must specifically state the reasons for the waiver request. Upon receipt
of a request to waive certain requirements, it shall be the duty of the
administrative officer to render a decision regarding the request within
10 days of receipt of same.
A. The minor site plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at
a scale of no more than 50 feet to the inch. All distances shall be in feet
and decimals of a foot, and all bearings shall be given to the nearest 10
seconds. For topographical and boundary survey information, the site
plan shall be signed and sealed by a licensed land surveyor. For all
elements of design, including drainage, pavements, curbing,
embankments, horizontal and vertical geometries, utilities, and all
pertinent structures, drawings shall be signed and sealed by a licensed
professional engineer. The plan shall show or be accompanied by the
following in order to be determined complete by the administrative
officer:
(1) A key map at a scale of one inch equals 500 feet showing the
location of the tract and its relationship to surrounding areas
within 1,000 feet of its boundaries. Zoning boundaries and the
intersection of at least two public streets, together with the names
of such streets, shall also be shown.
(2) A title box containing the title of the map, the Tax Map sheet, block
and lot numbers, the name, address, license number, signature and
embossed seal of the engineer who prepared the engineer details,
the date of original plat preparation and a box to record revision
dates, all to appear in the lower right-hand corner of the site plan.
(3) A survey prepared by a surveyor licensed in the State of New
Jersey, or certification of a licensed land surveyor as to boundaries
and topographic conditions. Such certification shall include name,
address, license number, signature and seal.
§ 295-35 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-36
284:811
(4) Notes adjacent to the title box shall include the name and address
of the owner and of the applicant, if different from the owner. The
current zoning and a schedule showing compliance with the zoning
district bulk requirements shall also be shown.
(5) Names of all landowners within 200 feet as disclosed by current tax
records. Block and lot numbers shall also be provided.
(6) North point and graphic scale.
(7) The location, size, type and specifics of all existing and proposed
utilities and storm drainage facilities necessary to service the site,
whether publicly or privately owned, as well as floodway and flood
hazard boundaries and setback lines.
(8) The location, size and use of all existing structures on the site and
within 200 feet of the property in question, as well as all other
structures such as fences, walls, culverts, bridges, roadways,
curbs, sidewalks and driveways on the tract. Structures to be
removed shall be so indicated.
(9) The location, size and use of all existing wooded areas,
watercourses, and drainage facilities on the site and within 200
feet of the property in question, as well as building or setback lines,
lines of existing streets, lots, reservations, and the location of all
easements and areas dedicated to the public, including grants,
restrictions and rights-of-way.
(10) All trees with a caliper of six inches or more as measured three feet
above the ground shall also be shown.
(11) Location of flood hazard boundaries as delineated by HUD-FHA,
wooded areas, including single trees not in wooded areas, and
other significant existing features.
(12) A copy of any covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions that are
intended to cover all or any part of the tract.
(13) All distances, as measured along the center line, of the existing
streets abutting the property to the nearest intersection with any
other public street.
(14) Elevations based upon U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey datum
showing existing contours with interval of one foot where slopes
are 3% or less, two feet where slopes are more than 3%. Where
changes in grade are proposed, existing grades shall be indicated
by dashed lines, and finished grades shall be indicated by solid
lines. Topographic data shall be provided for the entire site as well
as suitable overlap onto adjacent properties as deemed necessary
to determine existing drainage and grading patterns.
§ 295-36 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-36
284:812
(15) Existing spot elevations on structures, pavements, walks or
physical features with sufficient detail to determine the existing
conditions.
(16) The proposed use(s) of land and buildings and proposed location of
structures, including exterior grades, finished floor elevations and
elevations of outside corners. Elevations should also be shown for
loading docks, ramps, and other points where necessary to
determine proper construction of same.
(17) All proposed means of vehicular access for ingress and egress to
and from the site onto public streets, showing the size and location
of driveways and curb cuts, including the possible utilization of
traffic channels, channelization, acceleration, deceleration lanes,
additional width, and any other device necessary to prevent a
difficult traffic situation.
(18) All walkways, sidewalks and rights-of-way for pedestrian traffic.
(19) The location and design of any off-street parking or loading areas,
showing the size and location of parking stalls, bays, aisles and
boundaries.
(20) The location of all existing and proposed storm drainage
structures, indicating pipe, swale or ditch sizes, inverts, capacities,
grades and direction of flow. In addition to design information, the
plan shall include a stormwater analysis report prepared by the
applicant's licensed engineer, detailing the methodologies used for
calculation of runoff from all areas contributing to stormwater
drainage.
(21) The location of all proposed water lines, valves, hydrants and
service connections and of all sewer lines.
(22) Cross sections, center-line profiles and tentative grades of all
proposed streets, and plans and profiles of all proposed utility
layouts, showing feasible connections to any existing or proposed
system.
(23) Architectural details showing proposed building elevations, floor
plans, type of constructions materials. All roof-mounted
appurtenances must be screened from view.
(24) Location of all existing and proposed signs, including dimensions,
area and illumination.
(25) The proposed location, direction of illumination, power and time of
proposed outdoor lighting.
(26) Proposed screening and landscaping, including a planting plan
which identifies type, size and quantity of planting.
(27) The location and size of refuse areas and means of screening same.
§ 295-36 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-36
284:813
§ 295-37. Preliminary major site plan.
The following shall apply to preliminary major site plans:
(28) A copy of any covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions that are
intended to cover all or part of the tract.
(29) Certificate from the Tax Collector that no taxes or assessments for
local improvements are due or delinquent.
(30) All proposed soil erosion and sediment control measures.
(31) An environmental impact statement.
(32) Signature block for signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the
Board.
(33) The site plan shall indicate the following improvements: necessary
water and sewer service, curb, sidewalk, site grading, paved
driveway, concrete driveway apron, improved roadway pavement
or pavement repairs along frontage of all adjoining streets, and all
other improvements required for the development of the site.
(34) Such other information or data as may be required by the Board in
order to determine that the details of the site plan are in
accordance with the standards of this Part 1 and all other
ordinances of the Borough and, further, that the building or use will
not offend the public interest.
(35) Trees proposed to be saved must be located and tree save details
provided; limit of disturbance line must be shown.
(36) The location and dimensions of surface or subsurface structures
proposed for demolition must be provided.
(37) A list of stockholders holding at least 10% of stock must be
provided.
B. Any applicant may request the administrative officer to waive any of the
above required documents. Said request must be made in writing and
must specifically state the reasons for the waiver request. Upon receipt
of a request to waive certain requirements, it shall be the duty of the
administrative officer to render a decision regarding the request within
10 days of receipt of same.
C. Submittal of all of the above-mentioned items shall constitute a
complete application as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. Failure to submit all
of the above-mentioned items shall constitute an incomplete
application, and the administrative officer shall notify the applicant of
same, in writing, within 45 days of submission of the application.
A. The preliminary site plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn or
reproduced at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet and shall
§ 295-36 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-37
284:814
§ 295-38. Final major site plan.
The following shall apply to final major site plans:
be one of three standard sizes, namely, 18 inches by 24 inches, 24
inches by 36 inches or 30 inches by 42 inches. Preliminary plants shall
be designed and drawn by a person duly licensed for such purpose
by the State of New Jersey. The plat shall be designed in compliance
with the provisions of this Part 1 and shall show or be accompanied
by the following information in order to be deemed complete by the
administrative officer:
(1) All items required for a minor site plan.
(2) A staging plan for all development projects of 10 acres or larger.
(3) A traffic impact study addressing existing peak hours, road
capacity, gap analysis and proposed improvements both on and off
site, adequacy of parking supply, loading spaces, and such other
data as may be deemed necessary by the Board.
(4) An environmental impact statement.
B. Any applicant may request the administrative officer to waive any of the
above required documents. Said request must be made in writing and
must specifically state the reasons for the waiver request. Upon receipt
of a request to waive certain requirements, it shall be the duty of the
administrative officer to render a decision regarding the request within
10 days of receipt of same.
C. Submittal of all of the above-mentioned items shall constitute a
complete application as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. Failure to submit all
of the above-mentioned items shall constitute an incomplete
application, and the administrative officer shall notify the applicant of
same, in writing, within 45 days of submission of the application.
A. The final site plan shall be drawn at a scale of no more than 50 feet to
the inch and shall be prepared by a surveyor and an engineer licensed
in the State of New Jersey. The final plan shall show, or be accompanied
by, the following information in order to be deemed complete:
(1) All items required for a preliminary major site plan, except that the
information shown on the plans shall be in final form.
(2) A statement by the Borough Engineer that he is in receipt of a map
showing all utilities or extensions thereof in exact location and
elevation, identifying those portions already installed and those to
be installed.
(3) One of the following:
(a) A statement from the Borough Engineer that the applicant has
installed all improvements in accordance with the
§ 295-37 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-38
284:815
§ 295-39. Variance sketch.
requirements of these regulations and the conditions of
preliminary approval; or
(b) A statement from the Borough Engineer that a performance
guarantee sized in sufficient amount to assure the completion
of all required improvements has been posted in favor of the
Borough.
B. Any applicant may request the administrative officer to waive any of the
above required documents. Said request must be made in writing and
must specifically state the reasons for the waiver request. Upon receipt
of a request to waive certain requirements, it shall be the duty of the
administrative officer to render a decision regarding the request within
10 days of receipt of same.
C. Submittal of all of the above-mentioned items shall constitute a
complete application as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. Failure to submit all
of the above-mentioned items shall constitute an incomplete
application, and the administrative officer shall notify the applicant of
same, in writing, within 45 days of submission of the application.
A. The variance sketch shall be based on Tax Map information or some
similarly accurate base map at a scale preferably not less than 100 feet
to the inch or greater than eight feet to the inch, to enable the entire
tract to be shown on one sheet, and shall show or include the following
information in order to be deemed complete by the administrative
officer:
(1) A key map must show all adjacent properties and property lines
within 200 feet on all sides of the application lot.
(2) North point, block numbers, lot numbers, date prepared.
(3) Name and address of property owner.
(4) Name and address of applicant.
(5) Name and address of person preparing plan.
(6) All lot lines and dimensions.
(7) All existing and proposed structures and wall dimensions.
(8) Zoning setback lines.
(9) All adjoining lands owned by the owner and/or applicant.
(10) Location of existing water mains and proposed water connections.
(11) Location and width of all curb cuts and driveways.
§ 295-38 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-39
284:816
(12) Location, dimensions and street access for off-street parking
spaces.
(13) Locations and size of proposed landscaping.
(14) Location of existing sanitary sewer lines and proposed sanitary
sewer connections.
(15) All existing and proposed curbs and sidewalks.
(16) Building offset dimension from each property line to nearest
adjoining structure on each side yard.
(17) Such other information as may be required by the Board in order to
make an informed decision.
B. Any applicant may request the administrative officer to waive any of the
above required documents. Said request must be made in writing and
must specifically state the reasons for the waiver request. Upon receipt
of a request to waive certain requirements, it shall be the duty of the
administrative officer to render a decision regarding the request within
10 days of receipt of same.
C. Submittal of all of the above-mentioned items shall constitute a
complete application as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. Failure to submit all
of the above-mentioned items shall constitute an incomplete
application, and the administrative officer shall notify the applicant of
same, in writing, within 45 days of submission of the application.
D. Upon final approval for a site plan, no changes or modifications shall be
permitted unless said change is determined by the administrative
officer to be minor in nature and thus require no further action by the
Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment. Any change not determined
to be minor in nature shall be considered a new application for
development and shall comply with the provisions of this Part 1.
§ 295-39 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-39
284:817

ARTICLE VI
Conditions of Development Application Approval
§ 295-40. General conditions.
§ 295-41. Design and improvement standards.
A. Conditions binding. All conditions of any preliminary and final approval
shall be binding upon all present and future owners, tenants,
occupants, lessors, lessees, heirs, assignees, developers, contractors
and subcontractors.
B. Prior to the subdivision or resolution of land within the municipality as a
condition of the filing of subdivision plats with the County Recording
Officer, a resolution of approval of the reviewing board is required, as is
the approval of site plans by the issuance of a permit for any
development, except that subdivisions or individual lot application for
detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings shall be exempt from such
site plan review and approval.
C. Failure to maintain. All persons receiving development approval for
property or their successors in title shall be responsible for installing,
maintaining and properly utilizing on-site, off-site and off-tract
improvements, drainage facilities, and other requirements of the Board
as reflected on the plans and in the Board minutes. Failure of the
property owner to install, maintain and/or utilize improvements as
provided by the subdivision approval shall constitute a violation of this
Part 1 and shall be subject to the enforcement procedures set forth
herein.
A. All improvements which are proposed in conjunction with a subdivision
or site plan application shall be constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 1. Prior to the granting of final approval or as a
condition of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed or shall
have furnished a performance guarantee (in accordance with § 295-44
of this Part 1) for the ultimate installation of the following
improvements:
(1) Streets.
(2) Pavements and curbing.
(3) Sidewalks.
(4) Streetlighting.
(5) Electric/telephone lines.
(6) Street signs.
(7) Shade trees.
(8) Monuments.
§ 295-40 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-41
284:819
§ 295-42. Off-tract improvements.
(9) Storm and sanitary sewers, water mains and culverts.
(10) Any other improvements deemed necessary by the Borough
Engineer to promote the public welfare.
B. The standards and requirements set forth in this Part 1 shall be
considered to be the minimum requirements necessary for the
protection of the public health, safety and general welfare of the
Borough. However, should an applicant demonstrate that, due to an
extraordinary or exceptional situation affecting a specific property, or
that any requirement or standard is clearly not necessary in order to
achieve the objectives of this Part 1, the literal enforcement of any
regulation is impracticable or would exact an undue hardship, the
approving authority may grant variances or waivers as may be
reasonable. Failure of the developer, his contractor or his agents to
conform to the standards and specifications as required by this Part 1
will be considered just cause for suspension of the work being
performed, and no person, firm or corporation shall have the right to
demand or claim damages from the Borough, its officers, agents or
servants by reason of suspension.
A. General cost. As a condition of final subdivision or site plan approval,
the reviewing board may require an applicant to pay a pro rata share of
the cost of providing reasonable and necessary circulation
improvements and water, sewerage, drainage facilities and other
improvements, including land and easements, located off tract of the
property limits of the subdivision or development but necessitated or
required by the development. "Necessary" improvements are those
clearly and substantially related to the development in question. The
reviewing board shall provide in its resolution of approval the basis of
the required improvements. The capacity and design of proposed
improvements shall be based upon the circulation plan element and
utility service plan element of the adopted Master Plan. The
proportionate or pro rata amount of the cost of such facilities within a
related or common area shall be based on the following criteria.
B. Cost allocation.
(1) Full allocation. In cases where off-tract improvements are
necessitated by the proposed development and where no other
property owner(s) receives a special benefit thereby, the applicant
may be required, at his sole expense and as a condition of approval,
to provide and install such improvements.
(2) Proportionate allocation.
(a) Where it is determined that properties outside the
development will also be benefited by the off-tract
improvements, the following criteria shall be utilized in
§ 295-41 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-42
284:820
determining the proportionate share of the cost of such
improvements to the developer.
(b) Allocation formula.
[1] Sanitary sewers. The applicant's proportionate share of
distribution facilities, including the installation, location or
replacement of collector, trunk and interceptor sewers and
associated appurtenances, shall be computed as follows:
[a] The capacity and design of the sanitary sewer system
shall be based on the standards specified in this Part
1.
[b] The Borough Engineer or Planner shall provide the
applicant with the existing and reasonably anticipated
peak hour flows as well as capacity limits of the
affected sewer system.
[c] If the existing system does not have adequate capacity
to accommodate the applicant's flow given existing
and reasonably anticipated peak hour flows, the pro
rata share shall be computed as follows:
Total Cost of
Enlargement
Improvement
Capacity of Enlargement in
Gallons Per Day (GPD)
=
Developer's Cost Development (GPD) to be
Accommodated by the
Enlargement or
Improvement
[2] Water supply. The applicant's proportionate share of water
distribution facilities, including the installation of water
mains, hydrants, valves, and associated appurtenances,
shall be computed as follows:
[a] The capacity and design of the water supply system
shall be based on the standards specified in this Part
1.
[b] The Borough Engineer or Planner shall provide the
applicant with the existing and reasonable anticipated
capacity limits of the affected water supply system in
terms of average demand, peak demand and fire
demand.
[c] If the existing system does not have adequate
capacity, as defined above, to accommodate the
applicant's needs, the pro rata share shall be
computed as follows:
§ 295-42 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-42
284:821
Total Cost of
Enlargement
Improvement
Capacity of Enlargement in
Gallons Per Day (GPD)
=
Developer's Cost Development (GPD) to be
Accommodated by the
Enlargement or
Improvement
[3] Roadways. The applicant's proportionate share of street
improvements, alignment, channelization, barriers, new
curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvements not covered
elsewhere, the construction or reconstruction of new or
existing streets, and other associated street or traffic
improvements shall be as follows:
[a] The Borough Engineer or Planner shall provide the
applicant with the existing and reasonable anticipated
future peak hour traffic for the off-tract improvement.
[b] If the existing system does not have adequate capacity
as defined above, the pro rata share shall be computed
as follows:
Total Cost of
Enlargement
Improvement
Projected Total Peak Hour
Volumes
=
Developer's Cost Development-Generated
Peak Hour Volumes
[4] Drainage improvements. The applicant's proportionate
share of stormwater and drainage improvements,
including the installation, relocation or replacement of
storm drains, culverts, catch basins, manholes, riprap,
improved drainage ditches and appurtenances, and
relocation or replacement of other storm drainage
facilities or appurtenances, shall be determined as follows:
[a] The capacity and design of the drainage system to
accommodate stormwater runoff shall be based on the
standard specified in this Part 1, computed by the
developer's engineer and approved by the Borough
Engineer.
[b] The capacity of the enlarged, extended or improved
system required for the subdivision and areas outside
of the developer's tributary to the drainage system
shall be determined by the developer's engineer,
subject to approval of the Borough Engineer. The
§ 295-42 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-42
284:822
plans for the improved system shall be prepared by
the developer's engineer and the estimated cost of the
enlarged system calculated by the Borough Engineer.
The pro-rata share for the proposed improvements
shall be computed as follows:
Total Cost of
Enlargement
Improvement
Capacity of Enlargement
Gallon Per Day (GPD)
=
Developer's Cost Development (GPD) to be
Accommodated by the
Enlargement or
Improvement
[5] Other improvements. The applicant's proportionate share
of other capital improvements shall be computed as
follows:
Total Cost of
Enlargement
Improvement
Capacity of Facility
Enlargement
=
Developer's Cost Development-Generated
Share of the Enlargement or
Improvement
(c) Escrow accounts. Where the proposed off-tract improvements
are to be undertaken at some future date, monies required for
the improvement shall be deposited in a separate interestbearing
account to the credit of the municipality until such
time as the improvement is constructed. If the off-tract
improvement is not begun within three years of deposit, all
monies and interest shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 295-42 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-42
284:823

ARTICLE VII
Guarantees and Inspections
§ 295-43. Purpose.
As a condition of final site plan approval, or prior to the recording of final
subdivision plats, the Board may, for the purpose of assuring the installation
and maintenance of any on-tract improvements or any other improvements
deemed necessary to serve the public interest, health, safety, and general
welfare, require the following.
§ 295-44. Performance guarantee. [Amended 5-14-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-17]
A. No final application for development, whether for an entire tract or a
section thereof, shall be approved by the Board until the satisfactory
completion and performance of certain public improvements have been
certified to the Board by the Borough Engineer, unless the owner shall
have filed with the Borough a performance guarantee assuring the
installation of certain public improvements on or before an agreed date
as hereinafter provided.
B. Only certain public improvements shall require a performance
guarantee prior to final application approval. These improvements
include:
(1) Streets.
(2) Pavement.
(3) Gutters.
(4) Curbs.
(5) Sidewalks.
(6) Streetlighting.
(7) Street trees.
(8) Surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final map and required by
the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 through 46-26B-8.
(9) Water mains.
(10) Sanitary sewers.
(11) Drainage structures.
(12) Public improvements of open space.
(13) Any grading necessitated by the preceding improvements.
§ 295-43 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-44
284:825
C. With the exception of privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping, no
privately owned improvements shall require a performance guarantee
as a prerequisite for obtaining final approval of an application for
development by the Board as required in Subsection A(1) above.
D. A performance guarantee estimate shall be prepared by the applicant's
engineer and submitted to the Borough Engineer for review and
approval, setting forth all requirements for improvements, as fixed by
the Board, and their estimated cost. The estimate shall include an
itemized list appended to the performance guarantee posted by the
obligor. The Borough Council shall pass a resolution either approving or
adjusting this performance guarantee.
E. Extensions of time. The time allowed for the installation of the
improvements for which the performance guarantee has been provided
may be, but need not be, extended by the Borough Council by
resolution, provided that the current cost of the installation of such
improvements first shall be redetermined by the Borough Engineer, and
if such current cost is found to be greater than the cost originally
determined, the applicant shall be required, as a condition of any such
extension, to increase the amount of its performance guarantee to an
amount equal to 120% of the cost of installation, as redetermined. In
the event that the redetermined cost shall be less than the cost as
originally determined, and in further event that the applicant's
performance guarantee exceeds 120% of such redetermined costs, the
applicant shall be entitled to a reduction of its performance guarantee
to an amount equal to 120% of such redetermined costs.
F. Approval by Borough Attorney.
(1) The owner shall present two copies of the guarantee for approval
as to form and execution by the Borough Attorney.
(2) The Borough Attorney shall notify the Secretary of the Board prior
to the meeting that the performance guarantee is properly
executed and can be added to the agenda.
(3) The amount of the guarantee shall be provided in Subsection D of
this section.
G. Bonding and cash requirements.
(1) Requirements of performance guarantee.
(a) The performance guarantee shall be in an amount equal to
120% of the cost of installation of certain public improvements,
when secured by a bond, or in an amount equal to 100% of the
cost of the same, when secured by cash or irrevocable letter of
credit.
§ 295-44 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-44
284:826
§ 295-45. Safety and stabilization guarantee. [Amended 5-14-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-17]
(b) An itemized cost estimate, as approved by the Borough
Engineer, shall be appended to the posted performance
guarantee.
(c) The performance guarantee shall be made payable and
deposited to South River Borough and shall be in the form of
cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or certified check or a
performance bond in which the owner shall be principal, the
bond to be provided by an acceptable surety company licensed
to do business in the State of New Jersey. The Borough shall
issue its receipt for such deposits and shall cause the same to
be deposited in the name of the Borough, to be retained as
security for completion of all requirements and to be returned
to the owner on completion of all required work, or, in the
event of default on the part of the owner, to be used by the
Borough to pay the cost and expense of obtaining completion
of all requirements.
(d) Ten percent of the amount of the approved performance
guarantee estimate shall be deposited by the owner with the
Borough in the form of cash or irrevocable letter of credit. The
remaining 90% may be in cash, irrevocable letter or surety
bond. In the event of default, the ten-percent fund herein
mentioned shall be first applied to the completion of the
requirements, and the remaining cash, irrevocable letter of
credit, or surety bond shall thereafter be resorted to, if
necessary, for the completion of the requirements. The cash,
irrevocable letter of credit, or surety bond shall recite the
foregoing provisions.
A. On all applications for development in which a performance guarantee
is required prior to obtaining final approval, the Borough may also, at
the discretion of the Board, be required to furnish a safety and
stabilization guarantee, either as a line item of the performance
guarantee or as a separate and distinct guarantee. A safety and
stabilization guarantee shall be available to the Borough solely for the
purpose of returning property that has been disturbed to a safe and
stable condition or to otherwise implement measures to protect the
public from access to an unsafe or unstable condition in certain
circumstances prescribed in Subsection B(3).
B. Requirements of safety and stabilization guarantee.
(1) The safety and stabilization guarantee shall be in an amount
calculated as follows:
(a) Five thousand dollars for the first $100,000 of bonded
improvement costs; plus
§ 295-44 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-45
284:827
§ 295-46. Inspection and tests. [Amended 5-14-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-17]
(b) Two and one-half percent of the bonded improvement costs in
excess of $100,000 up to $1,000,000; plus
(c) One percent of the bonded improvement costs in excess of
$1,000,000.
(2) The safety and stabilization guarantee shall be made payable and
deposited to the Borough of South River either as part of the
performance guarantee or separate and apart from it. It shall be in
the form of cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or certified check or a
performance bond in which the owner shall be principal, the bond
to be provided by an acceptable surety company licensed to do
business in the State of New Jersey. The Borough shall issue its
receipt for such deposits and shall cause the same to be deposited
in the name of the Borough, to be retained as security in the case of
abandonment or ceasing of work and to be returned to the owner
on completion of all required work, or, in the event of default on the
part of the owner, to be used by the Borough to pay the cost and
expense of obtaining completion of all requirements.
(3) The safety and stabilization guarantee shall only be used in cases in
which all of the following has occurred:
(a) A project has commenced and the site has been disturbed;
(b) Thereafter, all work on the development has ceased for a
period of at least 60 consecutive days following such
commencement for reasons other than force majeure;
(c) After written notice by the Borough to the developer, by
certified mail, of the Borough's intent to claim payment under
the guarantee, work has not recommenced within 30 days.
A. Costs.
(1) Generally. All relevant site improvements and utility installations
for both site plans and subdivisions shall be inspected during the
time of their installation under the supervision of the Borough
Engineer to ensure satisfactory completion. The cost of said
inspection shall be the responsibility of the owner, who shall submit
an escrow to the Borough.
(a) The amount of the escrow for the purpose of covering
reasonable inspection fees shall be in an amount not to exceed
$500 or 5% of the cost of bonded improvements that are
subject to a performance guarantee listed in § 295-44B and C
above; and
§ 295-45 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-46
284:828
(b) An amount not to exceed 5% of the cost of private site
improvements that are not subject to a performance
guarantee.
(2) Thresholds.
(a) Where a development's inspection fees are less than $10,000,
fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in two
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a
developer shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When the
balance on deposit drops to 10% of the inspection fees because
the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced by
the amount paid to the Borough Engineer for inspections, the
developer shall deposit the remaining 50% of the inspection
fees.
(b) For those developments for which the inspection fees total
$10,000 or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be
paid in four installments. The initial amount deposited in
escrow by a developer shall be 25% of the inspection fees.
When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the inspection
fees because the amount deposited by the developer has been
reduced by the amount paid to the Borough Engineer for
inspections, the developer shall make additional deposits of
25% of the inspection fees.
(3) Fee schedule. The following fee schedule shall be charged related
to inspections:
(a) Borough employees. Inspection time will be rounded to the
next half hour for billing purposes. Inspections for Saturdays
and holidays must be preapproved by the Assistant Borough
Engineer prior to scheduling.
[1] Up to eight hours in a single weekday: $75 per hour.
[2] Beyond eight hours in a single weekday: $112 per hour.
[3] Saturday: $112 per hour.
[4] Legal Borough holiday: $187 per hour.
(4) Testing laboratory. Assessed at the cost to the Borough.
(5) Outside consulting services. When the Borough deems it necessary
to retain outside professional services, the developer shall
reimburse the Borough for all reasonable professional consulting
fees.
(6) Insufficient fees. If the Borough determines that the amount in
escrow for the payment of inspection fees, as calculated pursuant
to Subsection A(3)(a) of this section, is insufficient to cover the cost
of additional required inspections, the Borough may require the
§ 295-46 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-46
284:829
developer to deposit additional funds in escrow, provided that the
Borough delivers to the developer a written inspection escrow
deposit request, signed by the Borough Engineer, which informs
the developer of the need for additional inspections, details the
items or undertakings that require inspection, estimates the time
required for those inspections, and estimates the cost of
performing those inspections.
(7) Excess fees. No refund of inspection deposits shall be made.
B. Notice. The Borough Engineer's office shall be notified prior to each of
the following phases of work so that he or a qualified representative
may inspect the work.
(1) Road subgrade.
(2) Curb and gutter forms.
(3) Curbs and gutters.
(4) Road pavings.
(5) Sidewalk forms.
(6) Sidewalks.
(7) Drainage pipes and other drainage construction.
(8) Street name signs.
(9) Monuments.
(10) Sanitary sewers.
(11) Detention and/or retention basins.
(12) Topsoil, seeding and planting.
(13) Underground utilities.
C. Whenever site plan approval has been granted as required under the
provisions of this Part 1, the Borough Engineer shall conduct regular
inspections of the subject premises during the course of construction
and/or improvement to ascertain that there has been full compliance
with the terms and provisions of the site plan approval granted by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
D. Observation of installation of improvements. All improvements (except
electric, gas and water main extensions to a privately owned utility
company) shall be installed under the observation and to the
satisfaction of the Borough Engineer, the cost thereof to be borne by the
developer. In order to cover the cost of inspection, an amount equal to
5% of all improvements, as estimated in advance by the Borough
Engineer and approved by the Board, shall be deposited in the form of
cash or certified check with the Borough Clerk before commencement
§ 295-46 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-46
284:830
of any construction. Charges for observation services shall be in
accordance with prevailing agreements between the Borough and the
personnel involved. Payments for observation charges to the Borough
Engineer or his agents shall be paid out of this fund upon presentation
of bills by the Borough Engineer to the Borough Clerk for such
observation. If said deposit shall be insufficient, any additional
reasonable observation cost as approved by the governing body shall
be paid by the developer before the improvement is accepted. Any
balance from the deposit, after observation costs have been deducted
therefrom, shall be refunded to the developer.
E. Notification of Borough Engineer. No construction work relative to the
installation of required improvements shall commence without the
Borough Engineer or other responsible officer being notified at least 48
hours before the commencement of said work. No street underground
installations shall be covered until inspected and approved by the
Engineer or other authorized official.
F. Not more than 48 business hours after an engineer's inspection
pursuant to the provisions of this Part 1, the Borough Engineer shall
provide the applicant with written notice of any deficiency observed at
the time of inspection.
G. Suspension of work. Failure of the developer, his contractor or agent to
conform to the specifications for installing improvements indicated in
this Part 1 or to conform to the preliminary plat plan as approved by the
Board will be just cause for the suspension of work being performed,
and no person, firm or corporation shall have the right to demand or
claim damages from the Borough of South River, its officers, agents or
servants by reason of such suspension. No underground installation
shall be covered until inspected and approved by the Engineer.
H. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, an applicant shall
submit to the Borough Engineer five sets of as-built drawings (including
one Mylar) of the project for which site plan approval was granted,
signed and sealed by a licensed engineer.
I. The following details should be provided on as-built drawings required
for certificates of occupancy:
(1) The location of the dwelling and all physical features such as
driveway, walks, decks, accessory structures and fences.
(2) The location of all utility services.
(3) The location of any storm sewer facilities on the property, including
basement drainage discharge systems.
(4) The location of any utility and/or conservation easements.
(5) The site grading, including the first floor, garage floor and
basement floor elevations.
§ 295-46 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-47
284:831
§ 295-47. Other requirements. [Amended 5-14-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-17]
A. Paving and concrete generally. In no case shall any paving or concrete
work be done without permission from the Borough Engineer. At least
two working days' notice shall be given to the Borough Engineer prior
to any construction so that he or a qualified representative may be
present at the time the work is to be done. Samples of concrete or any
other materials used in the course of construction may be taken and
tested in an approved testing laboratory, with the cost of said lab
analysis to be paid by the developer or road contractor, independent of
the inspection deposits.
B. Streets. Streets shall not be paved with a wearing course until all heavy
construction is completed.
C. Shade trees. Shade trees shall not be planted until all grading and
earthmoving is completed.
D. Seeding of grass and surveyor's monuments. The seeding of grass and
the placing of surveyor's monuments shall be among the last
operations.
E. Violations. Any improvement installed contrary to the plan or plat
approval by the Borough shall constitute just cause to void the Board
approval. Any improvement installed without notice for inspection
pursuant to § 295-46B hereinabove shall constitute just cause for:
(1) Removal of the uninspected improvements;
(2) The payment by the developer of any costs of material testing;
(3) The restoration by the developer of any improvements disturbed
during any material testing; and/or
(4) The issuance of a stop-work order by the Borough Engineer
pending the resolution of any dispute.
F. Borough's rights reserved. Inspection by the Borough of the installation
of improvements and utilities shall not operate to subject the Borough
to liability for claims, suits, or liability of any kind that may at any time
arise because of defects or negligence during construction or at any
time thereafter; it being recognized that the responsibility to maintain
safe conditions at all times during construction and to provide proper
utilities and improvements is upon the owner and his contractor, if any.
G. Substantial completion. Upon the completion or substantial completion
of all required appurtenant utility improvements and the connection of
the same to the public system, the obligor may notify the Borough
Council, in writing, by certified mail in care of the Borough Clerk, of the
completion or substantial completion of the improvements and shall
simultaneously send a certified copy thereof to the Borough Engineer.
Within 10 working days of receipt of the notice, the Borough Engineer
§ 295-47 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-47
284:832
shall inspect all the improvements of which such notice has been given
and file a detailed report, in writing, with the Borough Council,
indicating either approval, partial approval, or rejection of such
improvements with a statement of the reasons for any rejection. The
costs of the improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.
H. Release.
(1) Generally. The Borough Council shall approve, partially approve, or
reject the improvements on the basis of the report from the
Borough Engineer, and shall notify the obligor, in writing, by
certified mail, of the Engineer's report and the action of the
Borough Council not later than 45 days after the receipt of the
notice of the obligor of the completion or substantial completion of
the improvements.
(a) Approval. Upon approval by the Borough Council with regard
to the public improvements for which a performance guarantee
is being held, said performance guarantee shall be released.
(b) Partial approval. Upon partial approval by the Borough Council
with regard to the public improvements for which a
performance bond is being held, the developer may seek a
temporary certificate of occupancy. As a condition of the
issuance thereof, the developer shall furnish a temporary
certificate of occupancy guarantee in favor of the municipality
in an amount equal to 120% of the cost of installation of only
those improvement or items which remain to be completed or
installed under the terms of the temporary certificate of
occupancy and which are required to be installed or completed
as a condition precedent to the issuance of the permanent
certificate of occupancy.
[1] Upon issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee, the performance guarantee shall be released.
At no time shall the Borough hold more than one
guarantee with respect to the same line item.
[2] The scope and amount of the temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee shall be determined by the
Municipal Engineer.
[3] The temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee shall be
released by the Municipal Engineer upon the issuance of a
permanent certificate of occupancy with regard to the
development, unit, lot, building, or phase to which the
temporary certificate of occupancy relates.
(c) Rejection. If any portions of the required improvements are
rejected, the obligor shall complete such improvements and,
upon completion, shall notify the Borough Council as specified
§ 295-47 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-47
284:833
in Subsection G of this section, and the same procedures shall
be followed.
(2) Failure of the Borough Council to send or provide such notification
to the obligor within the 45 days shall be deemed to constitute
approval of the improvements, and the obligor and the surety, if
any, shall be released from all liability pursuant to the performance
guarantee for such improvements.
(3) In the event that the Planning or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, is required by statute to act upon the application
prior to receipt of the Borough Council's determination as to
construction of off-tract improvements, it shall request the
applicant to consent to an extension of time within which to act, of
sufficient duration to enable the Borough Council to make the
aforesaid determination. In the event that said applicant is
unwilling to consent to the requested extension of time, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
shall, in its discretion, either itself determine the procedure to be
followed in constructing the aforesaid improvements or shall
condition its approval upon the subsequent determination of the
Borough Council.
I. Conditions and acceptance of improvements. The approval of any
application for development by the Borough shall in no way be
construed as acceptance of any public improvement subject to a
performance guarantee, privately owned perimeter buffer landscaping,
stormwater management basins, inflow and water quality structures
within the basins, and the outflow pipes and structures of the
stormwater management system. Such approval shall not obligate the
Borough in any way to exercise jurisdiction over such items. Any road
not meeting design standards specified within Article VIII of this
chapter shall not be accepted by the Borough as a public street. No
improvement provided herein shall be accepted by the governing body
unless and until all of the following conditions have been met:
(1) The Borough Engineer shall have certified, in writing, that the
improvements are completed and that they comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The final application for development shall have been approved by
the Board.
(3) The owner shall have filed with the Borough Council a maintenance
guarantee in an amount equal to and not more than 15% of the cost
of installing the improvements. The maintenance guarantee shall
run for a period of two years. The maintenance guarantee shall
comply with the following procedures and requirements:
(a) A maintenance guarantee estimate shall be prepared by the
Borough Engineer based on the estimate used for the
performance guarantee. The estimate shall include an itemized
§ 295-47 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-47
284:834
list appended to the performance guarantee posted by the
obligor. The Borough Council shall pass a resolution either
approving or adjusting this maintenance guarantee.
(b) The maintenance guarantee shall be made payable and
deposited to South River Borough and shall be in the form of
cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or certified check or a
performance bond in which the owner shall be principal, the
bond to be provided by an acceptable surety company licensed
to do business in the State of New Jersey. The Borough shall
issue its receipt for such deposits and shall cause the same to
be deposited in the name of the Borough, to be retained as
security for any maintenance needed to be performed on the
above-listed improvements and to be returned to the owner at
the expiration of the two-year period.
(c) Ten percent of the amount of the approved maintenance
guarantee estimate shall be deposited by the owner with the
Borough in the form of cash or irrevocable letter of credit. The
remaining 90% may be in cash, irrevocable letter or surety
bond. In the event of default, the ten-percent fund herein
mentioned shall be first applied to the completion of the
requirements, and the remaining cash, irrevocable letter of
credit, or surety bond shall thereafter be resorted to, if
necessary, for the completion of the requirements. The cash,
irrevocable letter of credit, or surety bond shall recite the
foregoing provisions.
(d) A maintenance guarantee may be waived by the Borough
Council only if the Borough Engineer has certified that the
improvements have been in continuous use for not less than
two years from the date the Borough Engineer certified
completion of such improvements and that during this period
the owner has maintained the improvements in a satisfactory
manner.
(e) An as-built plan and profiles of all utilities and roads (three
black-and-white prints, plus a Mylar copy to be sent to the
Borough Engineer), with certification signed and sealed by a
New Jersey licensed professional engineer as to the actual
construction as approved by the Borough Engineer, shall be
provided.
(f) Upon the passage of the period for the maintenance guarantee,
and upon certification of the Borough Engineer that said works
have been satisfactorily maintained and are in compliance with
all specifications set forth, the balance of said maintenance
guarantee, if any, shall be returned, without interest, to the
developer or road contractor.
§ 295-47 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-47
284:835
J. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development,
the provisions of this article shall be applied by stages or sections.
K. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
governing body or the Borough Engineer.
L. The municipality shall make all of the payments to professionals for
services rendered to the municipality for review of applications for
development, review and preparation of documents, inspection of
improvements or other purposes. If the municipality requires of the
developer a deposit toward the anticipated municipal expenses for
these professional services, the deposit shall be placed in an escrow
account pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1. The amount of the deposit
required shall be reasonable in regard to the scale and complexity of
the development. All payments charged to the deposit shall be pursuant
to vouchers from the professionals stating the hours spent, the hourly
rate, and the expenses incurred. The municipality shall render a written
final accounting to the developer on the uses to which the deposit was
put. Thereafter, the municipality shall, upon written request, provide
copies of the vouchers to the developer. If the salary, staff support and
overhead for a professional are provided by the municipality, the charge
to the deposit shall not exceed 200% of the sum of the products
resulting from multiplying the hourly base salary of each of the
professionals by the number of hours spent by the respective
professional on review of the application for development or the
developer's improvements, as the case may be. For other professionals,
the charge to the deposit shall be at the same rate as all other work of
the same nature by the professional for the municipality.
§ 295-47 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-47
284:836
ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards
§ 295-48. General design requirements.
§ 295-49. Specific design requirements.
The following design standards and specifications shall be adhered to for
each specified improvement:
A. All improvements which are proposed in conjunction with a
development application shall be constructed in accordance with the
provisions of this article as well as the standards and specifications as
shown in this Part 1, except as otherwise specified in the Residential
Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21).
B. The developer shall employ a New Jersey licensed professional
engineer and/or architect to prepare all plans and specifications or
similar documents and a licensed land surveyor of New Jersey to make
land surveys.
C. Construction shall be performed under the supervision and inspection
of the Borough Engineer in accordance with the regulations defined
herein.
D. Minor modifications or changes in the approved plans and
specifications may be effected only upon written approval of the
Borough Engineer. Some changes may require a further review and
approval of the reviewing board prior to making any proposed
modifications or changes.
A. Streets.
(1) The arrangement of streets shall be such as to provide for the
extension of existing streets where appropriate.
(2) In general, local residential streets shall be designed to discourage
through traffic, and proposed larger traffic generators shall not be
permitted through local residential streets. Streets and roadways
shall be located to blend with the topographic and aesthetic
features of the site. Local residential roads shall be curved
wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance and to
discourage through traffic. The grade of the streets shall run with
the topography wherever possible and in a manner that provides
most of the lots to be at or above the grade of the road.
(3) If the subdivision or site plan abuts a major arterial road, the
proposed plan shall include provisions to minimize the number of
curb cuts or entrances onto and exits from same. Wherever
possible, reverse frontage streets shall be employed or may be
required by the Board.
§ 295-48 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-49
284:837
(4) Streets shall be of sufficient width and of suitable design to
accommodate prospective traffic but in all cases shall have a rightof-
way width, measured from lot line to lot line, of not less than 50
feet for minor or marginal access streets and not less than 60 feet
for collector and arterial streets.
(5) In a subdivision that adjoins or includes an existing street that does
not conform to the width designated in the Master Plan, Official
Map or as required herein, such additional width shall be dedicated
along either or both sides of such street as the Board may
determine to be necessary and reasonable.
(6) The width of the right-of-way of internal roads, alleys and
serviceways in multifamily, commercial and industrial
developments shall be determined on an individual basis and in all
cases shall be of sufficient width and of suitable design to comply
with all applicable Borough requirements and to safely
accommodate the anticipated peak traffic, parking and loading
needs and to provide sufficient access and turnaround space for
fire-fighting equipment.
(7) Grades for minor residential streets shall not exceed 8% or have a
minimum grade of less than 0.75%. Within 50 feet of the
intersection of any such street with an arterial street, the maximum
grade shall be limited to 2%. For arterial, collector, industrial or
commercial roadways, the maximum grade shall be 7%.
(8) Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than 60°. At the street corners, curbs
shall be rounded with a curve having a radius of not less than 25
feet.
(9) A vertical curve of sufficient length shall be provided at all changes
of grade of streets to provide moving vehicles with a smooth
transition and to allow sufficient sight distance to drivers in order
to assure traffic and pedestrian safety.
(10) Culs-de-sac shall be avoided to the extent feasible. When needed,
such streets shall be no longer than 600 feet and shall provide a
turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than 60 feet, tangent
whenever possible to the right side of the street. Where the street
or alley is in excess of 100 feet in length, it shall be subject to a
determination by the Board that the design is such that fire-fighting
apparatus of the Borough shall not be deprived of ready access to
structures served by such cul-de-sac. If a dead-end street is of a
temporary nature, a temporary cul-de-sac shall be installed in
accordance with the requirements for a permanent cul-de-sac.
Future extension of the street shall result in the revision of the
right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
(11) In residential developments, four-way intersections shall be
prohibited except where deemed desirable by the Borough.
§ 295-49 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-49
284:838
(12) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
(13) Longitudinal changes in direction along a street shall be made by
means of a curve with a minimum center-line radius of 150 feet for
minor streets and a minimum of 300 feet for arterial or collector
roads.
(14) Where streets have a reverse curve, a tangent of at least 100 feet in
length shall be required.
(15)No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
(16) All intersections shall be provided with sight triangle easements of
90 feet by 90 feet for intersections of minor streets and a triangle
with a two-hundred-foot base for collector roads.
(17) Pavement specifications.
(a) All underground utilities shall be installed prior to the
installation of pavement.
(b) All unsuitable materials, such as debris, stumps, loose
boulders, soft clay, muck or other materials, shall be removed
from the right-of-way limits as may be directed by the Borough
Engineer.
(c) All excavation for utilities or for removing unsuitable materials
shall be refilled to the proper road grade in twelve-inch
maximum lifts with select fill material consisting of an
approved sand and gravel material. The select fill shall be
compacted to 95% of its modified Proctor density. Where
deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer, crushed stone or
quarry process stone shall be utilized.
(d) If the road base remains wet for prolonged periods or is
unstable as a result of wet conditions, the Borough Engineer
may require the installation of subsurface piping to drain the
road base.
(e) Road base course. After the subbase has been thoroughly
compacted to 95% of its modified Proctor density and approved
by the Borough Engineer, a minimum of six inches of hot
bituminous stabilized base course shall be installed in two
three-inch lifts in all minor roads in accordance with the latest
requirements of the New Jersey State Highway Department
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. The
Borough Engineer may permit installation of one six-inch lift if
conditions warrant. The thickness of the base course shall be
increased as deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer,
§ 295-49 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-49
284:839
depending on anticipated traffic and soils conditions for roads
other than minor and local roads. The base course for the
entire road or large section thereof shall be installed as soon
as possible to afford access to the site and shall be installed
prior to issuing certificates of occupancy for any house fronting
same.
(f) Road surface wearing course. The road surface pavement
course shall be hot type FABC-1 or SM-1 bituminous concrete
surface course and shall be manufactured and installed in
accordance with the New Jersey State Highway Department
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
(latest revision). The required minimum thickness shall be 1 1/
2 inches for all minor streets with sound and stable base. For
collector roads or other streets, the minimum thickness shall
be two inches. The wearing surface shall not be permitted to be
installed until all major construction is completed, all curbs
and sidewalks repaired, all base pavement repairs are made in
accordance with the directions of the Borough Engineer, all
low spots are brought to grade with leveling wedges, all
manhole and inlet castings are grouted and the road is
approved for paving by the Borough Engineer. The last two
certificates of occupancy shall not be issued until the paving is
completed, unless waived by the Borough.
(g) Development along existing streets. Where existing streets are
to be excavated for curbs, utilities extension or other purposes,
trenches shall be backfilled, and pavement replacement shall
be in accordance with requirements of this Part 1, except
where existing pavement is reinforced concrete, in which case
the pavement or replacement shall be reinforced concrete in
accordance with the requirements of the Borough Engineer.
After completion of all pavement excavations, curbing and
utility installations in existing streets, the pavement base shall
be replaced as specified in this section, and the roadway shall
be overlaid with 1 1/2 inches of bituminous concrete surface
overlay along the entire frontage to the center line of the
roadway if deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer.
B. Blocks and lots.
(1) Block lengths and widths within the bounding road shall be such as
to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the Zoning
Ordinance130 to provide for convenient access, circulation and
safety of street traffic.
(2) Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than as required by the
Zoning Ordinance.
130. Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ 295-49 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-49
284:840
(3) Insofar as it is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
straight streets and radial to curved streets. Lot lines shall be
regular and straight, except where the outside perimeter lines of
the subdivision tract make such an arrangement unfeasible, and
shall be free of irregularities and internal jogs, except where actual
land conditions necessitate such delineation.
(4) Each lot shall front on an approved street, and before a permit for
the erection of any structure on the lot is granted, such street shall
be improved or such improvements shall have been assured by
means of a performance guarantee.
(5) Where extra width has been provided for the widening of existing
streets, lot measurements shall begin at such extra width line, and
all setbacks shall be measured from such line.
(6) Intersecting property lines on corner lots adjacent to the street
lines shall be rounded with a curve having a radius of no less than
15 feet.
(7) Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for
their intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood
conditions or similar circumstances, the Borough may, after
adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
C. Easements and rights-of-way.
(1) Easements or rights-of-way of at least 15 feet in width shall be
provided for all public sewers, water mains and other required
underground utilities. The locations of such easements or rights-ofway
shall be determined by the Board after consultation with the
utility company or Borough department concerned.
(2) Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by a natural stream or
watercourse, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or a
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such
watercourses and such further width or construction, or both, as
will provide adequate drainage. Improvements to all drainageways
shall include cleaning, stabilization, provision of an access road for
cleaning and maintenance at least along one side of same and other
improvements as may be deemed necessary by the Borough
Engineer.
(3) Surface drainage easement for major and minor subdivisions and
site plans may be required from the downstream property owner to
the upstream property owner to permit continued passage of
stormwater flow as required by existing conditions and the
proposed development.
D. Pedestrian walks.
§ 295-49 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-49
284:841
(1) Pedestrian walks shall be provided along the frontage of all but
industrial zones and in other locations deemed necessary by the
Borough.
(2) Pedestrian walks and sitting areas shall be surfaced so that they
will be easily maintained and properly illuminated if in use after
sunset. Walks along the frontage of property shall be in accordance
with Borough standards.
(3) A private pedestrian walk shall have a minimum paved width of
four feet, and if dedicated to the Borough as a public walkway, the
pedestrian walk shall have an easement with a minimum width of
10 feet.
E. Bikeways.
(1) Bikeways may be required at the approving authority's discretion,
depending on the development's location in relation to schools and
recreation areas. Bicycle traffic shall be separated from motor
vehicle and pedestrian traffic as much as possible.
(2) Bikeways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
standards and specifications as detailed in the Bicycle and
Pedestrian Planning and Facilities Design Manual as sponsored by
the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
F. Buffers.
(1) Function and composition. A buffer shall provide a year-round
visual screen for a particular property or area in order to minimize
adverse impacts from a site on an adjacent property or from
adjacent areas. A buffer shall consist of fencing, evergreens,
berms, mounds or any combination thereof to achieve the stated
objectives.
(2) When required. Buffer areas shall be required along all lot lines
and street lines which separate a nonresidential use from either an
existing residential use or residential zoning district and/or where
the approving authority has determined that there is a need to
shield a site from adjacent properties and to minimize adverse
impacts such as incompatible land uses, noise, glaring light, and
traffic.
(3) Size. Parking areas, garbage collection and utility areas, and
loading areas shall be screened around their perimeter by a buffer
a minimum of three feet wide.
(4) Landscape requirements. All buffer areas shall be planted and
maintained with either grass or ground cover, together with a living
wall screen of live shrubs or scattered planting live trees, shrubs or
other plant material meeting the following requirements:
§ 295-49 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-49
284:842
(a) The preservation of all natural wooded tracts shall be an
integral part of all site plans and may be calculated as part of
the required buffer area, provided that the growth of a
sufficient density and the area has sufficient width to serve the
purpose of a buffer. Where additional plantings are necessary
to establish an appropriate tone for an effective buffer, said
plantings may be required.
(b) Planting materials used in screen plantings should be at least
four feet in height when planted and be of such density as will
obscure, throughout the full course of the year, the emitted
glare of automobile headlights and other adverse impacts such
as, but not limited to, noise, windblown debris, and other
typical and frequent nuisance problems. The purpose of the
screen plantings shall also be to create an aesthetically
pleasing and attractive view to mask or obscure the use,
function, or structure located upon the site.
(c) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity it will
not be closer than three feet to any street or property line.
(d) Trees shall be at least eight feet in height and 2 1/2 inches in
caliper when planted and be of a species common to the area,
be balled and burlapped nursery stock and be free of insects
and disease.
(e) Any plant material which does not live shall be replaced within
one year or one growing season.
(f) Screen plantings and landscaping shall be broken at points of
vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress to assure a clean
sight triangle at all street and driveway intersections.
(g) No buildings, structures, storage or materials, or parking shall
be permitted within the buffer area; buffer areas shall be
maintained and kept free of all debris, rubbish, weeds and tall
grass.
G. Fences, walls and hedges. Fences and walls shall not be located in any
required sight triangle. Fences may be erected, altered or
reconstructed in accordance with all other provisions of this Part 1 and
the Borough of South River Zoning Ordinance.131
H. Public utilities. All public services shall be connected to approved
public facilities systems where they exist.
(1) The developer shall arrange with the servicing utility for all
underground installation of the utility's distribution supply lines
and service connections in accordance with the provisions of the
applicable standards, terms and conditions incorporated as part of
131. Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning.
§ 295-49 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-49
284:843
its tariff as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utility Commissioners.
(2) The developer shall submit to the approving authority, prior to the
granting of final approval, a written instrument from each serving
utility which shall evidence full compliance or intended full
compliance with the provisions of this section; provided, however,
that lots which abut existing streets where overhead electric or
telephone distribution supply lines and service connections have
heretofore been installed may be supplied with electronic and
telephone service from those overhead lines. In the case of the
existing overhead utilities, should a road widening or an extension
of service or other such condition occur as a result of the
development and necessitate the replacement, relocation or
extension of such utilities, such replacement, relocation or
extension shall be underground.
(3) Where natural foliage is not sufficient to provide year-round
screening of any utility apparatus appearing above the surface of
the ground, other than utility poles, the applicant shall provide
sufficient live screening to conceal such apparatus year round.
(4) Any installation under this section to be performed by a servicing
utility shall be exempt from the requirement of performance
guarantees but shall be subject to inspection and certification by
the Borough Engineer, unless specifically and documentably
exempt by operation of state law.
I. Natural features. Natural features such as trees, brooks, swamps,
hilltops and views shall be preserved whenever possible. On individual
lots, care shall be taken to preserve selected trees to enhance soil
suitability and the landscape treatment of the area.
J. Shade trees and landscaping.
(1) Shade trees shall be of the type and species and shall be planted at
locations and intervals as may be approved by the Shade Tree
Commission,132 with a minimum of one tree per 50 feet of frontage.
Existing trees near street lines shall be preserved by the
subdivider.
(2) All proposed and existing lots or sites shall be landscaped in a
manner designed to provide approved vegetative cover over all
areas of the lot not utilized for buildings, walks, drives or planting
beds. The remaining areas of the lot shall be covered with a
minimum of six inches of topsoil from on the site or off the site and
vegetated with lawn or other vegetation as approved by the Board.
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Boards, Commissions and Authorities, Art. IV, Environmental/
Shade Tree Commission.
§ 295-49 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-49
284:844
K. Recycling. All development proposals involving single-family
development of 50 or more units, multifamily development of 25 or
more units, and commercial or industrial development of 1,000 square
feet or more of land shall provide adequate provisions for the collection,
disposition and recycling of recyclable materials as designated by the
Borough's recycling ordinance133 and the Statewide Mandatory Source
Separation and Recycling Act.134
L. Swimming pools. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct,
install, establish or maintain a private swimming pool or wading pool,
as herein defined, without having obtained a permit in the manner
prescribed in this Part 1.
M. Trailers.
(1) No trailer, auto trailer, trailer coach, travel trailer, office trailer,
shipping container or camper shall be used for dwelling purposes
or as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, nor shall any such
trailer or camper be used for storage or space of the permanent
conduct of any business, profession, occupation or trade, except
that such facilities may be used for temporary residency as the
temporary replacement of a damaged dwelling unit and for
temporary use as a construction office located on a site during
construction or for a sales office subject to Planning Board
approval, provided that a temporary permit has been issued for its
use by the Building Inspector. This section shall not be construed so
as to prohibit the parking or storage of recreational trailers and
campers on private premises, but such storage shall be located to
conform to the yard requirements for an accessory building.
(2) Temporary uses.
(a) Temporary trailers for purposes of residential occupancy shall
mean 90 days with an option to extend for one additional
ninety-day period.
(b) Temporary trailers for use as a model home and/or
construction office shall mean occupancy during the time of
construction.
(c) Any temporary office shall be removed within 15 days of
issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the last unit or
within 15 days of cessation of construction activity.
(d) The maximum allowable time period for a permitted temporary
structure or use shall be set at one year.
N. Tree removal and woodlands management. The Tree Removal and
Woodlands Management Ordinance, Chapter 319 of the South River
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 287, Solid Waste.
134. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.32 et seq.
§ 295-49 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-49
284:845
§ 295-50. Standard required improvements.
Code, adopted April 10, 1996, and as may from time to time be
amended, is adopted by reference and included in its entirety in this
Part 1.
A. General. The design and construction of all site improvements shall be
in accordance with this section and other applicable Borough
requirements. Prior to the granting of final approval, the applicant shall
have either installed improvements required by the Board or posted a
performance guarantee or surety sufficient to cover the costs of said
improvements. The Board may solicit local, county, state, federal, public
or semipublic agencies and knowledgeable individuals on what
improvements shall be required, the costs for same to be paid by the
applicant, and improvements recommended by other agencies may be
required by the Board as a condition of final approval. The following are
standard required improvements which are necessary to protect the
health, safety, welfare and convenience of the residents and public.
Other improvements may also be required. It is recognized, however,
that in peculiar situations all of the improvements listed below may not
be appropriate or needed and may then be waived if deemed
unnecessary by the Board.
B. Installation of street improvements. All street improvements (i.e.,
pavements, curbs, gutters and sidewalks) shall be installed in
accordance with the minimum standards set forth by the Borough or
county engineers when said streets fall under their jurisdiction. All
improvements to local streets shall be installed in conformance with
Borough standards and specifications and as required by this Part 1.
C. Water system. The water system for all development plans, including
major and minor subdivisions, site plans and development of individual
residential lots, shall be in accordance with this section and also with
the requirements of the Utility Department.135
(1) All residential and commercial units shall be provided with water
service through a minimum three-quarter-inch-diameter Type K
copper water service line complete with corporation cock at main,
curb stop and box and shall have a minimum cover of four feet as
shown on the Borough's Standard Details.136 Larger services shall
be provided where deemed necessary.
(2) Water mains shall be eight-inch-diameter (minimum) cement-lined
ductile iron pipe Class 52 suitable for sustaining pressures of 200
pounds per square inch and shall have a minimum cover of four feet
from the top of the pipe to the proposed finished grade. Larger
mains shall be provided as shown in the Master Water Plan or as
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 86, Utilities Department.
136. Editor's Note: Standard Details are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 295-49 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-50
284:846
required by the Borough Engineer. Mains shall be looped to avoid
dead ends.
(3) All connections to existing mains shall be by the wet-tap method
unless otherwise approved by the Borough Engineer.
(4) All bends and fittings shall be restrained by utilizing thrust blocks
as shown on the Standard Details or as otherwise required by the
Borough Engineer.
(5) All water mains shall be extended along the entire frontage of the
site to the farthest property limit from the existing main.
(6) Buried-type gate valves meeting AWWA-C-500-61 complete with
valve box and extension stem shall be provided at the intersection
of each street and main line valves a minimum of 1,000 feet apart.
Accordingly, three gate valves are required at T-type intersections.
(7) Fire hydrants shall be located as directed by the Borough Engineer
and shall be required at the end of all dead-end mains and a
maximum of 500 feet apart as measured along the curbline of the
roadway. Fire hydrants shall be equipped with six-inch gate valves
and shall be constructed in accordance with the Borough's
Standard Details. All fire hydrants shall be Penntroy Machine,
Model No. PT 8100 "Patriot."
(8) The development plans shall include plans and profiles of all water
mains. Hydrants shall be provided at all high spots as a means of
air release.
(9) Prior to using new water mains for potable water distribution, all
mains shall be tested for leakage by a two-hour pressure test. The
allowable leakage shall be 25 gallons per inch diameter per mile
per day at a pressure between 150 and 250 pounds per square inch
as may be directed by the Borough Engineer, depending on location
and elevation of the main within the system. After pressure testing,
the line shall be chlorinated and flushed in accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection. Water samples shall be analyzed by a recognized
professional testing lab, and the water mains shall not be utilized
until all mains have satisfactorily passed leakage and bacteria
testing.
(10)Within 10 days after the completion of the water main, the
developer shall provide six sets of as-built drawings prepared by a
licensed professional engineer to the Borough Engineer. The asbuilt
drawings shall indicate the type and the precise location of all
mains, fittings, valves, service connections, curb boxes and thrust
blocks.
§ 295-50 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-50
284:847
(11) All construction and operation of water mains shall be under the
supervision of the Borough Engineer and Utility Engineer,
respectively.
D. Sanitary sewerage facilities. The sanitary sewerage system for all
development plans, including major and minor subdivisions, site plans
and development of individual residential units, shall be in accordance
with this section and also with the requirements of the Utility
Department.
(1) All residential units shall be connected to a sanitary sewer by a
four-inch-diameter (minimum) sewer lateral. The lateral shall
include connecting fitting and cleanout and shall be in accordance
with the Borough's Standard Details.137 No lateral shall be
accepted if the line has not been tested for watertightness. No
connection shall be made without the approval of the Utility
Engineer.
(2) Commercial and industrial units shall utilize a sewer lateral size in
accordance with estimated sewage flow from the particular unit
with a minimum size of four inches.
(3) Sewer laterals shall be constructed of cast-iron soil pipe or other
material which may be approved by the Borough Engineer with
neoprene gaskets and shall be complete with cleanout and other
requirements of applicable codes and details.
(4) Sewer mains shall be constructed of eight-inch-diameter
(minimum) SDR-35 PVC gravity sewer pipe, Class 52 ductile iron
pipe, or prestressed concrete cylinder pipe with steel bell and
spigot, rubber gasket and bituminous lining. All pipe shall be
thoroughly bedded on suitable base, backfilled with select fill
material and thoroughly compacted around and over the pipe by
mechanical tampers in six-inch lifts. Special compacting shall be
required as directed by the Borough Engineer when utilizing PVC
pipe in order to prevent egging of the pipe.
(5) Manholes shall be located at a maximum of three-hundred-foot
spacing and shall be constructed in accordance with the Borough's
Standard Details. Manholes shall be located at the end of all
sewers.
(6) Connection to new mains shall be made by utilizing wye or tee-wye
fittings approved by the Engineer. Connections to testing mains
shall be made utilizing saddle-type connections approved by the
Utility Department. Both types of connections shall be watertight
and shall be in accordance with the Borough's Standard Details.
(7) All sewer mains shall be extended along the entire frontage of the
tract from the existing sewer main.
137. Editor's Note: Standard Details are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 295-50 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-50
284:848
(8) The development plan shall include plans and profiles of all sewer
lines indicating the size, type, class and location of all mains,
manholes and appurtenances.
(9) Where sewage pump stations are required to service low areas,
they shall be of the concrete wet-pit and separate concrete dry-pit
type and shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
Tile Yard Pump Station constructed during 1979 and shall include
all equipment and appurtenances contained therein and other
design features required by the Borough Engineer for the
particular installation.
(10) Prior to construction of any sewer extension, a permit shall be
obtained by the developer for said extension from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
(11) After construction but before acceptance of the new sewer line, the
pipeline shall be flushed free of debris and tested for leakage by
infiltration and exfiltration testing as required by the Borough
Engineer. The maximum allowable leakage shall be 25 gallons per
inch diameter per mile per day. No noticeable streams of water
shall be acceptable.
(12) All construction and testing of the sewerage facilities shall be
under the supervision of the Borough Engineer, and the connection
to the existing facilities shall be made under the supervision of the
Utility Engineer.
(13) Prior to utilizing any sanitary sewer extension, a permit to operate
same shall be obtained by the developer from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
(14) Six sets of as-built drawings shall be provided to the Borough
Engineer prior to utilizing the newly constructed sewer. The asbuilt
drawing shall include a plan and profile of the sewer and shall
indicate the precise location of all manholes, sewer connections
and laterals, the size, type, slope and length of all sewer lines and
other information deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer.
E. Storm drainage facilities.
(1) All development plans for subdivisions, site plans and individual
residential lots shall include provisions for safely and satisfactorily
controlling stormwater runoff, drainage and stream flows in a
manner that will not adversely affect existing and proposed
properties, both upstream and downstream of the site. When
developing a site in an aquifer outcrop area or other area affecting
same, the development plan shall include provisions for on-site
recharge of underground formations.
(2) Where downstream drainage facilities have inadequate capacity for
handling stormwater generated from the site in question and other
§ 295-50 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-50
284:849
presently undeveloped upstream sites, the development plan shall
include provisions for providing capacity for same, or, if approved
by the Borough, stormwater detention facilities may be required.
(3) The applicant's engineer shall submit a drainage plan and report
along with the proposed development plans for all major
subdivisions and site plans. Other applicants may be required to
submit same if deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer.
(a) The drainage plan shall include all data necessary to properly
evaluate the existing and proposed drainage systems,
including overall drainage basins, subbasins, if applicable, with
boundaries clearly indicated, areas shown in acres,
topographic data, all existing and proposed drainage facilities,
size, type, slope and elevations of all pipelines, culverts and
drainage channels, location and type of land use within the
drainage basin, drainage area to each inlet, ditch or other
collection device and all other factors that may affect the
drainage facilities.
(b) The drainage report shall include:
[1] An analysis of runoff before and after development,
considering undeveloped areas with no runoff to the site to
be fully developed in accordance with the zoning
requirements of same.
[2] An analysis of potential impact of the drainage facilities
adjoining properties and upstream and downstream
drainage facilities.
[3] The drainage system shall be designed utilizing the
rational formula (Q CIA) and shall be designed for a storm
with a frequency of one in 25 years, except major drainage
channels, detention basins and other facilities as deemed
necessary by the Borough Engineer shall be designed for a
storm with a frequency of one in 100 years.
[4] All drainage channels and detention ponds shall be
designed with a one-foot freeboard and shall include an
access easement and roadway along at least one side of
the drainage facility for maintenance purposes.
[5] Swales shall be provided along property lines of all singlefamily
residential lots in a manner that directs the runoff
to a point where same can be suitably collected.
[6] Inlets shall be located at all low points in roadway, parking
areas and lawns and shall be sufficient to permit the
entrance of all runoff with minimal surcharge. Inlets shall
be constructed at other locations as may be required by
the Borough Engineer to minimize gutter flow and to
§ 295-50 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-50
284:850
ensure that sufficient grate area is provided to accept all
runoff. All inlets shall be in accordance with the Borough's
Standard Details.138
[7] Manholes shall be precast concrete and shall be
constructed in accordance with the Borough's Standard
Details.
[8] Storm drainage pipe shall be reinforced concrete pipe
minimum Class III, except where cover and loading
requirements necessitate Class IV pipe. Pipe size shall be
determined by the Manning formula.
[9] Flared end sections and headwalls shall be suitably
designed reinforced concrete structures and shall include
riprap energy dissipaters at all discharge points. The
design of same shall be subject to the requirements of the
Borough Engineer.
[10] Vegetation. All drainage ditches, swales, channels,
diversion dikes and berms shall be stabilized with
vegetation in accordance with the requirements for soil
erosion and sediment control in New Jersey with specific
regard to slope, velocity and other applicable design
factors.
[11] After completion of the drainage system, the developer's
engineer shall provide six sets of as-built drawings
indicating the precise location, type, size, slope and
elevation of all facilities.
F. Monuments. Monuments shall be in the size and shape required by
N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11 (the Map Filing Law, as amended) and shall be
placed in accordance with said statute and indicated on the final plat.
All lot corners shall be permanently marked with a metal alloy pin or
equivalent.
G. Soil erosion and sediment control. All site plans and major subdivisions
shall incorporate soil erosion and sediment control programs phased
according to the scheduled progress of the development, including
anticipated starting and completion dates. The purpose is to control soil
erosion and sediment damages and related environmental damage by
requiring adequate provisions for surface water retention and drainage
and for the protection of exposed soil surfaces in order to promote the
public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the
community.
(1) Regulation and permits.
138. Editor's Note: Standard Details are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 295-50 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-50
284:851
(a) No building permit shall be issued for any application requiring
either site plan or major subdivision approval until final plat
approval has been given, including an approved soil erosion
and sediment control plan.
(b) No person shall proceed with any soil removal, soil disturbance
or land grading without first having obtained either a permit
for that purpose or a building permit based on an approved
plat as outlined above.
(c) A permit shall not be required under this Part 1 where
Subsection G below applies, provided that no soil is removed
from the premises involved.
(2) Data required.
(a) A plan showing the area(s) of soil removal, soil disturbance and
land grading and establishing the means for controlling soil
erosion and sedimentation for each site or portion of a site
when developed in stages.
(b) The soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be
certified by the local soil conservation district in the
development of the plan and the selection of appropriate
erosion and sediment control measures.
(c) The plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer licensed
in the State of New Jersey, except in instances where the
preparation of a plan does not include or require the practice
of engineering as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:8-28, and shall contain:
[1] Location and description of existing natural and man-made
features on and surrounding the site, including general
topography and soil characteristics and a copy of the
county soil conservation district soil survey (where
available).
[2] Location and description of the work and proposed
changes to the site, including contours and spot
elevations, showing existing and post-construction
conditions, and, in the case of soil mining, a description of
the equipment to be used for any processing of the soil and
the number of cubic yards of soil to be removed.
[3] Measures of soil erosion and sediment control.
[4] A schedule of the sequence of installation of planned
erosion and sediment control measures as related to the
progress of the project, including anticipated starting and
completion dates.
[5] All proposed revisions of data required shall be submitted
for approval.
§ 295-50 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-50
284:852
[6] Description of means for maintenance or erosion and
sediment control measures and facilities during and after
construction.
[7] Performance bond as set forth in this Part 1. The bond
shall be in such amount and for such period of time as
determined by the governing body.
(3) General design principles.
(a) Control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed
land disturbances and shall be in operation during all stages of
the disturbance activity. The following principles shall apply to
the soil erosion and sediment control plan:
[1] Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil distribution
shall be done in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.
[2] Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained
and protected.
[3] The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its
exposure shall be kept within practical limits.
[4] Either temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable
stabilization measures shall be used to protect exposed
critical areas during construction or other land
disturbances.
[5] Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff
resulting from modified soil and surface conditions during
and after development or land disturbances.
[6] Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on site
wherever possible to facilitate groundwater recharge.
[7] Sediment shall be retained on site.
[8] Diversions, sediment basins and similar required
structures shall be installed prior to any on-site grading or
land disturbance.
(b) Grading and filling. All lots where fill material is deposited
shall have clean fill and/or topsoil deposited, which shall be
graded to allow complete surface draining of the lot into local
storm sewer systems or natural drainagecourses. No regrading
of a lot shall be permitted which would create or aggravate
water stagnation or a drainage problem on site or on adjacent
properties or which will violate this Part 1. Grading shall be
limited to areas shown on an approved site plan or subdivision.
Any topsoil disturbed during approved excavation and grading
operations shall be redistributed throughout the site.
§ 295-50 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-50
284:853
(c) Soil removal and redistribution. Excavation of soil other than
as required for the construction of approved structures and
supporting facilities, such as but not limited to streets,
driveways, and parking areas, shall be prohibited. Regrading
of property so as to redistribute topsoil throughout the site
from areas excavated shall be done in the following manner to
minimize or eliminate the erosion of soil. Any application
proposing the disturbance or more than 5,000 square feet of
surface area of land as defined in the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act (c. 251, P.L. 1975)139 shall include on its
plan the following: the means to control or prevent erosion,
providing for a sedimentation basin(s) for soil that does erode
due to water; controlling drainage, dust and mud on the
premises as well as abutting lands; preserving soil fertility and
the ability of the area to support plant and tree growth by
maintenance of adequate topsoil consisting of at least six
inches of the original layer; maintaining necessary lateral
support and grades of abutting lands, structures and other
improvements; preventing pits and declivities which are
hazardous or which provide insect breeding locations; and not
altering the physical limitations and characteristics of the soil
in such a way as to prevent the use to which the land may
lawfully be put.
(4) Maintenance. All erosion and sediment control measures installed
shall be maintained for one year after completion of the
improvements or until such measures are permanently stabilized as
determined by the Borough Engineer, whichever is longer. The
Borough Engineer shall give the applicant, upon the applicant's
request, certification of this determination.
(5) Engineer report and public hearing. If no subdivision or site plan
review is required, a separate report by the Borough Engineer shall
be obtained. The Borough Engineer shall make a report on the
application within 30 days of its receipt. The report shall comment
upon all the requirements of this section, including but not limited
to soil characteristics, slopes, quantities of soil involved, water
table, drainage, road capacities, performance bonds and the utility
of the site following completion of the operation. All applications
shall require a public hearing as set forth in Chapter 50, Land Use
Procedures.
(6) Exemptions. The following activities are specifically exempt from
the soil erosion and sediment control provisions:
(a) Land disturbance associated with the construction of a singlefamily
dwelling unit unless such unit is a part of a proposed
subdivision, site plan, zoning variance or building permit
139. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 295-50 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-50
284:854
application involving two or more such single-family dwelling
units.
(b) Land disturbances of 5,000 square feet or less of the surface
area of land for the accommodation of construction for which
the Standard Building Code of the State of New Jersey would
require a building permit.
(c) Agricultural use of land when operated in accordance with a
farm conservation plan approved by the local soil conservation
district or when it is determined by the local soil conservation
district that such use will not cause excessive erosion and
sedimentation.
(d) Use of land for gardening primarily for home occupation.
(e) Percolation tests and/or soil borings.
H. Topsoil protection. Prior to undertaking major grading operations, all
topsoil shall be temporarily stockpiled. No topsoil shall be removed
from the site. After completion of grading and construction in any area,
the topsoil shall be spread and the soil stabilized by establishing
vegetation in accordance with the requirements for soil erosion and
sediment control. Where sufficient topsoil is not available on the site
not to be paved or contain structures, the developer shall provide
sufficient topsoil to accomplish same from off-site sources.
I. Steep slopes.
(1) This subsection shall be applicable to new development or land
disturbance on a steep slope within the Borough of South River.
(2) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
DISTURBANCE — The placement of impervious surface, the
exposure or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing, cutting,
or removing of vegetation.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any structure, surface, or improvement
that reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater into land, and
includes porous paving, paver blocks, gravel, crushed stone, decks,
patios, elevated structures, and other similar structures, surfaces,
or improvements.
REDEVELOPMENT — The construction of structures or
improvements on areas which previously contained structures or
other improvements.
STEEP SLOPES — Any slope equal to or greater than 20% as
measured over any minimum run of 10 feet. Steep slopes are
determined based on contour intervals of two feet or less.
§ 295-50 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-50
284:855
(3) Designation of areas. The percent of slope (rise in feet per
horizontal distance) shall be established by measurement of
distance perpendicular to the contour of the slope. The percent of
slope shall be calculated for each two-foot contour interval. For
example, any location on the site where there is a one-foot rise over
a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a ten-percent slope; a 1.5-foot
rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a fifteen-percent
slope; a two-foot rise over a ten-foot horizontal run constitutes a
twenty-percent slope.
(4) Steep slope limits.
(a) For steep slopes, any disturbance shall be prohibited, except as
provided below:
[1] Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious
surfaces; and
[2] New disturbance necessary to protect public health, safety
or welfare, such as necessary linear development with no
feasible alternative; to provide an environmental benefit,
such as remediation of a contaminated site; to prevent
extraordinary hardship on the property owner peculiar to
the property; or to prevent extraordinary hardship,
provided that the hardship was not created by the
property owner, that would not permit a minimum
economically viable use of the property based upon
reasonable investment. For example, redevelopment,
within the footprint of existing impervious cover, should be
allowed to support efforts to revitalize development that
has fallen into disrepair.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate through site plans depicting
proposed development and topography that new disturbance is
not located in areas with a twenty-percent or greater slope.
(5) Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(a) A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate
personnel of the Borough of South River of any person or entity
believed to be in violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a
condition which is in violation of this subsection is discovered,
a civil action may be brought in the Special Part of the Superior
Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief sought is
injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of
the Special Civil Part, by the filing and serving of appropriate
process. Nothing in this Subsection I shall be construed to
preclude the right of the Borough of South River, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in
Municipal Court. The violation of any part of this Subsection I
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of
the violation of any other section or subsection or of any order
§ 295-50 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-50
284:856
issued pursuant to this Subsection I. Each day a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(b) Any person or entity who violates any provision of this
subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as
provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
§ 295-50 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-50
284:857

ARTICLE IX
Additional Requirements
§ 295-51. Environmental impact statement.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish rules, regulations,
standards and procedures for the preparation of an environmental
impact statement by the applicant in order to provide essential
information to the appropriate reviewing board so that the
environmental consequences of a proposed activity can be evaluated
and controlled for the promotion of the safety, public health,
convenience and general welfare of the community. The environmental
impact statement shall describe, with suitable sketches and plans, the
proposed project. The environmental impact statement shall
complement, rather than duplicate, the site plan and building plan and
shall include a survey and description of the environmental features of
the property.
B. Applicability. All applications for major subdivisions, major site plan,
use variance, or conditional use for any application involving one acre
(43,560 square feet) or more of land shall be required to include an
environmental impact statement as part of the application submission
documentation.
C. Environmental assessment. Prior to submitting a preliminary plat for
any application involving more than one acre (43,560 square feet) of
land, the applicant shall use the Borough's Master Plan or the Soil
Conservation Service140 maps to present an overview of the natural
limitations of the site and to guide the layout of the proposed
development. These maps will aid in locating soil types, topography,
slopes, surface water, aquifers, depth to water table, floodplains,
vegetation, foundation limitations, erosion potential and septic
suitability. With regard to freshwater wetlands, mapping showing the
general location of wetlands is available from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEP) and
should be utilized for preparing the overview of natural limitations. It is
anticipated that major areas of concern can be identified and agreed
upon by use of this generalized data at an early stage in order to avoid
development designs that will encroach upon the major environmental
problem areas. Where environmentally sensitive areas identified by this
general data must be encroached upon, the environmental impact
statement submitted at the preliminary plat stage can analyze the
problem in more detail based on on-site evaluations, but limiting the
analysis to smaller areas of concern.
D. Compliance. The preliminary plat for any development of one acre
(43,560 square feet) or more shall be accompanied by an environmental
impact statement complying with the following, unless, as a result of
140. Editor's Note: Now the Natural Resources Conservation Service.
§ 295-51 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-51
284:859
data submitted prior to the preliminary plat, the approving authority
shall have waived or modified certain portions of these requirements:
(1) A description of the development specifying what is to be done
during construction and operation, how it is to be done, and
practical alternate plans to achieve the objective(s).
(2) An inventory of the following on-site environmental conditions and
an assessment of the probable impact of the development upon
them: water supply; water quality; floodplain protection; geology;
soil erosion; wetlands; sewage disposal; topography; slopes in
excess of 10%; vegetation and vegetation protection; depth to
bedrock; noise characteristics and levels; air quality; land use; site
aesthetics, such as views, terrain and mature wooded areas; and
historic sites. Air and water quality shall be described with
reference to standards promulgated by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the State of New Jersey, and soils shall
be described with reference to Soil Conservation Service
categories and characteristics.
(3) A list of the status of the licenses, permits and approvals needed
from federal, state or county agencies, including the conclusions
and comments of these governmental agencies.
(4) An evaluation of any adverse environmental impact which cannot
be avoided. Particular emphasis shall be placed upon air or water
pollution, traffic increases, increase in noise, increase in
sedimentation and siltation, increase in municipal services or
capital needs and consequences to the municipal tax structure. The
evaluation should include how the developer can assist in
minimizing the adverse impacts by altering design concepts or by
making, or participating in, on- or off-tract improvements.
(5) In conjunction with the submission of an environmental impact
statement, the applicant shall prepare and submit a fiscal impact
analysis which shall detail all municipal costs to be generated by
the proposed development, identified by type of obligation such as,
but not limited to, public safety, public works, health and welfare,
recreation, education, administration, utilities, garbage, etc. All
anticipated municipal revenues to be realized by the creation of the
proposed development shall be identified. In both costs and
revenue analysis, dollar values used shall reflect the current year of
application budgeting dollar equivalents for comparative purposes.
A determination of annual net cost/revenue shall be provided. This
cost revenue analysis shall be provided via annual projections to
the year of projected one-hundred-percent project build-out
completion.
E. Information required.
(1) General requirements. The information required shall be presented
in a concise descriptive report. The descriptive report shall be
§ 295-51 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-51
284:860
supplemented with graphic and explanatory material when
environmentally sensitive areas are involved. Environmentally
sensitive areas include, but are not limited to, stream corridors
and floodplains, depth to bedrock of less than two feet, streams
and water bodies, wetlands, slopes greater than 10%, highly acid
or erodible soils, mature stands of trees, aquifer recharge areas,
aquifer discharge areas and unique natural features and habitats.
(2) Specific requirements.
(a) Project description. Describe the suitability of the site for the
intended use and indicate the extent to which the site must be
altered, the kinds of facilities to be constructed, the uses
intended and an estimate of the resident population and
working population. The compatibility or incompatibility of the
proposed project shall be described in relation to the following:
[1] Master Plan, especially the land use and open space
elements.
[2] The Middlesex County Master Plan.
[3] Other pertinent planning documents.
(b) Site description and inventory.
[1] Types of soil. A complete mapping of all soil types on the
site shall be required, and a description of each soil's
characteristics shall be included, with a reference to the
Soil Survey and Middlesex County, New Jersey. The
statement should make specific reference to the soil
survey tables for engineering index properties, soil and
water features and, where applicable, sanitary facilities.
[2] Topography. Describe the topographic conditions of the
site.
[3] Geology. Describe the geologic formations and features
associated with the site as well as depth to bedrock
conditions; delineate those areas where bedrock is in close
proximity to the surface (within two feet of the surface), as
well as major rock outcroppings.
[4] Vegetation. Map and describe the diversity and frequency
of all major species.
[5] Wetlands. A presence/absence letter indicating whether
wetlands exist on a property shall be obtained from
NJDEPE. If it is known or anticipated that wetlands exist
on a property and in lieu of a presence/absence letter, a
letter of interpretation (LOI) shall be obtained from
NJDEPE. Any wetland delineation shall be shown on the
§ 295-51 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-51
284:861
site plan and/or subdivision maps as well as support
documents for the environmental impact statement.
[6] Wildlife. Describe the diversity and extent of wildlife
habitats; identify any unique habitats.
[7] Surface water. Describe and map existing watercourses
and water bodies that are particularly or totally on the site;
determine the existing surface runoff from the site.
Existing drainage network shall be determined. When the
natural drainage pattern will be significantly altered or
sewerage effluent is to be added to a watercourse or body,
an analysis shall be conducted which will investigate flow,
depth, capacity and water quality of the receiving waters.
[8] Subsurface water. Where existing conditions warrant,
describe the subsurface water conditions on the site, in
terms of both depth to groundwater and of water supply
capabilities of the site; from existing data, provide detailed
information regarding existing wells within 500 feet of the
site as to depth, capacity and water quality.
[9] Unique, scenic and/or historic features. Describe and map
those portions of the site which can be considered to have
unique scenic and/or historic qualities; discuss views to
and views from prominent locations.
[10] Existing development features. Describe any existing
features on the site that are not considered to be part of
the natural environment; include roads, housing units,
accessory structures, utility lines, sewage facilities and
public water supplies. When required, a regional analysis
should be included which describes existing infrastructure
for stormwater, sewerage, water supply and
transportation.
(c) Environmental impact:
[1] Describe on-site sewerage facilities and off-site sewerage
conditions. Demonstrate adequacy of both on-site and offsite
sewerage facilities and capacities and that the sewage
can be disposed of without pollution to natural and manmade
water systems.
[2] Demonstrate that an adequate potable water supply is
available for both domestic use and fire protection and
demonstrate compliance with N.J.S.A. 58:12A-1 et seq., the
New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, and Board of Health
(BH) Chapter 4, Individual and Semipublic Water Supply
Code.141
141. Editor's Note: See Ch. 390, Water Supply.
§ 295-51 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-51
284:862
[3] Discuss the effect of the proposed activity on groundwater
and surface water quality and quantity; include
calculations of before- and after-developed infiltration
capacity; describe any activities which may result, even
temporarily, in compliance with relevant water quality
standards, and demonstrate ability to comply permanently
with state and local regulations as set forth in N.J.S.A.
26:3B-2 and 26:3B-3, Nuisances; N.J.A.C. 7:14, the Water
Pollution Control Act; N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1, the New Jersey
Pollution Discharge Elimination System; BH Chapter 2,
Section 2-11c, the Public Health Nuisance Code;142 and BH
Chapter 12, Water Supply Protection.
[4] Describe any impact on stream corridors, wetlands,
aquifer recharge areas and historically or archaeologically
significant areas.
[5] Describe any effect, including cumulative effects, of the
proposed activity on air quality surrounding the project;
demonstrate compliance with relevant state and local
regulations and standards for visible and invisible
pollutants in the air as set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:27, Air
Pollution Control; BH Chapter 2, Section 2-11d, Public
Health Nuisance Code; and BH Chapter 16, Air Pollution
Control.
[6] Demonstrate that there will be no significant increase in
sound levels which will adversely impact public health and
welfare nor be detrimental to the quality of life and privacy
of the surrounding community; demonstrate compliance
with N.J.A.C. 7:29, Noise Control, and BH Chapter 2,
Section 2:11c, Public Health Nuisance Code.
[7] Describe any hazardous substances to be transported to or
from or to be stored at the site and solid waste which will
be generated by the proposed activity. Demonstrate
compliance with relevant state and local regulations and
standard as set forth in N.J.S.A. 13:1K-6 et seq.,
Environmental Cleanup and Responsibility Act;143 N.J.A.C.
7:1E, Discharges of Petroleum and Other Hazardous
Substances; N.J.A.C 7:30, Pesticide Control; and BH
Chapter 17, Hazardous Substance Control.
[8] Describe the environmental impact of traffic generation.
[9] Describe any adverse environmental effect that may occur
during the construction phase of the project.
142. Editor's Note: See Ch. 373, Nuisances.
143. Editor's Note: Now the Industrial Site Recovery Act.
§ 295-51 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-51
284:863
[10] List all publications, file reports, manuscripts or written
sources of information related to the project, the project
site and the Borough which were consulted and employed
in the compilation of the environmental impact statement.
[11] Demonstrate that there will be no adverse impact to
environmentally sensitive areas from the proposed
development.
[12] Demonstrate that there will be no adverse impact to traffic
safety from the proposed development.
(d) Environmental performance controls. Describe in detail what
measures will be employed during the planning, construction
and operation phases which will minimize or eliminate impacts
on site and off site resulting from the proposed activity,
including, but not limited to:
[1] Site design techniques sensitive to the natural
environment, which should include innovative landscapes,
building and circulation design buffers.
[2] Drainage plans which would limit off-site runoff.
[3] Sewage disposal techniques.
[4] Water supply and water conservation proposals.
[5] Energy conservation measures.
[6] Pollution control measures that favorably affect air quality
and water quality and reduce noise.
[7] Open space reserves.
[8] Procedures for chemical spill prevention, control and
cleanup.
(e) The name and address of the person, persons, or entity who or
which prepared the environmental impact statement or their
curriculum vitae.
F. Disposition. The municipal reviewing board shall use the environmental
impact and, where appropriate, formulate reasonable and necessary
conditions of approval which will mitigate adverse environmental
impact.
G. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the approving authority may waive the
requirement for all or part of an environmental impact statement if
sufficient evidence is submitted to support a conclusion that the
proposed development will have a slight or negligible environmental
impact or upon a finding that the complete report need not be prepared
in order to evaluate the environmental impact of the development.
§ 295-51 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-52
284:864
§ 295-52. Building permits.
No building permit shall be issued for the development of any parcel or
lot contained in any subdivision which has been created subsequent to
the effective date of this Part 1 unless the lot or parcel has been created
pursuant to this Part 1.
§ 295-52.1. Violations and penalties.
If, before final subdivision approval has been obtained, any person transfers
or sells or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of
said subdivision, such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000,
and each parcel, plot or lot so disposed of shall be deemed a separate
violation.
§ 295-52.2. Miscellaneous provisions.
A. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or provision
of this Part 1 shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply
only to the section, subsection, paragraph, clause or provision so
adjudged, and the remainder of this Part 1 shall remain in full force and
effect.
B. Amendability. This Part 1 may be amended at any time by the Borough
Council in accordance with Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey
1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
C. Repealer. All ordinances inconsistent with this Part 1, with the
exception of Chapter 350, Zoning, are hereby repealed.
D. Effective date. This Part 1 shall take effect upon its final passage and
publication as provided by law.
§ 295-52 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-52.2
284:865

Part 2
[Adopted 8-13-2S0to0r7mBwyaOterrd. No. 2007-17]
ARTICLE X
Stormwater Management
§ 295-53. Standards and requirements.
A. Scope and purpose.
(1) Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and
pollutant reduction through nonstructural or low-impact
techniques shall be explored before relying on structural BMPs.
Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive
site design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being
placed on the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source
control plans should be developed based upon physical site
conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated quantity or
amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management
BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established performance
standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
(2) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in Subsection B below.
(3) Applicability.
(a) This section shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that require
preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
[1] Nonresidential major developments; and
[2] Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards
at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(b) This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of South River.
(4) Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this section are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this section shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:867
public health, safety, and general welfare. This section is not
intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law
except that, where any provision of this section imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive
provisions or higher standards shall control.
B. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in
this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this section its most reasonable
application. The definitions below are the same as or based on the
corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within
boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries
for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA
Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses
serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment
Plan Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as
urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly
licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and
preparation of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
(1) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
(2)
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:868
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development
of agricultural lands, development means: any activity that requires a
state permit; any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board
(CAB) and the State Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and
municipal review of any activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act,
N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water
body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater
recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are
identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by
the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with"
the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for
ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities, which are not organized in a
compact form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Borough of South River, or political subdivision of this state
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:869
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial,
municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other
residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters
or surface waters of the state, or to a domestic treatment works.
"Pollutant" includes both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates
into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air,
water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or
has occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
METROPOLITAN PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the
State Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission
that is intended to be the focus for much of the state's future
redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or
in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:870
recharge of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater
discharges into stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may
be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT
NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood given priority access to state
resources through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater,
whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New
Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient
to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a
prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as “hydrophytic vegetation.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the
Metropolitan Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or
Nodes;
(1)
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(4)
C. General standards.
(1) Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(a) Stormwater management measures for major development
shall be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff
quality standards in Subsection D of this section. To the
maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be met by
incorporating nonstructural stormwater management
strategies into the design. If these strategies alone are not
sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards
shall be incorporated into the design.
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:871
(b) The standards in this section apply only to new major
development and are intended to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in
receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge.
The standards do not apply to new major development to the
extent that alternative design and performance standards are
applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or
water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
D. Stormwater management requirements for major development.
(1) The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development in accordance with Subsection J of this
section.
(2) Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered
species as documented in the Department's Landscape Project or
Natural Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A.
13:1B-15.147 through 15.150, particularly Helonias bullata
(swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
(3) The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of Subsection D(6) and
D(7) of this section:
(a) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that
the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that
the existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided
that the access is made of permeable material.
(4) A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsection D(6) and D(7) of this section may be
obtained for the enlargement of an existing public roadway or
railroad, or the construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian
access, provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis
that, through the use of nonstructural and structural
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:872
stormwater management strategies and measures, the option
selected complies with the requirements of Subsection D(6)
and D(7) of this section to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of Subsection D(6) and D(7) of this section,
existing structures currently in use, such as homes and
buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(4)(c) above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of Subsection D(6) and D(7) of this section that
were not achievable on-site.
(5) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in
Subsection D(6) and D(7) of this section shall be met by
incorporating nonstructural stormwater management
strategies set forth at Subsection D(5) of this section into the
design. The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental,
or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection D(5)(b) below
into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall
identify the strategy considered and provide a basis for the
contention.
(b) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies
incorporated into site design shall:
[1] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
[4] Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of
concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the
watershed to the point of interest within a watershed;
[5] Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
[6] Minimize soil compaction;
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:873
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes
the use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to
prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. Such source controls include, but are
not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation
of trash and debris in drainage systems, including
features that satisfy Subsection D(5)(c) below;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial developments;
and
[d] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(c) Site design features identified under Subsection D(5)(b)[9][b]
above shall comply with the following standard to control
passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain
inlets. For purposes of this subsection, "solid and floatable
materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard see Subsection D(5)(c)[3] below.
[1] Grates.
[a] Design engineers shall use either of the following
grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or
another ground surface to collect stormwater from
that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
[i] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle-safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:874
[ii] A different grate, if each individual clear space in
that grate has an area of no more than 7.0 square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the
smallest dimension.
[b] Examples of grates subject to this standard include
grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on
storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples
of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
[2] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the
clear space in that curb opening (or each individual clear
space, if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces)
shall have an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be
no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest dimension.
[3] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be overcome
by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection D(7)(a) below are conveyed
through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility,
manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent
delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could
not pass through one of the following:
[c] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[d] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[e] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that
has parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars, to the elevation of the water quality design storm
as specified in Subsection D(7)(a) below; or
[f] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c),
that action to meet this standard is an undertaking
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:875
that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic
property.
(d) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards in
Subsection D(6) and D(7) shall be dedicated to a government
agency, subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate county clerk's office, or subject to an approved
equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an
equivalent stormwater management measure approved by the
reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(e) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection G of this
section, or found on the Department's Web site at
www.njstormwater.org.
(6) Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity
standards.
(a) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration
and groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff
quantity impacts of major development.
[1] The minimum design and performance standards for
erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
and implementing rules.
[2] The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[a] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge calculations at Subsection E of this section,
either:
[i] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater
management measures maintain 100% of the
average annual preconstruction groundwater
recharge volume for the site; or
[ii] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff
volume from preconstruction to postconstruction
for the two-year storm is infiltrated.
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:876
[b] This groundwater recharge requirement does not
apply to projects within the urban redevelopment
area, or to projects subject to Subsection D(6)(a)[2][c]
below.
[c] The following types of stormwater shall not be
recharged:
[i] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
High pollutant loading areas are areas in
industrial and commercial developments where
solvents and/or petroleum products are loaded/
unloaded, stored, or applied; areas where
pesticides are loaded/unloaded or stored; areas
where hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than "reportable quantities" as
defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas
where recharge would be inconsistent with
Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks
for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations
and vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[ii] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities,
which could be a source of pollutants in any
industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater.
Source materials include, but are not limited to,
raw materials; intermediate products; final
products; waste materials; by-products; industrial
machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and
detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that
are exposed to stormwater.
[d] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact
on the groundwater table and design the site so as to
avoid adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse
hydraulic impacts include, but are not limited to,
exacerbating a naturally or seasonally high water
table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of
basements, or interference with the proper operation
of subsurface sewage disposal systems and other
subsurface structures in the vicinity or downgradient
of the groundwater recharge area.
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:877
[3] In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff calculations at Subsection E of this
section, complete one of the following:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that for stormwater leaving the site,
postconstruction runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-,
and one-hundred-year storm events do not exceed, at
any point in time, the preconstruction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased
volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will
not increase flood damage at or downstream of the
site. This analysis shall include the analysis of impacts
of existing land uses and projected land uses assuming
full development under existing zoning and land use
ordinances in the drainage area;
[c] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-,
and one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and
80%, respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff
rates. The percentages apply only to the
postconstruction stormwater runoff that is
attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed.
The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood
hazard areas if the increased volume of stormwater
runoff will not increase flood damages below the point
of discharge; or
[d] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection D(6)(a)[3][a],
[b] and [c] above shall only be applied if the increased
volume of stormwater runoff could increase flood
damages below the point of discharge.
(b) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets
the definition of major development at Subsection B of this
section shall be submitted to the appropriate soil conservation
district for review and approval in accordance with the
requirements of this section and any applicable soil
conservation district guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity
and erosion control. For the purposes of this section,
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:878
"agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock
for sale. Such uses do not include the development of land
for the processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of
agriculturally related products.
(7) Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(a) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the postconstruction load of total suspended solids
(TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from
the developed site, expressed as an annual average.
Stormwater management measures shall only be required for
water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious
surface is being proposed on a development site. The
requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater
runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric effluent
limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A,
or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit
from this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25
inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall
take into account the distribution of rain from the water quality
design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the
volume of runoff may take into account the implementation of
nonstructural and structural stormwater management
measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:879
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
60 0.6250
(b) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection G of this
section, or found on the Department's Web site at
www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in Subsection G of this section.
TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates
for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and
methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design
engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability
of these alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A
copy of any approved alternative rate or method of calculating
the removal rate shall be provided to the Department at the
following address: Division of Watershed Management, New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(c) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the
required eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant
shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland 90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:880
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Manufactured treatment
device See Subsection F(3)
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(d) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eightypercent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area,
unless the runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which
case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a
calculation using a weighted average.
(e) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design
storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum
extent feasible, the design of the site shall include
nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize
nutrient removal while still achieving the performance
standards in Subsection D(6) and D(7) of this section.
(f) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which
may be obtained from the address identified in Subsection G of
this section.
(g) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to
prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified
as FW1.
(h) Special water resource protection areas shall be established
along all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream
of the Category One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle
Maps or in the county soil surveys, within the associated
HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall be established for the
protection of water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional
ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional
fisheries significance of those established Category One
waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:881
[1] The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[a] A three-hundred-foot special water resource
protection area shall be provided on each side of the
waterway, measured perpendicular to the waterway
from the top of the bank outwards or from the center
line of the waterway where the bank is not defined,
consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation allowed
to follow natural succession is provided.
[b] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection
D(7)(h)[1][a] above shall only be allowed where
previous development or disturbance has occurred
(for example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only
be allowed where applicant demonstrates that the
functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area will be maintained to
the maximum extent practicable. In no case shall the
remaining special water resource protection area be
reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top-of-bank of the waterway or
center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
[2] All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow
through the special water resource protection area and
shall comply with the standard for off-site stability in the
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey, established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
[3] If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through
the special water resource protection area cannot comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey,
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization
measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water
resource protection area, provided that:
[a] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150
feet of the Category One waterway;
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:882
[b] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by
this section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[c] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact
on the receiving waterway;
[d] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource
protection area will be maintained to the maximum
extent practicable;
[e] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with
the appropriate Department staff and soil
conservation district staff to identify necessary
stabilization measures; and
[f] All encroachments proposed under this section shall
be subject to review and approval by the Department.
[4] A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as
an element of a regional stormwater management plan, or
by a municipality through an adopted municipal
stormwater management plan. If a stream corridor
protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h) of this section has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the
provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special water
resource protection area requirements for that waterway.
A stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject
to Subsection D(7)(h) shall maintain or enhance the
current functional value and overall condition of the
special water resource protection area as defined in
Subsection D(7)(h)[1] above. In no case shall a stream
corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the special
water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
[5] Subsection D(7)(h) does not apply to the construction of
one individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a
larger development on a lot receiving preliminary or final
subdivision approval on or before February 2, 2004,
provided that the construction begins on or before
February 2, 2009.
E. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge.
(1) Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the
following:
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:883
(a) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
[1] The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation
and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the
NRCS National Engineering Handbook Section 4 -
Hydrology and Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds; or
[2] The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified
Rational Method for hydrograph computations.
(b) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and
groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the
preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a
wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term
"runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology at
Subsection E(1)(a)[1] and the Rational and Modified Rational
Methods at Subsection E(1)(a)[2]. A runoff coefficient or a
groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer
verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or
portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover
have existed on the site during the five years immediately prior
to the time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff
potential shall be used for the computations. In addition, there
is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition
(if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover
(if the land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic
condition and conservation treatment (if the land use type is
cultivation).
(c) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows,
or culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater
runoff rates and volumes.
(d) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the
design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff
rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces
separately to accurately compute the rates and volume of
stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from
unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious area
modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release 55 -
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods may
be employed.
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:884
(e) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design flood
elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall
take into account the effects of tailwater in the design of
structural stormwater management measures.
(2) Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following: The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A
Method for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New
Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as amended and
supplemented. Information regarding the methodology is available
from the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual; at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey
Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New
Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
F. Standards for structural stormwater management measures.
(1) Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas,
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high
water table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage area
and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone
carbonate rocks (limestone).
(b) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and
repairs, and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet structure as appropriate,
and shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the
bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the
parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater
than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the
width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between bars of one
inch and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In
addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of Subsection H(2) of this section.
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and
corrosion-resistant. Measures that are consistent with the
relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to
meet this requirement.
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:885
(d) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management
basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in
diameter.
(e) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins
at Subsection H of this section.
(2) Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by Subsection D of this section.
(3) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of Subsection D of this section, provided the pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the Department.
G. Sources for technical guidance.
(1) Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection G(1)(a) and (b) below,
which are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street,
P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 777-1038.
(a) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are
contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual, as amended. Information is provided on
stormwater management measures such as: bioretention
systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry wells,
extended detention basins, infiltration structures,
manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand filters,
vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(b) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
(2) Additional technical guidance for stormwater management
measures can be obtained from the following:
(a) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee
and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards
may be obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation
Committee or any of the soil conservation districts listed in
N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone
number of each soil conservation district may be obtained from
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:886
the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540;
(b) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306;
and
(c) The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625, (609) 292-5540.
H. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety
through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. This subsection applies to any new
stormwater management basin.
(2) Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape
provisions.
(a) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
[1] The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater
than six-inch spacing between the bars.
[2] The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely
affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or
structure.
[3] The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is
not to exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of
stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
[4] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(b) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
[1] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure
but removable for emergencies and maintenance.
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:887
[2] The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two
inches across the smallest dimension.
[3] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300
pounds per square foot.
(c) For purposes of this subsection, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management
basins shall include escape provisions as follows:
[1] If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. With the prior approval of the reviewing agency
identified in Subsection H(3) of this section, a freestanding
outlet structure may be exempted from this requirement.
[2] Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool
of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six
feet in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/
2 feet below the permanent water surface, and the second
step shall be located one foot to 1 1/2 feet above the
permanent water surface. See Subsection H(4) of this
section for an illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater
management basin.
[3] In new stormwater management basins, the maximum
interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm
shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
(3) Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or
exemption from the safety standards for stormwater management
basins may be granted only upon a written finding by the
appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or Department)
that the variance or exemption will not constitute a threat to public
safety.
(4) Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management
basin. See Figure 1 below.
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:888
Figure 1: Required Safety Ledges for a Stormwater
Management Wet Pond
I. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(1) Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a
development subject to this section, the applicant shall submit
all of the required components of the checklist for the site
development stormwater plan at Subsection I(3) below as part
of the submission of the applicant's application for subdivision
or site plan approval.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
(c) The applicant shall submit 20 copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in
accordance with Subsection I(3) of this section.
(2) Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision
or site plan review process by the municipal board or official from
which municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or
official shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or
Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project
meets the standards set forth in this section.
(3) Checklist requirements.
(a) The following information shall be required:
[1] Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may
require upstream tributary drainage system information
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:889
as necessary. It is recommended that the topographic base
map of the site be submitted which extends a minimum of
200 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development,
at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or greater, showing
two-foot contour intervals. The map, as appropriate, may
indicate the following: existing surface water drainage,
shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of
the Category One waters, wetlands and floodplains along
with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other
wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing manmade
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property
lines, and significant natural and man-made features not
otherwise shown.
[2] Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic
description of the natural and man-made features of the
site and its environs. This description should include a
discussion of soil conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways
and vegetation on the site. Particular attention should be
given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive
features and to those that provide particular opportunities
or constraints for development.
[3] Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the
scale of the topographical base map indicating the location
of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas,
utilities, structural facilities for stormwater management
and sediment control, and other permanent structures.
The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where alterations
occur in the natural terrain and cover, including lawns and
other landscaping, and seasonal high groundwater
elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may
also be provided.
[4] Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of
Subsections C through F of this section are being met. The
focus of this plan shall be to describe how the site is being
developed to meet the objective of controlling
groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land
management and source controls whenever possible.
[5] Stormwater management facilities map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
[a] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:890
management facilities and the type of vegetation
thereon, and details of the proposed plan to control
and dispose of stormwater.
[b] Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at
different levels of detention and emergency spillway
provisions with maximum discharge capacity of each
spillway.
[6] Calculations.
[a] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and
postdevelopment conditions for the design storms
specified in Subsection D of this section.
[b] When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall
be submitted. The soils report shall be based on onsite
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and
location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be
determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the
location of the control measure.
[7] Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of
the stormwater management facility shall meet the
maintenance requirements of Subsection J of this section.
(b) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official
or board reviewing an application under this section may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of
any of the requirements in Subsection I(3)(a) through I(3)(f) of
this section when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship
on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially
affect the review process.
J. Maintenance and repair.
(1) Applicability. Projects subject to review as in Subsection A(3) of this
section shall comply with the requirements of Subsections J(2) and
J(3).
(2) General maintenance.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development.
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:891
(b) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the
name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance
(including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for
stormwater management measures are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the
maintenance plan identifies a person other than the developer
(for example, a public agency or homeowners' association) as
having the responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall
include documentation of such person's agreement to assume
this responsibility or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(c) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or
transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property in
a residential development or project, unless such owner or
tenant owns or leases the entire residential development or
project.
(d) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on
Subsection J(2)(g) below shall be recorded upon the deed of
record for each property on which the maintenance described
in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(e) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow
and ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of
vegetation; and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(f) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of the development, including a record of all inspections
and copies of all maintenance-related work orders.
(g) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan
and the deed as needed.
(h) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection J(2)(b) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 295-53
284:892
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by
Subsection J(2)(f) and J(2)(g) above.
(i) The requirements of Subsection J(2)(c) and J(2)(d) do not apply
to stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(j) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes
a danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance
and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the
Municipal Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting
maintenance and repair for good cause. If the responsible
person fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and
repair, the municipality or county may immediately proceed to
do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
(3) Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
K. Violations and penalties. Any person, entity or associations who erects,
constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, fails to maintain as
required in this section hereof, or otherwise uses any building,
structure or land in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $2,000 and/or a term of imprisonment of not more than
30 days, or both. Each day that a violation persists shall be a separate
violation hereof.
L. Effective date. This section shall take effect immediately upon the
approval by the county review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the
ordinance by the county review agency if the county review agency
should fail to act.
M. Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision, or clause of this section shall be judged invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or
invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision, or clause of this section.
§ 295-53 SOIL REMOVAL § 295-53
284:893
Chapter 300
SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Sewer use charges — See Ch. 275, Art. II.
Water restrictions — See Ch. 333.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
Public swimming pools — See Ch. 385.
§ 300-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases listed below shall be
defined as follows:
PARTLY NATURAL POOL — Any pool formed from a natural body of water
of such an inadequate flow that the quantity or quality of the water must be
maintained by artificial means and which has a water surface area in excess
of 100 square feet or is capable of being filled to a water depth in excess of
15 inches and is designed and maintained for swimming purposes and used
as an accessory use to a residence by the persons living therein and their
guests.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any pool designed and maintained for
swimming purposes and used as an accessory use to a residence by the
persons living therein and their guests. Unless otherwise qualified, the term
"private swimming pool" shall be construed as including both artificial and
partly natural pools that have a water surface area in excess of 100 square
feet or are capable of being filled to a water depth in excess of 15 inches.
§ 300-2. Existing pools.
The application of the provisions herein to a permanently installed
swimming or bathing pool constructed prior to the passage of this chapter
shall be as follows:
A. Such pools shall not be subject to the requirements under § 300-7
hereof, pertaining to distances of pools from boundary lines, etc., unless
an enlargement of the facilities is sought.
B. Such pools shall be exempt from the requirements under § 300-6,
pertaining to permits and fees, unless an enlargement of the facilities is
sought.
C. Such pools, however, shall be subject to all the provisions and
regulations relating to safety and sanitation, including the provisions
contained in Chapter 385, Swimming Pools, Public, of the Code of the
Borough of South River, and also subject to the right of appeal provided
in § 300-11 herein.144
§ 295-53 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 300-2
300:894
§ 300-3. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain a
swimming or bathing pool in the Borough of South River without having first
complied with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 300-4. Permit required; application.
No person shall construct any permanent or stationary-type swimming or
bathing pool without first having obtained a permit therefor. Application
for a permit required by this section shall be made in duplicate to the
Construction Official, accompanied by the following:
§ 300-5. Processing of application.
D. All owners of such pools shall, within 60 days from the enactment of this
chapter, register such pool with the Board of Health.
A. Plans and specifications for the proposed swimming or bathing pool,
showing and covering all auxiliary structures and appurtenances
related thereto.
B. A plot plan showing the property lines of the land upon which the
proposed swimming or bathing pool is to be constructed, installed or
located, showing all existing houses and structures thereon, showing
the specific location and dimensions of the proposed pool and auxiliary
structures, showing the distance of the pool from the buildings thereon
and showing the distances of the pool from the property lines and the
existing street. Said distances shall not be less than the minimum
provided in § 300-7 of this chapter.
C. A clear description of the fence or other enclosure proposed to
surround the swimming or bathing pool, the type of material to be used,
the height thereof and the number of gates or doors. Said fence or other
enclosure shall conform to the minimum standards provided in § 300-10
of this chapter.
D. A statement of the method proposed to dispose of the wastewater from
the swimming or bathing pool. The means of disposal proposed shall be
subject to the provisions of § 300-9 of this chapter and to the approval
of the Board of Health.
E. The application fee for a permit issued hereunder in the amount
provided in § 300-6.
A. Upon the filing of a properly executed application for a permit
hereunder, the Construction Official shall forthwith file the duplicate
application and accompanying plans and specifications with the Board
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 300-2 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 300-5
300:895
§ 300-6. Permit fee. [Amended 4-22-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-13]
At the time an application is made for a swimming pool permit, a fee shall
be paid as provided in Chapter 155, Fees. For the purpose of determining
estimated cost, the applicant shall submit to the Construction Official,
if available, cost data produced by the contractor or applicant. The
Construction Official will make the final decision regarding the estimated
cost.
§ 300-7. Location of pools. [Amended 9-5-1967]
No private swimming pool shall be constructed or installed nearer than
eight feet from any property line. No private swimming pool shall be
constructed on any plot or lot unless there is a residence thereon, and no
property shall be subdivided if the result will be that the said pool will
be separated in ownership from the residence property to which it was
originally attached.
§ 300-8. General construction requirements.
All material used in the construction of a swimming or bathing pool licensed
hereunder shall be of durable quality and waterproof and so designed as to
facilitate its emptying and cleaning. The bottom and sides of the pool shall
be either white or a light color, except that aluminum paint shall not be
used as a finish. Pool sides and bottom shall be smooth and free from cracks
and open joints. Inlets and outlets shall be so located and spaced as to
secure satisfactory dispersion of inflowing waters throughout the pool and
to permit the draining, cleaning and disinfecting of the bottom and sides of
said pool. Sand or earth bottoms shall not be used.
§ 300-9. Sanitary regulations.
of Health for its recommendations and approval, which shall be
forthcoming within 30 days.
B. The Construction Official shall, within one week after receiving the
approval or recommendation of the Board of Health, act upon the same
in the manner as follows:
(1) Approve the application as submitted and cause the permit to be
issued; or
(2) Require the submission of an amended application to correct,
modify and furnish additional information to assure that the
application is in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter;
or
(3) Reject the application when it is determined that a permit should
not be issued. In case of such rejection, an appeal therefor shall be
available to the applicant in the manner provided by § 300-11 of
this chapter.
§ 300-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 300-9
300:896
§ 300-10. Safety regulations.
A. In general.
(1) In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the construction,
installation, maintenance and operation of any private swimming
pool shall be subject to any existing regulations and those that may
hereafter be provided.
(2) The water in every private swimming pool shall be so maintained at
all times when in use as to comply with the physical, chemical and
bacteriological standards established by the Board of Health of the
Borough of South River.
(3) Physical connections between the potable water systems and the
circulating systems of swimming pools shall not be permitted.
Potable water for makeup and filling purposes shall be introduced
into the pool by means of a discharge pipe turned downwards
either over a fluid-controlled surge tank or over the pool itself,
having in either case an air gap of at least four inches between the
orifice of the discharge pipe and the pool or tank overflow level.
Filling of a pool shall take place pursuant to rules and regulations
now or hereafter established by the Department of Public Works.
B. Discharge system.
(1) Provision shall be made for drainage of the pool and for back
wastewater disposal. No nuisance shall be created by virtue of the
disposal of wastewater from any pool.
(2) Permission for the use of storm sewers may be obtained from the
Borough Engineer upon written application and approval. No
recurring charge will be required if connection is approved and
made to a storm sewer.
(3) Permission for the use of sanitary sewers may be obtained from the
Department of Public Works upon written application and approval,
provided the applicant agrees to regulations established by the said
Department. If connection to a sanitary sewer is approved and
made, an annual fee in accordance with rates established by the
said Department must be paid by the pool owner.
(4) In no case shall the size of the discharge pipe connecting to a storm
or sanitary sewer exceed three inches.
A. Every swimming pool or bathing pool shall, within 60 days from the
enactment of this chapter, be completely surrounded by a fence or wall
meeting the requirements of the Swimming Pool Safety Devices section
of the New Jersey State Uniform Construction Code.145
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 300-9 SWIMMING POOLS, PRIVATE § 300-10
300:897
§ 300-11. Appeals and variances.
Any person denied the issuance of a permit as required under § 300-5
hereof shall have the right to appeal to the Mayor and Council for a
hearing to review his application. After the hearing, the Council may, by
resolution, grant a variance from the terms of this chapter in specific
cases, provided the variance will be consistent with public safety and the
general provisions and intent of this chapter. However, when any question
of sanitation is involved, such variance may be allowed only if the same is
also recommended by resolution of the Board of Health and after it has been
determined and declared that such variance will not be harmful to public
health.
§ 300-12. Inspections; fees. [Amended 7-5-1966]
B. Said fence or wall enclosure shall be so designed and constructed as to
reasonably prevent any person from gaining access beneath, through or
over the same and shall be provided with one or more substantial gates
or doors of the same height as the fence or wall enclosure.
C. Every gate or door through such enclosure shall be equipped with a
self-closing and self-latching device capable of keeping such gate or
door securely closed. Such device shall be capable of being opened
from the inside without a key.
D. It shall be deemed that there is sufficient compliance with this section
when the owner's entire property is completely enclosed by a fence and
gate of the type above-mentioned.
E. All portable pools, unless enclosed by a fence or barrier of the type and
dimensions hereinabove specified, shall either be emptied when not in
use or unattended or be covered with a suitably strong protective cover
securely fastened or locked in place when not in use or unattended. The
walls of said portable pool shall not be considered as constituting an
acceptable fence or barrier.
F. Any access ladder or steps used in connection with an above-surface
type of swimming or bathing pool or portable pool shall be removed
from the pool when the same is not in use.
G. Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool or bathing pool shall be so
arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises.
H. Electrical fixtures, wiring and installation thereof used in connection
with the swimming pool shall conform to the standards of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters for electrical wiring and apparatus.
A. All swimming and bathing pools shall be subject to inspection at any
time by the Health Officer of the Borough of South River or by the
members of the Police Department of said Borough.
§ 300-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 300-12
300:898
§ 300-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1,
Article I, General Penalty. Every day that such violation continues shall be
deemed to be a separate offense.
Chapter 306
TAXATION
B. There shall be an annual inspection of all swimming and bathing pools
in the Borough of South River, for which inspection there shall be an
annual inspection fee of as provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
C. The annual inspection fee shall be paid to the Borough of South River
and shall be due by May 15 of each year. The said fee shall be payable at
the office of the Borough Clerk.
D. The annual inspection shall be made by a special police officer, who
shall be paid at the rate provided in Chapter 155, Fees, and shall be
paid from a fund consisting of the inspection fees collected.
§ 300-12 TAXATION § 300-13
306:899

ARTICLE I
Residential Improvement Exemption
[Adopted 5-23-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-31 (Ch. 176, Art. II, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 306-1. Designation.
The Borough of South River hereby acknowledges having been duly
designated as a "qualified municipality" pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 104, as
amended and supplemented.146
§ 306-2. Qualified area.
The entire Borough of South River is hereby designated as the area in which
residential buildings may be eligible for tax exemption pursuant to P.L 1975,
c. 104, as amended and supplemented.
§ 306-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSESSOR — The Tax Assessor of the Borough of South River.
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the use for which it was intended.
DWELLING — Any building or part of a building used, to be used or held
for use as a home or residence, including accessory buildings located on
the same premises, together with the land upon which such building or
buildings are erected and which may be necessary for the fair enjoyment
thereof, but shall not mean any building or part of a building defined as a
"multiple dwelling" pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwellings Law, P.L.
1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.). A "dwelling" shall include individual
residences within a horizontal property regime or a condominium, but
shall not include general common elements or common elements of such
horizontal property regime or condominium as defined pursuant to the
Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963, c. 168 (N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq.), or the
Condominium Act, P.L. 1969, c. 257 (N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.).
EXEMPTION — Any portion of the Assessor's full and true value of any
improvement not regarded as increasing the taxable value of a property
pursuant to § 306-4 of this article.
HOME IMPROVEMENT — The improvement of a dwelling which does
not change its permitted use, and shall include the modernization,
rehabilitation, renovation, alteration or repair of a dwelling.
146. Editor's Note: Chapter 104 of the Laws of 1975 was repealed by Chapter 441 of the Laws
of 1991. See now N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
§ 306-1 TAXATION § 306-4
306:901
§ 306-4. Determination of value of property.
In determining the value of real property for the purposes of taxation,
the first $15,000 in Assessor's full and true value of home improvements
for each dwelling unit which is primarily and directly affected by a home
improvement in any dwelling more than 20 years old and which is otherwise
eligible for a tax exemption pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 104, as amended
and supplemented, the regulations duly promulgated pursuant thereto and
this article shall be regarded as not increasing the value of such property
for a period of five years following completion of such improvements,
notwithstanding that the value of the dwelling to which such improvements
are made is increased thereby; provided, however, that during said period,
the assessment on such dwelling shall in no case, except that of damage
through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction, be less
than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to such home
improvements.
§ 306-5. Application required.
No exemption authorized pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be
granted or allowed except upon written application therefor filed with and
approved by the Tax Assessor. Every such application shall be on a form
prescribed by the Director of the Division of Taxation, Department of the
Treasury, and which shall be provided for the use of claimants by the Tax
Office of the Borough of South River. The application shall be filed with the
Tax Assessor within 30 days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following
the completion of the improvement. Every application for exemption of one
or more improvements which qualify as home improvements and which is
filed within the time specified shall be approved and allowed by the Tax
Assessor. The granting of any such exemption shall be recorded and made
a permanent part of the official tax records of the taxing district, which
record shall contain a notice of the termination date of the exemption and
the consequences of transfer of title.
§ 306-6. Notice.
The Tax Collector shall, during the first year following the adoption of this
article, include a notice, prepared by the Department of Community Affairs,
which describes the exemption program and application procedure therefor,
in the mailing of annual property tax bills to each owner of a dwelling
located within the Borough of South River.
§ 306-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 306-6
306:902
ARTICLE II
Commercial and Industrial Property Improvement Exemption
[Adopted 7-17-1996 by Ord. No. 1996-14 (Ch. 176, Art. III, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 306-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABATEMENT — That portion of the assessed value of a property as it
existed prior to construction, improvement or conversion of a building or
structure thereon, which is exempted from taxation pursuant to this article.
AREA IN NEED OF REHABILITATION — A portion or all of a municipality
which has been determined to be an area in need of rehabilitation or
redevelopment pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, P.L.
1992, c. 79 (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.), a blighted area as determined
pursuant to the Blighted Areas Act, P.L. 1949, c. 187 (N.J.S.A. 40:55-21.1 et
seq.), or which has been determined to be in need of rehabilitation pursuant
to P.L. 1975, c. 104 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.72 et seq.), P.L. 1977, c. 12 (N.J.S.A.
54:4-3.95 et seq.) or P.L. 1979, c. 233 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-3. 121 et seq.).147
ASSESSOR — The officer of a taxing district charged with the duty of
assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — A structure or part thereof
used for manufacturing, processing or assembling of material or
manufactured products, as for research, office, industrial, commercial,
retail, recreation, hotel or motel facilities, or warehousing purposes, or
for any combination thereof, which the governing body determines will
tend to maintain or provide gainful employment within the municipality,
maintain or increase the tax base of the municipality, assist in the economic
development of the municipality and maintain or diversify and expand
commerce within the municipality. It shall not include any structure or part
thereof used or to be used by any business located from another qualifying
municipality.
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the intended use for which a
building or structure is constructed, improved or converted.
CONSTRUCTION — The provision of a commercial or industrial structure or
enlargement of the volume of an existing commercial or industrial structure
by more than 30%, but shall not mean the conversion of an existing building
or structure to another use.
IMPROVEMENTS — The modernization, rehabilitation, renovation,
alteration or repair of a commercial or industrial structure that does not
increase the volume of the structure by more than 30%.
147. Editor's Note: The statutes cited have been repealed as follows: N.J.S.A. 40:55-21.1 et seq.
by Chapter 79 of the Laws of 1992 (See now N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.); N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.72
et seq.; 54:4-3.95 et seq.; 54:4-3.121 et seq. by Chapter 441 of the Laws of 1991 (See now
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.).
§ 306-7 TAXATION § 306-7
306:903
PROJECT — The construction of a new facility or facilities to be used or
occupied by any person for the manufacturing, processing or assembly
of material or manufactured products for research, office, industrial,
commercial, retail, recreation or hotel or motel facilities or warehousing,
or for any combination thereof, and which the governing body determines
will tend to maintain or provide gainful employment within the municipality,
maintain or increase the tax base of the municipality and maintain or
diversify and expand commerce within the municipality. Project shall also
mean an enlargement of the volume of an existing structure by more than
30%. Project shall not include any facility or facilities which are the result
of a removal of a facility from any other qualifying municipality.
§ 306-8. Exemptions.
Exemptions may be granted for improvements to commercial or industrial
structures located in an area designated as an area in need of rehabilitation
as the same is defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3, after applications are
submitted to the Borough Council for its review, evaluation and approval.
§ 306-9. Valuation.
§ 306-10. Application for exemption required; approval; records.
No exemption authorized pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be
granted or allowed except upon written application therefor filed with and
approved by the Assessor of the taxing district wherein the improvement is
made. Every such application shall be on a form prescribed by the Director
of the Division of Local Government Services and provided for the use of
claimants by the Assessor and shall be filed with the Assessor not later
than 60 days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the completion
of improvements. Every properly completed application for exemption of
one or more improvements which is filed within the time prescribed shall
be approved by the Assessor who shall submit his recommendation to the
Borough Council. If approved by the Borough Council, the granting of any
such exemption shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the official
tax records of the Borough, which record shall contain a notice of the
A. The Assessor's full and true value of improvements to a property
granted approval for exemption pursuant to this article, shall not be
assessed as increasing the value of such property for a period of five
years after the completion of such improvement(s), notwithstanding
that the value of the property to which the improvements are made is
increased thereby.
B. In no event shall the assessment on the property granted the exemption
be less than the assessment existing immediately prior to the
construction of the improvements, unless the structures on the
property has incurred damage through the action of the elements
sufficient to warrant reduction or the prior assessment is contested in
accordance with the remedies provided by law.
§ 306-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 306-10
306:904
termination date of the exemption and the application of such exemption in
the event of a transfer of title to the property which is the subject of such
exemption.
§ 306-11. Contents of application.
Applicants for tax abatement, as provided in this article, shall provide an
application with the Borough Clerk setting forth:
§ 306-12. Tax abatement agreements for projects; payments in lieu
of full property tax.
The Borough Council may enter into a written agreement with the applicant
for the abatement of local real property taxes as to premises located within
an area designated as in need of rehabilitation as defined pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3. The agreement shall provide for the applicant to pay to
the Borough, in lieu of full property tax payments, an amount annually to be
computed by one, but in no case a combination of the following formulas:
A. A general description of a project for which abatement is sought.
B. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project.
C. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of the project.
D. A description of the number, classes and types of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project.
E. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax abatement on the project and
a description of the benefits to be realized by the applicant if tax
abatement is granted.
F. Estimates of the cost of completing such project.
G. A statement showing:
(1) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project site.
(2) Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by the
applicant on the project during the period of tax abatement.
(3) Estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant on the
project during the first full year following the termination of the tax
abatement agreement.
H. A description of any lease agreement between the applicant and
proposed users of the project and a history and description of the users'
business.
I. Such other pertinent information as the Assessor may require.
§ 306-10 TAXATION § 306-12
306:905
§ 306-13. Duration of agreements.
A. Cost basis. The applicant shall pay to the Borough of South River an
amount annually equal to 2% of the cost of the project. For purposes of
this agreement, "the cost of the project" shall mean the cost or fair
market value of direct labor and all material used in the construction,
expansion or rehabilitation of all buildings, structures, and facilities at
the project site, including the costs (if any) of land acquisition and land
preparation, provision of access roads, utilities, drainage facilities and
parking facilities, together with architectural, engineering, legal,
surveying, testing and contractors' fees associated with the project,
provided that the applicant shall cause such costs to be certified to the
Borough by an independent and qualified architect following the
completion of the project.
B. Gross revenue basis. The applicant shall pay to the Borough an amount
annually equal to 15% of the annual gross revenues from the project.
For the purposes of the agreement, "annual gross revenue" shall mean
the total annual gross rental and other income payable to the owner of
the project from the project. If, in any leasing, any real estate taxes or
assessments on the property included in the project, any premiums for
fire or other insurance on or concerning property included in the
project or any operating or maintenance expenses ordinarily paid by
the landlord are to be paid by the tenant, then such payments shall be
compiled and deemed to be part of the rent and shall be included in the
annual gross revenue. The tax abatement agreement shall establish the
method of computing such revenues and may establish a method of
arbitration by which either the landlord or tenant may dispute the
amount of such payments so included in the annual gross revenue.
C. Tax phase-in basis. The applicant shall pay to the Borough of South
River an amount equal to a percentage of taxes otherwise due,
according to the following schedule:
(1) In the first full calendar year after completion, no payment in lieu of
taxes otherwise due.
(2) In the second calendar year, an amount not less than 20% of taxes
otherwise due.
(3) In the third calendar year, an amount not less than 40% of taxes
otherwise due.
(4) In the fourth calendar year, an amount not less than 60% of taxes
otherwise due.
(5) In the fifth calendar year, an amount not less than 80% of taxes
otherwise due.
A. All tax abatements entered into by the Borough pursuant to the terms of
this article shall be in effect for a period of not more than five years next
following the date of completion of the project.
§ 306-12 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 306-13
306:906
§ 306-14. Application of other laws to projects.
All projects subject to agreements for tax abatement as provided herein
shall be subject to all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulation
on pollution control, worker safety, discrimination in employment, zoning,
planning and Building Code requirements and other appropriate law.
§ 306-15. Disqualification of property owner prior to termination of
agreement; tax payment due.
§ 306-16. Termination of agreement; tax consequences.
At the termination of an agreement for tax abatement authorized pursuant
to this article, a project shall be subject to all applicable real property taxes
as provided by applicable law and/or ordinances of the Borough, provided
that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a project, at the termination
of an agreement for tax abatement, from qualifying for and receiving the
full benefits of any other tax preferences provided by law.
B. The Borough may require as part of a tax abatement an agreement by
the developer that said developer shall not appeal the tax assessment
for a period of up to five years next following the expiration of the tax
abatement.
A. If, during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax agreement, the
property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property, or fails to
meet the conditions for qualifying, then the tax which would have
otherwise been payable for each tax year shall become due and payable
from such property owner as if no exemption and abatement had been
granted. The Borough Council shall notify the property owner and the
Tax Collector forthwith, and the Tax Collector shall, within 15 days
thereof, notify the owner of the property of the amount of taxes due.
B. However, with respect to the disposal of the property, where it is
determined that the new owner of the property will continue to use the
property pursuant to the conditions which qualified the property for
abatement, no tax shall be due, the exemption and the abatement shall
remain in effect.
§ 306-13 TAXATION § 306-16
306:907

ARTICLE III
Hotel, Motel and Guesthouse Room Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 9-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-29 (Ch. 176, Art. IV, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 306-17. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003, c.
114, (N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1 et seq.) which authorizes the governing body of a
municipality to adopt an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage
rate not to exceed 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after
July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges
of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms
in a hotel, motel or established guesthouse subject to taxation pursuant to
Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3) which shall
be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local
ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon occupancy of a
hotel, motel or established guesthouse.
§ 306-18. Tax rate percentage established.
There is hereby established a hotel, motel, and established guesthouse
occupancy tax in the Borough of South River which shall be fixed at a
uniform percentage rate of 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a
hotel, motel or established guesthouse in the Borough of South River on or
after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and 3% on charges of rent for
every occupancy of a hotel, motel or established guesthouse in the Borough
of South River on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel
subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.
40, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 306-19. Additional nature of tax.
The hotel, motel and established guesthouse occupancy tax shall be in
addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local
ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy in
a hotel, motel or established guesthouse.
§ 306-20. Assumption of tax by vendor prohibited; penalty.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this article.
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
§ 306-17 TAXATION § 306-20
306:909
§ 306-21. Collection of tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the Borough
of South River by the person collecting the rent from the hotel, motel or
established guesthouse customer. Each person required to collect the tax
herein imposed shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or
required to be collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the same
right in respect to collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax were
a part of the rent and payable at the same time, provided that the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough of South River shall be joined as a party in
any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense, and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
E. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be as
provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, for each offense.
§ 306-20 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 306-21
306:910
Chapter 310
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 193.
§ 306-21 TAXATION § 306-21
306:911

ARTICLE I
Taxicabs
[Adopted 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6 (Ch. 179 of the 1977 Code)]
§ 310-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of South River, in the County of Middlesex and
State of New Jersey.
CRUISING — The practice of driving about the streets of the Borough with
a taxicab so as to bring the presence of the taxicab to the attention of
prospective passengers. A taxicab driving along the streets of this Borough
for any purpose other than while transporting a passenger going to a
definite destination by the most direct route in response to a call for a
taxicab by a prospective passenger or returning by the most direct route to
the taxicab home, terminus or stand after discharging a passenger or going
to or from the said terminus or stand to the driver’s home by the direct
route shall be prima facie evidence of cruising.[Added 5-11-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-11]
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab within the Borough.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section of this
article.
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB — Transporting in such taxicab one or more
persons for hire along any of the streets of this Borough, accepting a
passenger to be transported for hire within this Borough or from a point
within this Borough to a point outside the Borough limits shall be deemed to
be "operation of a taxicab" within the Borough within the meaning thereof.
The "operation of a taxicab" in any of the above-described methods by one
other than the owner shall be deemed operation by the owner thereof as
well as by the person actually driving the same. The transportation of any
person other than the owner or driver in any motor vehicle bearing the sign
thereon or therein using the word "taxi," "taxicab," "cab," "hack" or word of
similar connotation shall be prima facie evidence of operation.[Amended
9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14]
OWNER — Any person, corporation or association in whose name title to
any taxicab is registered with the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles
or who appears in such records to be the conditional vendee or lessee
thereof.
PERSON — Includes the plural as well as the singular and artificial as well
as natural persons.
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motorcar, commonly called "taxi," engaged
in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run, or which is operated or run,
over any of the streets of the Borough of South River and which accepts
passengers in the Borough for transportation from points or places to points
§ 310-1 TAXATION § 310-1
306:913
or places within or without the said Borough, provided that nothing herein
contained shall include or apply to public conveyances which are by law
subject to state or federal regulations exclusively.
§ 310-2. License required. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-11]
No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the Borough of South
River and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be
so driven and no taxicab licensed by the Borough shall be so driven for
hire unless the driver of the taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have
then in force and in his possession a taxicab driver’s license issued by the
Borough of South River.
§ 310-3. Classes of licenses.
There are hereby established two classes of taxicab licenses, to be known
as "taxicab driver's license" and "taxicab owner's license," respectively.
§ 310-4. Taxicab owner's license. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-11; 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11; 9-12-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-14]
§ 310-5. Taxicab driver's license. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-11; 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14]
A. Any taxicab which is operated anywhere within this Borough must
possess a valid taxicab owner's license. A taxicab owner's license shall
entitle the taxicab therein described to be operated anywhere within
this Borough by a driver duly licensed hereunder, until such license
either expires or is surrendered, suspended or revoked, and shall not be
transferable. The number of taxicab owner's licenses shall not exceed
25. However, nothing herein shall prevent the Municipal Council from
increasing or decreasing the number of licenses pursuant to the
procedure set forth in N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.1 et seq., should the public
convenience and necessity so require. The number of taxicab owner's
licenses issued to and held by any single taxicab company and/or owner
shall not exceed 15. No individual, corporation, partnership or other
business entity shall have an ownership interest or share in more than
one taxicab business in the Borough of South River.
B. All taxicabs owned by the license holder, who maintain a fixed place of
business in accordance with § 310-25A, shall be licensed by the
Borough of South River and shall be subject to safety inspection(s) by a
duly authorized representative of the Police Department.
A. The applicant for a taxicab driver's license must be employed by a taxi
company licensed for business within the Borough of South River.
B. A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the person named therein to
operate within this Borough any taxicab duly licensed hereunder, until
§ 310-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 310-5
306:914
§ 310-6. Duration of license. [Amended 7-9-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15; 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14]
§ 310-7. (Reserved)148
§ 310-8. Application for driver's license. [Amended 4-9-1987 by Ord.
No. 1987-6; 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
the license either expires or is surrendered, suspended or revoked,
and shall not be transferable. There shall be no limit to the number of
taxicab driver's licenses issued.
C. Any licensed owner who knowingly allows his vehicle to transport
passengers by a driver who does not hold a valid taxicab driver's license
shall be in violation of this article.
A. Upon termination of employment from the licensed taxi company
identified on the application for the license, the taxicab driver's license
shall expire and shall be surrendered to the Borough Clerk.
B. Every license issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall expire at
12:00 midnight on the 31st day of December of the year next
succeeding that in which it was issued, unless sooner surrendered,
suspended or revoked. Applications for renewal shall be filed no later
than October 15. Any application not filed by October 15 may preclude
an applicant from operating or driving a taxi until such renewal license
is issued.
A. An application for a taxi driver's license shall be filed, in duplicate, with
the Borough Clerk upon forms provided by the Clerk. The application
shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Places of residence for the preceding five years.
(3) Age, height, color of eyes and color of hair.
(4) Place of birth.
(5) Marital status.
(6) Previous employment and employer.
(7) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any of the
following crimes: [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14]
(a) In New Jersey or anywhere else: aggravated assault, arson,
burglary, escape, extortion, homicide, kidnapping, robbery,
aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault or endangering the
148. Editor's Note: Former § 310-7, Number of licenses to be issued, was repealed 5-11-2009 by
Ord. No 2009-11.
§ 310-5 TAXATION § 310-8
306:915
welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or
not armed with or having in his possession any weapon
enumerated in Subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, 2C:39-4 or
2C:39-9, or other than a disorderly persons or petty disorderly
persons offense for the unlawful use, possession or sale of a
controlled dangerous substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
(b) In any other state, territory, commonwealth, or other
jurisdiction of the United States, or any country in the world,
as a result of a conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a
crime which in that other jurisdiction or country is comparable
to one of the crimes enumerated in Subsection A(7)(a).
(8) Whether a driver's license issued by any state or municipality to
him has ever been suspended or revoked, and for what cause.
(9) Whether he is able to read, write and understand the English
language.
(10) Whether he is in good health and has good eyesight.
(11) Whether he is or has ever been addicted to the use of intoxicating
liquors or drugs.
(12) Length of time the applicant has been a licensed automobile driver
of the State of New Jersey.
(13) Such other reasonable information as the Chief of Police may
require.
B. The application shall be accompanied by a copy of a New Jersey driver's
license with four passport-type photographs of the applicant, front view,
taken within 30 days of the application. The photographs shall be of a
size not less than 1 1/4 inches in height and 1 3/4 inches in length.
[Amended 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(1) Submit a driver’s abstract: to be obtained by the applicant from the
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission within 30 days of the date of
application. [Added 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-24]
C. This application shall also be accompanied by a certificate of a licensed
and practicing physician of the State of New Jersey certifying that the
applicant has been examined within 30 days of the date of the
application and that the applicant is of sound physical condition, with
good eyesight, not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any
other infirmity of body or mind which might make him unfit for the sage
driving of a taxicab. This requirement shall be waived for any applicant
who has been issued a commercial driver’s license by the State of New
Jersey.
§ 310-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 310-9
306:916
§ 310-9. Qualifications of applicant. [Added 4-9-1987 by Ord. No.
1987-6; amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
No taxicab driver's license shall be issued unless the applicant establishes
to the satisfaction of the Mayor and Council the following minimum
qualifications:
A. That he is, and has been for at least one year immediately prior to the
date of the application, the holder of a valid New Jersey automobile
driver's license.
B. That he is over 18 years of age.
C. That he is in good health, with good eyesight.
D. That he is not addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors or drugs.
E. That he is able to read, write and understand the English language.
F. That he is of good character.
G. That he has not been convicted of a crime and has not violated any
provision of this article. A person shall be disqualified from operating a
taxicab if a criminal history record background check reveals a
conviction of any of the following crimes: [Amended 9-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-14]
(1) In New Jersey or anywhere else: aggravated assault, arson,
burglary, escape, extortion, homicide, kidnapping, robbery,
aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault or endangering the
welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not
armed with or having in his possession any weapon enumerated in
Subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, 2C:39-4 or 2C:39-9, or other than a disorderly
persons or petty disorderly persons offense for the unlawful use,
possession or sale of a controlled dangerous substance as defined
in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
(2) In any other state, territory, commonwealth, or other jurisdiction of
the United States or any country in the world, as a result of a
conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a crime which in
that other jurisdiction or country is comparable to one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection G(1).
(3) If a person who has been convicted of one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection G(1) or (2) of this subsection can
produce a certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:168A-8 or, if the criminal offense occurred outside of New
Jersey, an equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction where the
criminal offense occurred, the criminal offense shall not disqualify
the applicant from operating or driving an autocab.
§ 310-9 TAXATION § 310-9
306:917
§ 310-10. Application for owner's license. [Amended 4-9-1987 by
Ord. No. 1987-6; 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
(4) The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an operator or
driver of an autocab who has received the consent to operate in a
municipality prior to November 29, 2011.
H. That a driver's license issued by any state or municipality to him has not
been suspended or revoked resulting from motor vehicle or criminal
violations within two years immediately prior to the date of the filing of
the application. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14]
I. That he has knowledge of the state motor vehicle laws and traffic
regulations.
J. That he has knowledge of the ordinances and geography of the
Borough.
A. An application for a taxicab owner's license shall be filed, in duplicate,
with the Borough Clerk upon forms provided by the Clerk. The
application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant; where the applicant is not a
natural person, the name and address of all owners or participants
in the ownership of the legal entity, all officers, directors or others
of like position, whatever their title, and all other individuals
having an interest in the legal entity.
(2) The year, type, color, make, model and vehicle identification
number of the vehicle for which the license is desired.
(3) The number of persons the vehicle is capable of carrying.
(4) Whether the applicant, or any individual enumerated in
§ 310-10A(1), has ever been convicted, in this or in any other
jurisdiction, of a crime, high misdemeanor, misdemeanor, reckless
driving or violation of this article or any ordinance, statute or law
governing taxicabs.
(5) Whether a driver's license issued by any state or municipality to the
applicant, or any individual enumerated in § 310-10A(1), has ever
been suspended or revoked and for what cause.
(6) Whether the applicant, or any individual enumerated in
§ 310-10A(1), is or has ever been addicted to the use of intoxicating
liquors or drugs.
(7) The year, type, color, make, model and serial number of the vehicle
for which the license is desired.
(8) New Jersey motor vehicle registration plate number of vehicle
sought to be licensed.
§ 310-9 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 310-10
306:918
§ 310-11. Investigation of application; approval or rejection of
application. [Added 4-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-6]
(9) Color scheme of the vehicle or name, monogram or insignia to be
used.
(10) The length of time the vehicle has been in use.
(11) Address within the Borough of South River from which the
applicant intends to conduct the operation of the taxicab sought to
be licensed. [Amended 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(12) Any other pertinent information deemed necessary by the Chief of
Police in the interest of public safety, health and welfare.
B. (Reserved)149
C. The application shall be accompanied by four passport-type
photographs of the applicant, if an individual, or of the manager or chief
operating officer of the applicant, if other than an individual, front view,
taken within 30 days of the application. The photographs shall be of a
size not less than 1 1/4 inches in height and 1 3/4 inches in length.
D. Upon the request of the Borough Clerk, the applicant, or any individual
enumerated in § 310-10A(1), shall submit to fingerprinting by the South
River Police Department.
E. The application shall also be accompanied by the license fee prescribed
by this article.
F. If, at any time following the filing of the application and continuing
throughout the effective period of any license issued pursuant to this
article, there are any changes in any of the information required by this
section, the applicant or licensee shall report the same, in writing, to
the Borough Clerk within three days after such change.
G. A copy of the complete schedule of the rates to be charged and a copy of
the complete schedule of hours and days of intended operation of the
vehicle.
A. All applicants for a license under this article shall obtain a criminal
background check at a private agency approved by the Borough. The
results of the criminal background check shall be forwarded by the
approved agency directly to the Borough Clerk. Upon receipt of a
complete application, including the criminal background check referred
to herein, and the driver’s abstract referred to in § 310-8B, the original
shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police, the Borough Clerk and the
Business Administrator, who shall cause such investigation of the
applicant's driving record, criminal background, and business and
moral character to be made as they deem necessary for the protection
149. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding the annual application for renewal of
taxicab owner’s licenses, was repealed 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15.
§ 310-10 TAXATION § 310-11
306:919
of the public good. Said investigation, prior to the issuance of a license
hereunder, shall be mandatory. If the result of said investigation is that
the application is satisfactory, same shall be approved by the Borough
Clerk. If as a result of such investigation the applicant’s background
reveals a prior history involving any of the crimes and offenses set forth
in § 310-11C, or if the applicant’s driving record, character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the application shall be
denied, with reasons for said denial indicated on the application by
the Borough Clerk. If an application is for a taxicab owner's license,
the Traffic Safety Division of the Police Department shall conduct an
inspection of the vehicle or vehicles to be licensed. A report of such
investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant,
if any, shall be attached to the application and returned to the Borough
Clerk for consideration by the governing body at a regular meeting
of the Borough Council. [Amended 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15;
11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-24; 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14]
(1) Prior to issuing an original taxi owner's license, the Police
Department shall inspect the taxi to verify that the taxi possesses a
valid motor vehicle inspection sticker. Upon receipt of any new
sticker, the taxi shall again be presented for inspection by the
police to verify that a valid sticker is in place. Upon successful
inspection of the vehicle, a number decal shall be issued by the
Police Department to be affixed to the rear window of the vehicle. If
the vehicle fails inspection, reinspection must occur within 14 days
of the initial inspection. The license issued for a vehicle listed on
the owner’s application that has failed inspection by the Traffic
Safety Division and is not in operation after the reinspection period
has expired will be forfeited.
(2) No taxi shall be put in service or kept in service unless both heat
and air conditioning are operational.
A1. After the initial criminal background check that includes a
fingerprinting process, annual subsequent criminal background checks
for the purpose of licensing shall consist of the use of the New Jersey
State Police SBI 212A Form, unless otherwise dictated by the Borough
Clerk or the Chief of Police. [Added 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14]
B. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police,
Business Administrator and Borough Clerk in the denial of an
application for a license as provided in § 310-11A of this chapter, or in
the decision with reference to revocation of a license as provided in
§ 310-15 of this chapter, shall have the right of appeal to the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of South River. Such an appeal shall be taken by
filing with the Mayor and Council within 14 days after notice of the
action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known
address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds of the
appeal. The Mayor and Council shall set a time and place for a hearing
on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the
appellant in the same manner as provided in § 310-15 of this chapter for
§ 310-11 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 310-11
306:920
notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the Council
on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. [Amended 11-25-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-24]
C. Criminal history record background check. [Added 2-13-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-3]
(1) Each operator or driver of the autocab for which the owner thereof
is seeking the consent to operate in a municipality must submit to
the performance of a criminal history record background check.
The cost for the criminal history record background check,
including all costs of administering and processing the check, shall
be borne by the operator or driver of the autocab.
(2) A person shall be disqualified from operating or driving an autocab
if a criminal history record background check required pursuant to
this subsection reveals a record of conviction of any of the following
crimes:
(a) In New Jersey or elsewhere, any crime as follows: aggravated
assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion, homicide,
kidnapping, robbery, aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault
or endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:24-4, whether or not armed with or having in his possession
any weapon enumerated in Subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a
crime pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, N.J.S.A.
2C:39-4, or N.J.S.A. 2C:39-9, or other than a disorderly persons
or petty disorderly persons offense for the unlawful use,
possession or sale of a controlled dangerous substance as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
(b) In any other state, territory, commonwealth, or other
jurisdiction of the United States, or any country in the world,
as a result of a conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a
crime which in that other jurisdiction or country is comparable
to one of the crimes enumerated in Subsection C(2)(a) of this
section.
(c) If a person who has been convicted of one of the crimes
enumerated in Subsection C(2)(a) and (b) of this section can
produce a certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8 or, if the criminal offense occurred outside
New Jersey, an equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction
where the criminal offense occurred, the criminal offense shall
not disqualify the applicant from operating or driving an
autocab.
§ 310-11 TAXATION § 310-12
306:921
§ 310-12. Inspection and maintenance of taxicabs. [Added 4-9-1987
by Ord. No. 1987-6]
No vehicle licensed under the provisions of this article shall be used or
operated unless it exhibits, at all times, a valid New Jersey inspection
certificate. Every vehicle operating under this article shall, at all times, be
maintained in a sanitary condition and shall be mechanically sound, and the
interior and exterior shall be kept in good order, free from dirt, rust, dents
or other damage.
§ 310-13. Insurance. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
§ 310-14. Fees. [Amended 2-25-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-4]
The fees for the issuance of licenses herein referred to shall be as provided
in Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 310-15. Issuance, denial, revocation and suspension. [Amended
4-9-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-6; 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11;
7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15; 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14]
A. No license shall be issued by the Township Clerk unless the applicant
has filed an insurance policy with the Clerk in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 48:16-3. [Amended 7-9-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-15; 9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14]
B. The Borough Clerk shall notify the Chief of Police of the filing of the
insurance policy required by Subsection A of this section.
C. The taxicab license and operation hereunder shall be effective only so
long as the insurance policy required by this section shall remain in full
force to the full and collectible amounts as required by this section.
A. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of South River may, in its
discretion, refuse to issue or, after notice and a hearing, refuse to
renew, revoke or suspend:
(1) Any license of either class if the applicant or licensee, within two
years next preceding the filing of an application hereunder or
having obtained a license and while said license is in effect
hereunder:
(a) Has been or is convicted of any of the crimes and offenses set
forth in § 310-11C, in this or any other jurisdiction, or of
reckless driving;
(b) Has had his driving privileges revoked in this or any other
state;
(c) Violates any provision of this article or has any judgment
unsatisfied of record against him arising out of an automobile
accident;
§ 310-12 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 310-15
306:922
§ 310-16. Display of licenses.
Each applicant granted a taxicab driver's license shall be issued a license
card in evidence thereof in a form approved by the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of South River and signed by the Borough Clerk on its behalf.
Such license card shall at all times be carried by the driver while operating
a taxicab. In addition, the owner of the taxicab shall furnish a card with the
name of the driver, which shall at all times be prominently displayed and
adequately posted in the interior of any taxicab operated by the licensee so
that the face thereof shall be at all times in full view and plainly legible to
any passenger seated on the rear seat of such taxicab, and there shall be
(d) Has failed or fails to render reasonable, prompt, safe and
adequate taxicab service;
(e) Has not complied fully with the requirements of this article for
such class of license;
(f) Has failed to comply with the minimum qualifications and/or
vehicle maintenance requirements established by this article
for such class of license;
(g) Makes a misrepresentation of any material fact made or
disclosed in an application; or
(h) Has permitted a driver whose driver's license has been
revoked or who has been denied a taxi driver's license to
operate a taxi.
(2) Any license of either class if the governing body determines that
public convenience currently does not require additional licensed
taxicabs or that public safety will be best served by the refusal to
issue any additional licenses or that the granting of the license
applied for is not in the interest of the public health, safety or
welfare.
(3) Any taxicab owner's license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be
licensed, by reason of unsafe or unsanitary condition, is dangerous
to the safety and health of the occupants or others or if the policy of
insurance required by this article or by any statute of the State of
New Jersey has become lapsed or such coverage is not maintained
at all times.
B. Right to inspect vehicles; suspension or revocation of license prior to
hearing. In the event that the Chief of Police believes that the health,
safety or welfare of passengers would be endangered if a license is not
immediately suspended or revoked, the Chief of Police is authorized to
immediately suspend or revoke a license prior to the licensee having an
opportunity for a hearing with the Borough Council. In such cases of
immediate suspension or revocation, the licensee shall be entitled to a
hearing before the Borough Council within 15 days of the Chief of
Police's notification of the suspension or revocation.
§ 310-15 TAXATION § 310-16
306:923
affixed to such card, in full view of such passengers, a photograph of such
licensed driver, of a size not less than 1 1/4 inches in height and 1 3/4 inches
in length, together with a photograph of the licensed owner of such taxicab,
of the same size, and each of the said photographs shall have indicated
thereon the words "Licensed Taxicab Owner" or "Licensed Taxicab Driver,"
as the case may be.
§ 310-17. Lapse of insurance.
The operation of any taxicab licensed pursuant to this article shall be
permitted and shall be lawful only so long as the applicable liability
insurance policies prescribed by this article shall remain in full force to the
full and collectible amount stated in said policies.
§ 310-18. Fares posted.
No taxicab shall hereafter be operated in this Borough unless and until
there is prominently displayed in the interior thereof, within the full view
and access of any passengers therein, a complete list of fares, charges or
tariff rates charged for transportation of passengers, which fares, charges
or tariff rates so displayed and no others shall be charged any passenger so
transported.
§ 310-19. Taxicabs to be so designated. [Amended 5-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-11]
A. All taxicabs added to any taxicab company’s fleet, after the effective
date of this subsection, shall be of matching color and lettering.
B. Every taxicab so licensed shall have conspicuously located on the
exterior thereof the word “taxicab,” which shall be illuminated during
darkness.
C. No tinting or obstruction shall be added to any windows of the taxicab
vehicle that restricts the view of the interior of the vehicle, excluding
such tinting or obstructions that are original manufacturer’s installed
equipment.
D. The owner of an autocab shall cause to be displayed on the body of the
vehicle the taxi license number issued to that vehicle. The number shall
be three inches in height and located in the center of the rear quarter
panels on the driver and passenger sides and the rear center line of the
trunk of the vehicle. Each autocab shall display on each rear door of the
autocab the name of the municipality or municipalities which have
issued the autocab a taxi license in letters three inches in height.
[Added 2-13-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-3]
§ 310-16 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 310-20
306:924
§ 310-20. Additional rules and regulations; amendments. [Amended
9-12-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-14]
The Mayor and Council may, by ordinance, make such general rules and
regulations and such special rulings and findings as may be necessary
for the proper regulation and control of the operation of taxicabs in the
Borough and for the enforcement of this article. The Mayor and Council,
in implementing this article, shall at all times consider the purpose and
intent of this article, the character of the various districts of the Borough
and the needs of the public, with particular consideration of pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
§ 310-21. Violations of rules and regulations. [Amended 9-12-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-14]
The violation by the taxicab owner or the taxicab driver of any rules,
regulations, special rulings and findings shall be sufficient cause for
revocation of any license granted to such taxicab owner or taxicab driver
pursuant to this article and shall be sufficient cause for the refusal by the
Mayor and Council to renew such license, in addition to any and all other
grounds heretofore specifically mentioned in this article.
§ 310-22. Taxicabs licensed elsewhere. [Amended 9-12-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-14]
A. Owners and drivers of taxicabs licensed out of the jurisdiction of this
Borough may be allowed to enter their taxicabs in this Borough on
specific call only to discharge a passenger to a location point within the
limits of the Borough of South River. Owners and drivers of taxicabs
licensed out of the jurisdiction of this Borough are prohibited from
entering their taxicabs into this Borough with the purpose of:
(1) Transporting a person from a location point to a location point
within the limits of the Borough of South River.
(2) Transporting a person from a location point within the limits of the
Borough of South River to a location point located outside the limits
of the Borough.
B. Such taxicabs shall not be parked in this Borough, nor shall the drivers
thereof cruise on the streets of this Borough at any time for the purpose
of soliciting passengers, nor shall they in the nighttime or other periods
of darkness, when in this Borough, permit any advertising lights on the
taxicab to remain lighted; provided, however, that the same or similar
substantial reciprocal rights are granted to owners and drivers of
taxicabs licensed in this Borough by the municipalities in which the
aforesaid owners or drivers are licensed.
§ 310-20 TAXATION § 310-23
306:925
§ 310-23. Substitution of vehicle. [Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-11]
The vehicle described on the taxicab license may be substituted or replaced
by another vehicle only after written permission is received from the Chief
of Police. Permission shall not be granted until:
§ 310-24. License transferability. [Added 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-11]
§ 310-25. Taxicab operating regulations. [Added 5-11-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-11]
A. The existing license application is amended to include the relevant
information with respect to the substituted vehicle.
B. The vehicle substituted has been inspected as required by § 310-11A.
C. The vehicle complies with all the requirements of this article and the
insurance policy required pursuant to § 310-13 has been amended to
disclose the substitution of the new vehicle.
D. The license for said substitute vehicle shall have the same effective date
and expiration date as the original vehicle’s license.
A. Taxicab owner’s license.
(1) Taxicab licenses issued pursuant to this section may be sold,
assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred by the designated
person to whom such licenses were issued, provided that such
transfer takes place simultaneously with the sale of the business
and that the transferee of the licenses will be the new owner.
(2) Any licenses not transferred to the new owner of the business shall
immediately and automatically revert back to the Borough.
B. Taxicab driver’s license. No taxicab driver’s license issued pursuant to
this section may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred
by the designated person to whom such license was issued.
A. Parking and standing.
(1) No person shall park or stand any taxicab on any streets of the
Borough or upon any premises, other than as permitted herein
below, except for the purpose of pickup or discharge of passengers
or at such place or places as the Borough Council may from time to
time designate as a municipal taxi stand. [Amended 7-9-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-15]
(2) No taxicab shall stand at the curb within 15 feet of the entrance to
any hotel, restaurant, tavern or other public place, and it shall not
stand within 25 feet of any crosswalk or fire hydrant.
§ 310-23 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 310-25
306:926
(3) Every owner holding a South River taxi owner’s license shall
maintain a fixed place of business within the Borough which is
approved by the Borough Zoning Officer and shall park all taxis
only in accordance with Chapter 350 of the Code of the Borough of
South River or in a municipal parking lot upon issuance of a
parking permit by the South River Parking Utility. The licensee
shall provide a letter from the owner of the property confirming
that, upon issuance of a license by the Borough, the licensee is
permitted to park taxis on-site for a minimum of 12 months.
[Added 7-9-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-15]
(4) If the licensee intends to occupy space in a building at a central
place of business, the licensee must also secure a certificate of use
for occupancy from the Zoning Officer. [Added 7-9-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-15]
B. Cruising. No person shall cruise on the streets of the Borough with any
taxicab at any time for the purpose of soliciting passengers.
C. Additional passengers. No driver shall permit any other person to
occupy or ride in the taxicab unless the person or persons first
employing a taxicab shall consent to the acceptance of an additional
passenger or passengers.
D. Restriction on number of passengers.
(1) The number of passengers permitted to be carried in any taxicab
shall be in accordance with the particular vehicle manufacturer’s
passenger capacity specifications.
(2) Transportation of all passengers shall be in accordance with all
applicable New Jersey state statutes and regulations.
E. Recordkeeping by owners.
(1) The holder of each and every taxicab license shall record in a book
kept solely for such purpose the time of departure and the time of
return of each taxicab. It shall also include the place of origin and
destination as well as the name of the driver.
(2) The record book shall be kept open for inspection at all times by a
duly authorized representative of the Police Department.
F. Recordkeeping by the drivers.
(1) The licensed driver of each taxicab shall keep a daily record upon
which all trips shall be recorded. The daily record shall show the
time and place of origin and destination of each trip and the
amount of fare received for each trip. All such records shall be
given to the holder of the taxicab license and shall be retained for
two years by such holder. The holder of the taxicab license shall be
responsible for the maintenance of daily records of all taxicabs
§ 310-25 TAXATION § 310-25
306:927
§ 310-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-11]
Any person who shall violate a provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by one or more of the following: a fine not exceeding
$2,000 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days.
operated by him. Such daily record shall be kept in the taxicab
vehicle during daily operations.
(2) The form of such records shall be approved by the Chief of Police.
§ 310-25 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 310-26
306:928
ARTICLE II
Limousines and Livery Services
[Adopted 5-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
§ 310-27. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the operation of
autocabs, also known as "limousine and livery services," within the Borough
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-13 et seq.
§ 310-28. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated:
AUTOCAB — A limousine.
BOROUGH — The Borough of South River, New Jersey.
CRUISING — The practice of driving about the streets of the Borough
with a taxicab or limousine so as to bring the presence of the taxicab or
limousine to the attention of prospective passengers. A taxicab or limousine
driving along the streets of this Borough for any purpose other than while
transporting a passenger going to a definite destination by the most direct
route in response to a call for a taxicab or limousine by a prospective
passenger or returning by the most direct route to the taxicab or limousine's
home, terminus or stand after discharging a passenger or going to or from
the said terminus or stand to the driver's home by the direct route shall be
prima facie evidence of cruising.
DRIVER — Any person who drives a limousine within the Borough.
LIMOUSINE — A motor vehicle used in the business of carrying passengers
for hire to provide prearranged passenger transportation at a premium
fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter basis that is not conducted on
a regular route and with a seating capacity in no event of more than 14
passengers, not including the driver, provided that such vehicle shall not
have a seating capacity in excess of four passengers, not including the
driver, beyond the maximum passenger seating capacity of the vehicle, not
including the driver, at the time of manufacture. Nothing in this definition
shall be construed to include taxicabs, hotel buses or buses regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Transportation.
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — Includes the business of carrying passengers for
hire by limousine.
OWNER — Includes any individual, copartnership, association, corporation
or joint-stock company.
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS — The location of the main place of
business of the limousine service in the municipality where limousine
service is conducted, where limousines are dispatched, or where limousine
drivers report for duty.
§ 310-27 TAXATION § 310-28
306:929
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway, boulevard
or other public place.
§ 310-29. Classes of licenses.
There are hereby established two classes of limousine licenses, to be known
as "limousine owner's license" and "limousine driver's license."
§ 310-30. Licenses required.
§ 310-31. Owner's license application requirements.
Applications for licenses shall be made in writing, upon forms provided by
the Borough of South River, signed by the applicant before a notary public
or another person duly authorized to administer oaths and filed with the
Borough Clerk. Said applications shall contain or be accompanied by the
following:
A. Limousine owner's license. A limousine owner's license shall entitle the
limousine therein described to be operated anywhere within this
Borough by a driver duly licensed hereunder, until such license either
expires or is surrendered, suspended or revoked, and shall not be
transferable. There shall be no limit to the number of limousine owner's
licenses issued.
B. Limousine driver's license. A limousine driver's license shall entitle the
person named therein to operate within this Borough any limousine
duly licensed hereunder, until the license either expires or is
surrendered, suspended or revoked, and shall not be transferable.
There shall be no limit to the number of limousine driver's licenses
issued.
A. An owner of a limousine service having a principal place of business in
the Borough of South River must obtain a license for said service from
the Borough Clerk of the Borough of South River as hereinafter
provided.
B. Each driver of a limousine service having his or her principal place of
business in the Borough of South River must obtain a limousine driver's
license from the Borough Clerk of the Borough of South River.
C. No person shall drive a limousine upon the streets of South River and
no person who owns or controls a limousine shall permit it to be driven
and no limousine licensed by the Borough shall be driven for hire unless
the driver of the limousine shall have first obtained and shall have then
in force and in his possession a limousine driver's license issued by the
Borough of South River.
A. The name, age and residence of the applicant.
(1) If a partnership, the names, ages and residents of all partners,
along with the business address of the partnership.
§ 310-28 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 310-31
306:930
(2) If a corporation, the names, ages and residences of its president,
secretary and treasurer. Applications made by a corporation shall
be signed in its name by the president and attested by the
secretary.
B. The serial number, type, color, year and make of the limousine, the state
registration number, number of doors on said vehicle and number of
persons the vehicle can carry as passengers.
C. A certificate of compliance attesting that the applicant has complied
with all state statutes governing limousine services.
D. Insurance requirements.
(1) Before a person or party shall be allowed to operate an autocab,
also known as "limousine service or livery service," the party or
person, as the owner, shall file with the Clerk of the Borough an
insurance policy pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-14 in the sum of
$1,500,000, or as may otherwise be required by the statute in such
case made and provided, against loss by reason of liability imposed
by law upon every autocab, limousine, or livery service owner for
damages or bodily injury or death suffered by any person as a result
of an accident and against loss by reason of property damage. The
right to operate an autocab, also known as "limousine service or
livery service," shall be permitted only so long as the insurance
policy shall remain in full force and effect for such statutory
amounts. The contents of the insurance policy shall also provide for
the payment of any final judgment recovered by a person on
account of the ownership, maintenance and use of such autocab,
limousine, or livery service, or any fault in respect thereof, shall be
for the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage, or injury and
shall state the name of the insurance company, the number and the
date of expiration of the policy and a description of every limousine
insured thereunder and the registration number of the same. In
addition to the actual policy, the party or person, as owner, shall
provide a specific power of attorney to the Borough Administrator
permitting the Borough to confirm at any time that the aboverequired
insurance is in effect.
(2) The operation shall be permitted only so long as the insurance
policy remains in full force and effect as to the full and collectible
amount of $1,500,000 or such other amount as may be required by
statute. Limousine owners, or anyone on their behalf, shall not
undertake to cancel or have canceled any such policy without
giving the Borough Clerk 10 days' notice of the intention to do so.
(3) The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment covered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance and use of such limousine upon any public street or
any fault in respect thereto and shall be for the benefit of every
person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
§ 310-31 TAXATION § 310-31
306:931
§ 310-32. Limousine appearance.
No lettering, emblem or advertising may be placed on a licensed limousine.
§ 310-33. Limousine operation.
(4) Every person operating a limousine, whether an owner and/or
driver, who is transporting a child under five years on the
roadways, streets or highways of the Borough shall be responsible
for the protection of the child by properly using a child passenger
restraint system that complies with federal vehicle safety, N.J.S.A.
39:3-76.2a.
E. Power of attorney. The owner of the limousine shall execute and deliver
to the Division of Motor Vehicles, concurrently with the filing of a
certificate of insurance, a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the
owner shall appoint the Director of Motor Vehicles his true and lawful
attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of
a court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by
virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed.
F. No limousine owner's license shall be issued until the location of the
business is approved by the Zoning Officer.
G. The owner and operator of each limousine operating in the Borough
shall keep the limousine in good running order so that it makes a
presentable appearance and is in compliance with all current Division
of Motor Vehicle (DMV) regulations. The owner of each limousine shall
have each limousine presented to the Chief of Police or his designee
prior to the issuance or renewal of the limousine owner's license and
thereafter upon the request of the Chief of Police or his designee so that
it may be inspected to determine whether it complies with the
provisions of this article.
H. A nonrefundable limousine license fee as set forth in Chapter 155,
§ 155-3.1. This license is nontransferable and shall be valid from its
date of issue until December 31 of the same year. Thereafter, a renewal
license shall be valid for one year from January 1 until December 31.
There will be no proration of the fee.
A. Limousine drivers shall not solicit business in a manner similar to that
of a taxicab or attempt to solicit business by knowingly misleading a
prospective passenger.
B. No person shall cruise upon the streets of the Borough of South River
with any limousine at any time for the purpose of soliciting passengers.
Upon conviction for violation of this provision, in addition to any fine
that may be imposed, the license of the operator of such vehicle may be
suspended for a period of up to 30 days by the Borough Clerk.
C. The driver of any limousine shall, upon request of any passenger,
render a receipt for the fare charged. The receipt shall state the name
§ 310-31 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 310-33
306:932
§ 310-34. Driver's license application requirements.
of the driver, limousine license number, the amount of the fare, the
points of original and destination and the date and time of the
transaction. The number of passengers permitted in any taxicab or
limousine shall comply with the particular vehicle manufacturer's
passenger capacity specifications.
A. Applications for licenses shall be made in writing, upon forms provided
by the Borough of South River, signed by the applicant before a notary
public or another person duly authorized to administer oaths and filed
with the Borough Clerk. Said applications shall contain or be
accompanied with the following information:
(1) The name, residence, age, height, weight, color of eyes and color of
hair of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the applicant's current employer and
name and address of all employers within the last five years.
(3) Whether a driver's license issued to the applicant by New Jersey or
any other State has ever been suspended and, if so, for what cause.
(4) Copy of a valid New Jersey driver's license.
(5) A copy of the written notification of the Commissioner of
Transportation's determination that the applicant is qualified for
employment as a limousine driver.
(6) Results of a drug screening testing conducted within 30 days of an
application submitted to the South River Police Department. This
drug test must have been performed by a facility duly licensed to
conduct drug testing by the State of New Jersey, which shall have
screened for all illegal substances.
(7) A certificate from a licensed physician of the State of New Jersey, at
the applicant's expense, certifying that the applicant has been
examined within the preceding 30 days and that such applicant has
no infirmity of body or mind or visual impairment or deficiency
which might render the applicant unfit for the safe operation of a
limousine.
(8) Two recent photographs, being not less than 1 1/4 inches in height
by one inch in length, of the applicant.
(9) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
violating any criminal or quasicriminal statute, including traffic
laws and municipal ordinances; if the applicant has been convicted,
a statement as to the date and place of conviction, the nature of the
offense and the punishment imposed.
(10) A nonrefundable limousine driver's license fee as set forth in
Chapter 155. This license is nontransferable and shall be valid from
§ 310-33 TAXATION § 310-34
306:933
§ 310-35. Issuance of license to operate limousine.
§ 310-36. Inspection of license and operations.
its date of issue until December 31 of the same year. Thereafter,
a renewal license shall be valid for one year from January 1 until
December 31. There will be no proration of the fee.
B. Any misrepresentation of any material act made or disclosed in the
application shall be cause for refusal and/or revocation of the license or
the imposition of the penalty provided in § 310-38.
A. Upon proof that the owner of the autocab, limousine, or livery service
has complied with filing the required insurance policy, the Borough
Clerk shall issue a certificate, in duplicate, showing that the owner has
complied with the terms and provisions of this section and the New
Jersey state statutes. This certificate issued by the Borough Clerk shall
recite the name of the insurance company, the number and date of
expiration of the policy, a description of every autocab, limousine, and
livery service insured under the policy and the registration number of
the vehicles registered thereto. The duplicate certificate shall be filed
with the Division of Motor Vehicles before any car is registered as an
autocab, limousine, or livery service. The original certificate shall be
posted in a conspicuous place within the autocab, limousine, or livery
vehicle.
B. The license shall state the name of the insurance company, the number
and date of the expiration of the policy and a description and the
registration number of each limousine insured thereunder. The
duplicate license shall be filed with the Division of Motor Vehicles
before any such vehicle is registered as a limousine service.
C. A limousine shall not be operated for service within the Borough unless
the driver thereof has been issued a valid limousine driver's license.
A. The original license shall be retained within the limousine and shall be
available for inspection by any police officer of the state.
B. No limousine shall operate on the highways of this state unless it has a
license issued and the limousine is equipped, in accordance with
minimum standards established by the Director of the Division of Motor
Vehicles and the Department of Transportation, with:
(1) A two-way communications system, which, at a minimum, shall
provide for communication to a person outside the vehicle for a
distance of not less than 100 miles and which requirement may be
satisfied by a mobile telephone.
(2) A removable first-aid kit and an operable fire extinguisher, which
shall be placed in an accessible place within the vehicle.
§ 310-34 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 310-36
306:934
§ 310-37. Jurisdiction and responsibility.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the jurisdiction and
responsibility for:
§ 310-38. Enforcement. [Amended 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of
South River. Violations of this article that occur upon private property may
be enforced by either the Police Department of the Borough of South River
or the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of South River.
(3) Sideboards attached to the permanent body construction of the
vehicle if the height of the vehicle floor is 10 inches or more above
ground level.
A. Inspecting limousines and ensuring that any limousine service has
sufficient off-street parking for all its limousines and employees of the
limousine service.
B. Instituting an investigation of the facts stated in any application and
evaluating the application in light of the criteria set forth in §§ 310-28
and § 310-31. A report containing the results of the investigation and
evaluation, a recommendation by the Chief of Police that the license be
granted or denied, and the reasons for his recommendation shall be
forwarded to the Borough Clerk at least three days before the date set
for any action by the governing body with regard to such application. A
copy of the report shall also be sent to the applicant.
C. Conducting periodic inspections of licensed limousines. Before any
limousine license is issued, the vehicle sought to be licensed shall be
driven to a place designated by the Chief of Police and shall be
inspected to determine if the vehicle is safe for the transportation of
passengers, sanitary and otherwise fit for the transportation of
passengers as well as in conformity with the provisions of this article.
Any vehicle found to be unsafe, unsanitary, or not suitable for service
may be removed from service and not returned to service until it has
been reinspected by the Chief of Police or his designee.
§ 310-36 TAXATION § 310-38
306:935
Chapter 315
TRAILERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 129.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 258.
Zoning — See Ch. 350.
§ 310-38 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 310-38
315:936
ARTICLE I
Trailer Camps
[Adopted 10-12-1950 (Ch. 188, §§ 188-1, 188-2 to 188-16)]
§ 315-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAILER or CAMP CAR or TRAILER COACH — Any vehicle, whether selfpropelled
or otherwise, used or intended for use as a conveyance upon the
public streets or highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed
or added to by means of accessories in such manner as to permit the
occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons
or as living and business quarters combined, and having no foundation
other than wheels, jacks or skirtings so arranged as to be integral with or
portable by such trailer, camp car or trailer coach.
TRAILER CAMP OR COURT — An area devoted to or designed for the
accommodation of more than two wheeled vehicles or portions thereof
in use as or capable of use as residential facilities which are commonly
known as "house trailers" or "auto trailers." No house trailer which has
been rendered incapable of immediate removal to another site shall be
considered a residential structure.[Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
TRAILER COACH LOT — A unit of level, adequately drained ground of
definite size, clearly indicated by corner markers, for the placing of a trailer
coach or a trailer coach and tow car.
§ 315-2. Permit for trailer camp; fee.
§ 315-3. Application for trailer camp permit.
Each application for a trailer camp permit shall be in writing and shall state
the following:
A. It shall be unlawful within the Borough of South River for any person or
persons to construct or operate a trailer camp without first securing a
permit.
B. No trailer camp shall be operated within the Borough of South River
except as provided for in this article.
C. The permit for the trailer camp shall be obtained from the Construction
Official at an annual fee as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, as specified
in the plan to be submitted, as provided in § 300-4B. Such plan, before
the permit is issued, shall be reviewed by the Board of Adjustment. The
foregoing permit shall not be valid unless it has been countersigned by
the Borough Clerk and the aforesaid fee has been paid to the Borough
Clerk. [Amended 8-27-1953; 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6]
§ 315-1 TRAILERS § 315-3
315:937
§ 315-4. Trailer camp plan.
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the premises.
C. The exact location of the proposed trailer camp, accompanied by a
camp plan or map indicating the information required in § 300-4.
D. An agreement to comply with all provisions and regulations hereafter
promulgated.
E. A resume of sewer, water and toilet facilities provided.
F. The maximum number of trailers or camp cars to be accommodated.
G. A statement of all other pertinent information which may be required.
H. The names of the attendants to be in active charge of the proposed
trailer camp and their hours of duty.
I. An agreement by applicant that he will permit entry to the camp at any
time during the day or night by an authorized police officer or health
officer of the Borough of South River.
A. The camp shall be located on a well-drained site suitable for the
purpose and shall be adequately lighted at night.
B. The trailer coach camp shall provide a lot for each trailer coach, the
boundaries of such lots to be indicated by corner markers, and each
such lot shall have an area of not less than 1,000 square feet, with a
minimum width of 25 feet and a minimum depth of 40 feet. Each trailer
coach shall be located at least 10 feet from any building, at least as far
from the building line as the nearest adjacent permanent buildings on
the same lot, and at least five feet from the property line.
C. The camp plan required by § 300-3 shall provide a legal description and
map clearly setting out the following information:
(1) The extent and area to be used for camp purposes.
(2) Driveways at entrances and exits, roadways and walkways.
(3) Location of lots for trailer coaches.
(4) Location and number of proposed sanitary conveniences, including
proposed toilets and washrooms.
(5) Method and plan of sewage disposal.
(6) Method and plan of garbage removal.
(7) Plan of water supply.
(8) Plan of electric lighting.
§ 315-3 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 315-4
315:938
§ 315-5. Camp location restrictions.
Trailers or trailer camps shall be prohibited in residential zones as such
zones are defined by Chapter 350, Zoning, of the Borough of South River;
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to any such trailers
or trailer camps in existence in residential zones as of the date of the final
passage of such ordinance.150
§ 315-6. Garbage receptacles.
The camp shall provide supervision and equipment sufficient to prevent
littering the ground with rubbish and debris. Flytight metal depositories
with tight-fitting metal covers shall be conveniently located not farther
than 200 feet from any trailer coach. Depositories shall be kept in sanitary
condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall not be mixed.
§ 315-7. Registration records.
§ 315-8. Miscellaneous provisions.
D. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit the rental of
space to more than 17 trailers in any trailer camp at any one time.
[Added 7-14-1958]
A. The camp shall keep a record of all guests, noting:
(1) Name and address of each occupant.
(2) The make, model and year of all automobiles and trailer coaches.
(3) State issuing such automobile and trailer coach licenses.
B. The camp shall keep a copy of the registry available for inspection at
any time by any authorized person and shall not destroy the registry
until the expiration of three years following the date of registration.
C. A copy of such registry shall be kept on file at police headquarters in the
Borough Hall, and all entries and departures of trailers from trailer
camps shall be noted therein by the camp proprietor within three days
after the date thereof. [Added 7-14-1958]
A. Dogs shall not be permitted to run at large in any trailer camp at any
time.
B. No permanent additions of any kind whatsoever shall be built onto or
become a part of a trailer coach.
150. Editor's Note: The Zoning Ordinance (Ch. 350 of the Code), adopted May 3, 1965, did not
permit trailer camps in any districts. Thus, new camps may not be established under this
article, and only existing camps may continue to operate as nonconforming uses. Original
§§ 188-7, Water supply; 188-8, Toilets; 188-9, Bathing facilities; 188-10, Sewerage, which
immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 315-4 TRAILERS § 315-8
315:939
§ 315-9. Inspection prior to permit renewal.
Before any renewal of trailer coach camp permit, an inspection shall be
made by the Construction Official of the Borough of South River to
determine that all requirements of this article have been complied with.
§ 315-10. Revocation or suspension of permit.
§ 315-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
Any person, firm or corporation violating or contributing in any way to the
violation of this article or any part thereof shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, in the
discretion of the Judge, and each day that the chapter is violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
C. It shall be the duty of the camp attendant to notify immediately the
Health Officer of the Borough of South River of any communicable
diseases in the camp.
A. The Health Officer of the Borough of South River shall have the
authority to enter and inspect for health and sanitation purposes any
facility licensed hereunder at any reasonable time.
B. If upon inspection it shall be found that the permit holder has violated
any law of the State of New Jersey, the Health Officer or Chief of Police
of the Borough of South River shall have the power to revoke or
suspend any permit and order the trailer coaches removed from the
facility or the trailer camp closed after notice and proper hearing.
§ 315-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 315-11
315:940
ARTICLE II
Trailers Outside Trailer Camps
[Adopted 10-24-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-29 (Ch. 188, § 188-2, of the
1977 Code)]
§ 315-12. Parking certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any of the following defined
vehicles on any residential property in the Borough, except in accordance
with the provisions of this section:
CAMPER — A separate vehicle designed for human habitation and which
can be attached or detached from a pickup truck.
MOTOR HOME — A self-contained vehicle, designed for human habitation,
with its own motive power, and with a passageway from the body of the
home to the driver's and front passenger's seat.
TRAILER — A vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons
or property on its own structure and to be drawn by a vehicle with motive
power. The term "trailer" shall include trailer coach, semitrailer, travel
trailer or utility trailer.
§ 315-13. Parking area.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle defined in § 315-12 of
this article except in certain specified places as follows:
CARPORT — A detached or attached structure with a covered roof
containing one or more parking spaces and open on one or more sides.
A carport located upon a lot developed with a residential dwelling or
dwellings serves a similar use as a private garage.
DRIVEWAY — A permanently surfaced area on a lot designed and required
to provide direct access for vehicles between a street and a private garage,
carport or other permitted parking space or parking area or loading area.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A detached accessory building located upon a lot
developed with a residential dwelling or dwellings (or a portion of a main
residential building), used by the occupants resident upon the premises,
principally for the storage of passenger vehicles and other vehicles and
equipment permitted to be located upon the lot.
PARKING SPACE — A permanently surfaced area of not less than 180
square feet, either within a structure or in the open, excluding driveways or
access drives, for the parking of a vehicle.
§ 315-14. Side and rear yards.
A. Any vehicle may be parked or stored within a side or rear yard parking
and storage area, subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in
this section.
§ 315-12 TRAILERS § 315-14
315:941
§ 315-15. Parking in driveways.
B. No vehicle shall exceed in height the height regulations of the district
applicable to the lot, determined as follows: If the parking area is
located in an area of the lot where a principal building (dwelling) is
allowed to be located (that is, in yard area not required pursuant to the
regulations of Chapter 350, Zoning), but such building has not been
extended into such area, then the height regulations applicable to such
principal building shall apply to the vehicle, provided that such vehicle
does not exceed the height of the existing dwelling. If the parking area
is located elsewhere in the side or rear yard, the height regulation
applicable to accessory buildings on the lot shall apply to the vehicle or
equipment regardless of the location or height of any existing accessory
building.
C. No vehicle or equipment shall be parked or stored within any distance
and space between the vehicle and any door, window or other opening
of the dwelling which provides light, air, entrance to or exit from the
dwelling necessary to or serving the health, safety and general welfare
of the occupants of the dwelling or lot. The distance and space to be
maintained shall be five feet, determined by measurement from the
nearest edge of each such opening to the nearest point of the vehicle or
equipment.
D. The ground area of any such parking and storage area or if there is
more than one such area, the total ground area of all such parking
areas, shall not occupy more than 20% of the required rear yard area
prescribed by the district and other regulations of Chapter 350, Zoning,
applicable to the lot, provided that no part of the required rear yard of a
through lot shall be occupied if the rear lot line abuts a street.
E. No vehicle or equipment shall be parked or stored in any part of the
required street side yard of a corner lot prescribed in Chapter 350,
Zoning, for the district and other regulations of Chapter 350 applicable
to the corner lot.
F. No vehicle or equipment shall be parked or stored within five feet of the
rear lot line or within three feet or 0.91 meter of the side lot line,
provided that such distance or space clearance requirements shall not
apply where a wall, of one-hour fire resistive material, is constructed on
the lot line adjacent to the parking area or between the parking area
and the lot line, the height of which shall equal the height limits for
walls applicable at the location of such wall.
A. Any motor vehicle not exceeding 25 feet or 8.60 meters in length may
be parked upon any driveway in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
B. Any motor vehicle exceeding 25 feet in length may be parked upon any
driveway only for the purposes of loading or unloading persons or
property, and for a period not to exceed four hours.
§ 315-14 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 315-15
315:942
§ 315-16. Screening of parking areas.
C. Location restrictions.
(1) No vehicle shall be parked or stored within any part of a front yard,
or street side yard, which is not a driveway. No vehicle shall be
parked or stored in a manner such that a portion thereof overhangs
any part of a front yard, or street side yard on a corner lot, which is
not a driveway.
(2) Vehicles shall be parked, placed or stored on a driveway so that the
side of such vehicle or equipment is substantially parallel to the
edge of the driveway.
(3) No vehicle shall be parked or stored upon any part of a driveway,
commencing at a front or side street lot line, extending into any
side yard area beyond or behind the side of the principal building
on the lot facing the street from which the driveway commences.
(4) No vehicle shall be parked or stored upon a driveway commencing
at a rear lot line (on a through lot), unless such driveway provides
the sole vehicular access to the lot, in which event parking or
storage in any part of such driveway extending into any side yard
area shall be subject to the limitations on driveways commencing at
a front or side street lot line. Subject to the foregoing limitations of
this subsection applicable to side yard parking, if the driveway
extends beyond and outside the required front yard, or street side
yard on a corner lot, or rear yard (on a through lot), vehicles parked
or stored on such driveway shall be parked or stored outside such
required yard area to the extent physically possible.
(5) No vehicle shall be parked or stored on any sidewalk or other area
of the street at the entrance of the driveway to the lot, except to the
extent that it is necessary to temporarily leave a vehicle standing in
such area in order to open or close a door or other enclosure to a
garage, carport or parking area on the lot, or to accomplish other
similar necessary actions incidental to the ingress or egress of the
vehicle to or from the lot, provided that any such temporary
standing of a vehicle in any such area of the street is not a hazard to
pedestrians, motorists or vehicles on the street and is not in
violation of any traffic or street parking regulation imposed
pursuant to the zoning or vehicle code.151
A. Any vehicle parked or stored within a carport or parking area located in
a side or rear yard shall be effectively screened from adjacent lots and
streets by a fence, wall, gate, door, hedge, trees, other plant material,
landscaping or a combination of such items. Any trees planted for such
purpose shall be a minimum five-gallon size of a species which has a
recognized rapid capacity for growing dense foliage and for growing to
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Zoning, and Ch. 193, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 315-15 TRAILERS § 315-16
315:943
§ 315-17. Occupancy restrictions.
It shall be unlawful to occupy any motor home, camper or trailer for
residence purposes anywhere in the Borough except in a duly established
trailer park maintained in accordance with the ordinances of the Borough,
provided that occupation for residence purposes for a period of not more
than three days shall not be considered to be a violation of this section.
§ 315-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty, for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
a height of 12 feet or more, provided that the location and height of any
fence, wall or hedge at lot lines, and of any structure upon the lot, shall
conform to all other regulations of this article applicable to the lot.
B. The screening requirements of Subsection E(1) shall be applicable to
any vehicle or equipment parked or stored in a carport located in a
front yard, which vehicle or equipment is not permitted to be regularly
parked on a driveway in such front yard pursuant to § 315-15.
C. Any door, gate or other enclosure to a private garage, carport or
parking area, which enclosure provides screening from adjacent lots
and streets for any vehicle or equipment parked or stored therein which
is not permitted to be regularly parked within a driveway pursuant to
§ 315-15 shall be kept closed except when opening such enclosure is
necessary to obtain access to such parking area.
§ 315-16 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 315-18
315:944
Chapter 319
TREE REMOVAL AND WOODLANDS MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Environmental/Shade Tree Commission — See
Ch. 22, Art. IV.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 258.
Soil removal — See Ch. 284.
Excavations in streets — See Ch. 289, Art. VI.
Weed control — See Ch. 394.
§ 319-1. Legislative intent.
§ 319-2. Legislative findings.
A. It is the intent of this chapter to promote the general welfare of the
people of the Borough of South River by providing for the protection,
regulation, planting and cutting of trees in such a way as to protect and
preserve the environment by controlling the tree life in the Borough of
South River. Shade and ornamental trees must be protected in this
rapidly growing area since they provide shade and beauty and grace to
our Borough. Trees also act as barriers to surface water flow and soil
erosion which, without the proper control, could become a serious
problem in the Borough.
B. It shall further be the policy of the Borough to improve and coordinate
the plans for the protection, regulation and planting of trees and forest
management with the overall environmental plans of the Borough in
cooperation with the federal and state governments.
C. It shall further be the policy of the Borough in implementing this
chapter for the protection, regulation, planting and cutting of trees to
foster, promote, create and maintain conditions under which man and
nature can thrive in harmony with each other and achieve social,
economic and technical progress for present and future generations for
the citizens of the Borough of South River.
A. With an evergrowing population in the Borough of South River, it is
absolutely essential to our citizens to remove pollution from our air. It
takes approximately 20 mature trees to clean the air of gases produced
from vehicular traffic consuming five gallons of gasoline. Healthy trees
greatly assist in this battle against air pollution since moist tree foliage
traps dust and soot particles until the rain washes them away and they
produce oxygen.
B. Properly planted and nurtured trees are also needed to create sound
barriers to help in the reduction of the noise level made by vehicular
§ 315-18 TRAILERS § 319-2
315:945
§ 319-3. Definitions and word usage.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context or unless a different meaning is stated in a definition
applicable to only a portion of this chapter, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
AESTHETIC IMPROVEMENT CUT — The removal, to the extent possible, of
the minimum number of smallest size and undesirable specimens of trees
so as to permit land development while retaining the maximum number of
larger and better specimens of trees.
CLEAR CUTTING — The removal of all standing trees on a lot or portion of
a lot.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT — The diameter of a tree measured at a point
on the tree 4 1/2 feet from ground level. This phrase may appear in this
chapter as the abbreviation "DBH."
MANAGEMENT PLAN — The written information required in this chapter
and containing the proposed methods and procedures to be employed in
conjunction with a tree removal project and tree preservation.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, copartnership, association, corporation or
developer other than the Borough and public corporation.
PROFESSIONAL FORESTER — One who has a minimum of a bachelor's of
science degree in forestry from a four-year college accredited by the Society
of American Foresters.
SELECTIVE CUTTING — The removal on a selected basis while leaving
other trees of various sizes and ages to meet a particular objective.
SILVICULTURE — The management of any forested tract of land to ensure
its continued survival and welfare whether for commercial or
noncommercial purposes.
SLASH — The forest debris remaining after a tree removal operation.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered "subdivisions" within the meaning of
this chapter if no new streets are created and no modifications to Borough
facilities are involved: divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
provisions; divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited
to judgments of foreclosure; consolidation of existing lots by deed or other
recorded instrument; and the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots,
tracts or parcels of land owned by the same person or persons and all of
traffic, trains and ultimately the noise which will be created by air
traffic.
C. Properly maintained trees can also increase property values and will
generally improve the overall aesthetic appearance of homes,
neighborhoods and the community as a whole.
§ 319-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 319-3
315:946
which are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to
the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are shown
and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Maps of the
Borough. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
THINNING — The removal of undesirable, competitive, diseased or
damaged trees so as to cultivate and improve the development of remaining
trees on a lot.
TOPPINGS — The uppermost 20% of a tree constituting its crown.
TREE — Any deciduous or coniferous species which reaches a typical
mature height of 10 feet and a typical mature DBH of four inches or
greater. Any species not qualifying as a "tree" under this definition shall be
considered a stem and shall not fall within the purview of this chapter.
§ 319-4. Protection of trees against damage from electric wires.
Any person, firm or corporation having control over any wire for
transmission of electric current along a public street or road shall at all
times guard all trees through which or near which such wires pass against
any injury from wires or from electric current carried by them.
§ 319-5. Contact of trees with injurious chemicals.
No person, firm or corporation shall permit any brine, gas or liquid chemical
to come in contact with the stem or roots of any tree or stem upon a public
street or road or upon Borough property which shall cause injury to said
tree.
§ 319-6. Hitching of animals; injury by animals.
No person, firm or corporation shall hitch or fasten an animal to any tree or
stem upon a public street or road or to any guard or support provided for
the same nor permit an animal to bite or otherwise injure any such tree or
stem.
§ 319-7. Protection of trees.
A. No person shall do or cause to be done upon trees in any right-of-way,
public street or road within the Borough of South River any of the
following acts:
(1) Cut, trim, break, move, climb with spikes, disturb the roots or
otherwise intentionally injure, misuse or spray with harmful
chemicals or remove any living tree four inches or more DBH or
remove any device installed to support or protect such trees.
(2) Plant any tree.
(3) Fasten any rope, wire, electrical equipment, sign or other device to
a tree or any guard about such a tree or stem.
§ 319-3 TRAILERS § 319-7
315:947
§ 319-8. Trees on public streets or roads.
Where a person desires to control the growth of trees on a public street or
road or right-of-way by removing them or pruning the trees, then the person
shall apply for approval to the Environmental/Shade Tree Commission and
shall outline the work to be performed. Upon receiving a written
application, the Environmental/Shade Tree Commission shall approve or
deny the same.
§ 319-9. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
(4) Close or obstruct any open space provided at the base of a tree
which open space is necessary to permit the access of air, water or
fertilizer to the roots of such tree.
(5) Pile, heap or store any building material, soil, debris or any other
matter or make any mortar or cement within a distance of two feet
of a tree.
B. During the period of construction or repair of any building or structure
or in the construction or repair of a street, road and highway not yet
dedicated to the Borough, the owner thereof and/or the contractor shall
take every precaution to place guards around all nearby trees on
Borough land or within public roads or rights-of-way so as to effectively
prevent injury to such trees. The owner and/or contractor shall each be
responsible for the placement of such guards or guardrail, and failure
to make adequate provision for the protection of the trees shall subject
the owner and builder to a penalty as hereinafter provided.
A. Commercial nurseries and fruit orchards.
B. Christmas tree plantations.
C. Properties devoted to the practice of silviculture.
D. The proposed cutting of trees on tracts of land one acre or less in area,
provided that no more than 75% of the existing trees are removed from
the lot upon which a single-family dwelling has been erected or is to be
erected, except lots within proposed major subdivisions.
E. Removal of trees on private property which are dead, dying or diseased
or trees which have suffered severe damage or any tree or trees whose
angle or growth makes them a hazard to structures or human life.
F. Pruning and removal of trees by utility companies to provide for line
clearance of utility wires.
G. Approved game management practice, as recommended by the State of
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Fish,
Game and Wildlife.
§ 319-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 319-9
315:948
§ 319-10. Management plan approval.
H. All lots which contain three or fewer trees upon which a single-family
dwelling has been erected or is to be erected, except lots within
proposed major subdivisions. [Added 4-24-1996 by Ord. No.
1996-11]
A. Except for the exemptions set forth in this chapter, no tree shall be cut
or otherwise removed from any lands in the Borough of South River
unless a management plan as described in this chapter has been
approved by the Planning Board and a permit based thereon issued by
the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of South River. The
application for such a permit shall indicate the name and address of the
owner of the premises, the name and address of the applicant for the
permit, if other than the owner, accompanied by the owner's consent to
said application, and a description by lot and block number of the
premises for which the permit is sought. The form of said application
shall be obtainable from the Code Enforcement Officer. A complete
application for a tree removal permit consists of the following:
(1) The fully completed application form.
(2) The management plan as described in this chapter.
B. If, however, an application which requires a management plan under
this chapter is before the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall retain jurisdiction with respect to the
management plan.
C. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
shall act on the application within 45 days of its receipt or within such
additional time as is consented to by the applicant. The Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, may refer the
application to the Environmental/Shade Tree Commission for its report
and recommendations. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, may rely on the report and
recommendations of the Environmental/Shade Tree Commission in
reaching its decision to approve the management plan, disapprove the
management plan or approve the management plan subject to such
conditions as have been recommended by the Environmental/Shade
Tree Commission in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Failure
of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be, to act within 45 days of the date of the application or any extension
thereof shall be deemed to be an approval of the management plan,
and, thereafter, the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of South
River shall issue a tree removal permit based thereon.
D. All action taken by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, pertaining to a management plan shall be in the
form of a resolution to which the tree removal permit issued by the
Code Enforcement Officer shall refer. Any such tree removal permit
§ 319-9 TRAILERS § 319-10
315:949
§ 319-11. Management plan information.
The management plan submitted in conjunction with a tree removal permit
application shall contain the following information:
§ 319-12. Preparation of management plan.
shall be valid for the time proposed by the applicant to complete the
project; provided, however, that no permit shall be valid for a period
of more than five years from the date of approval. The Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, upon showing of
good cause by the applicant, my recommend the extension of any such
permit for an additional period of one year, provided that the applicant
submits an updated management plan to show tree removal activities
to date. Further, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case my be, may require as a condition of any such extension that
the applicant employ current techniques and procedures incorporated
into this chapter since the date of original approval.
A. A description of the premises upon which tree removal is to take place
by street address and Township Tax Map lot and block number.
B. The acreage of the lot upon which tree removal is to take place.
C. The location upon the lot where tree removal is to take place.
D. A survey of the species size and quantity of trees which are to be
removed. On timber harvesting and/or silviculture projects involving
more than 10 acres, the application may make an estimate of the total
quantity of trees and size of trees to be removed based on the number
upon one typical acre.
E. Specific proposals for replanting or reforestations, if applicable.
F. A description of the type of tree removal project, that is:
(1) Thinning.
(2) Selective cutting.
(3) Clear cutting.
(4) Aesthetic improvement cut.
G. Location of streams and watercourses.
H. Location of slopes of greater than 10% where any tree removal is
proposed.
A. All management plans submitted pursuant to this chapter dealing with
the harvesting of timber and/or silviculture shall be based upon and be
in accordance with the standards and recommendations of the New
Jersey State Bureau of Forestry pertaining to the type of tree removal
project proposed.
§ 319-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 319-12
315:950
§ 319-13. Toppings and slash.
All toppings and slash that are generated by the falling of individual trees
shall be removed from the site for disposal.
§ 319-14. Clear-cutting.
§ 319-15. Control of trees in land development.
Where an owner of real property plans to develop his property as a
subdivision, planned unit development, multiple-residence development or
an undeveloped building lot on which a house is to be constructed, he shall
not remove any live trees until compliance with this chapter is satisfied and
only under the following circumstances:
§ 319-16. Land development procedures.
B. All management plans submitted pursuant to this chapter dealing with
the development of land for housing, commercial or industrial use shall
be subject to all the provisions set forth in the management plan.
A. There shall be no clear-cutting permitted on slopes of 10% or greater in
grade; however, selective cutting or thinning is permitted.
B. There shall be no clear-cutting permitted within major subdivisions
where the existing lots will be on one acre or less, unless otherwise
approved.
C. Where lots are one acre or less within major subdivisions, 75% of the
trees may be removed. However, a management plan is required for
their removal and the 25% that will remain.
A. Any tree protected by this chapter that is seriously damaged or
removed by the developer shall be replaced prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
B. All replacement trees must comply with the specifications for the
planting of shade trees for the Borough of South River provided in
§ 319-19 of this chapter.
A. If property is developed as a subdivision, site plan, planned unit
development or multiresidential development which requires the
approval of the South River Planning Board or South River Zoning
Board, then the developer shall be required to submit plans indicating
proposed locations of roads, lots, improvements, existing trees and size
of said trees for review and approval of the appropriate agency. The
proposed plan should indicate trees to be removed and wooded areas to
remain.
B. The developer shall submit three sets of plans to the appropriate Board
to enable the Engineering Department to make recommendation to the
appropriate Board with regard to the adequacy of tree preservation.
§ 319-12 TRAILERS § 319-16
315:951
§ 319-17. Responsibility of developer.
C. An application for approval before the Planning Board or Zoning Board
shall require that the developer, as a condition of such approval, follow
the recommendations of the Engineering Department or follow those
recommendations which the Planning Board or Zoning Board deems
advisable under the circumstances. The manner of designating the
trees to be saved shall be left to the discretion of the Board. At any time
after receiving approval, if the developer changes the road pattern, lot
layout or site improvements, then he shall submit revised tree
preservation plans to the Planning Board or Zoning Board.
D. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the Zoning Officer, the
developer shall designate on a given lot the trees to be retained, which
designation shall be based upon the proposed location of the house or
building, driveway and other accessory uses and structures, it being
understood that in that area the developer shall not designate any tree
for preservation.152
E. Prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the Construction
Official shall receive a release from the Borough Engineer or his
designee indicating that all trees designated for preservation shall, in
fact, be in existence. In the event that the developer has removed any
trees designated for preservation without prior approval, then the
developer shall replace the trees with trees of equal kind to the
satisfaction of the Borough Engineer.
F. Where a person is to build on an individual lot, then that person shall be
required to obtain the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer as set
forth in this chapter.
A. Where the South River Planning Board or Zoning Board has given
approval to a subdivision or site plan which contains, as a condition of
such approval, a tree management plan, then the developer shall be
responsible for the preservation of designated trees and the planting of
trees as shown on the approval plan. The developer shall plant one
shade tree for every 50 feet of frontage on the proposed or existing
right-of-way. All types and locations of shade trees to be planted shall be
shown in the written recommendations submitted to the South River
Planning Board or Zoning Board and shall be planted in accordance
with the specifications for planting shade trees as hereinafter provided.
B. Where by reason of weather, season or other circumstances it is
impossible for the developer to plant a tree in accordance with this
chapter, a person may deposit in escrow with the Borough Clerk in the
amount per tree as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, to cover the cost of
purchasing, planting and maintaining the tree for one year. No street
shall be accepted for dedication by the Municipal Council until the
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 319-16 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 319-17
315:952
§ 319-18. Planting requirements for off-street parking spaces.
Where a building permit has been requested from the South River
Construction Official for the construction of a building requiring off-street
parking for 10 or more vehicles, then the owner or builder shall be required
to plant shade trees around the perimeter of such parking space in
accordance with this chapter. Where the season or weather prevents such
planting, the owner or builder may deposit with the Clerk of the Borough of
South River a sum sufficient to guarantee the planting of such trees.
§ 319-19. Specifications for planting shade trees.
Borough Engineer notifies the Municipal Council that the developer has
complied with this chapter.
A. Specifications and requirements.
(1) Trees to be planted along road rights-of-way as a requirement of
subdivision approval shall be approved by the Environmental/
Shade Tree Commission, balled or burlapped and not less than 2 1/
2 inches in caliper, measured one foot above the ball, nor less than
10 feet high. They must be well branched, the branches to start not
less than six feet from the crown of the root system. The leader
branch for each specimen tree should be intact at time of delivery
and planting. Only trees with a columnar form and habit should be
planted in the downtown area. The following types of trees shall be
planted: London or Oriental plane; red maple; silver linden;
European linden; ash; thornless honey locust; Schwedler's maple;
Bradford Callery Pear; littleleaf linden; and Norway maple.
[Amended 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-15]
(2) Trees should start 15 feet from the point of curvature of the curb,
located on the tangent side of the curb, and shall be approximately
50 feet apart. Trees should be staggered when planted on opposite
sides of the same street. No tree shall be located in such a manner
as to limit the sight distance along the road below the specified
minimum in the highway specifications. [Amended 5-24-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-15; 10-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-23]
(3) In general, excavation for planting shall be large enough to
accommodate the natural spread of the root system and at least
one foot deeper and two feet wider than the ball of earth supplied
with the tree. The pit shall be rock free and refilled with one part
topsoil, one part clean fill and one part humus and the parent soil
discarded. Hardpan shall be loosened an additional 12 inches from
the bottom and sides of the pit. Trees shall be adequately fertilized
and watered at the time of planting and mulched with three inches
of approved mulch immediately after planting.
(4) Trees shall be staked and guyed immediately after planting. Stakes
shall be of cedar or oak, eight feet long and no less than two inches
§ 319-17 TRAILERS § 319-19
315:953
§ 319-20. Fees.
There shall be no fee payable for the processing or issuance of a tree
removal permit.
§ 319-21. Appeals.
in diameter. Trees shall be guyed to the stakes using No. 10 wire
covered with rubber hose, or its equal. The wire shall be attached
to the stake in such a manner that it will not slip or come into
contact with the tree trunk. The trunk of the tree may be protected
with tree-wrapping paper. Said staking shall remain until directed
by the Borough Engineer or a certified and/or equally qualified
professional. [Amended 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-15]
(5) Removal of debris is required. The property must be left in a neat
and orderly condition in accordance with good and accepted
planting and tree surgery practice.
(6) Trees shall only be planted from March 15 through May 15 or
between September 15 and November 15 unless specific
authorization of the Borough Engineer or a certified and/or equally
qualified professional shall be given. [Amended 5-24-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-15]
(7) Notice must be given to the Borough Engineer or a certified and/or
equally qualified professional 30 days prior to the start of planting
in order that the plants and trees may be inspected and approved
for tree variety, condition, size and quality. All work shall be subject
to the general supervision and approval of the Borough Engineer.
[Amended 5-24-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-15]
B. Any tree improperly planted or not meeting these specifications will be
subject to removal. Any tree that does not survive or is in an unhealthy
condition at the end of one year shall be replaced within 60 days
following written demand for such replacement or within a more
extended period as may be specified. It shall be the responsibility of the
Borough Engineer to determine if a tree is subject to removal under the
provisions of this chapter.
C. If a formal request is made by a property owner to remove a shade tree
citing damage to a sidewalk as the reason for removal, the property
owner must replace the section of the sidewalk damaged or otherwise
altered by the tree's removal within one year. All requests and repairs
must be made in accordance with South River Borough Code § 22-17,
§ 289-20 and any other applicable sections enumerated herein. [Added
10-10-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-24]
A. An applicant may appeal to the South River Borough Council from a
decision of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment denying
a tree removal permit or from any other action or requirement of the
§ 319-19 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 319-21
315:954
§ 319-22. Permit revocation.
The Borough Council, through the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough, may revoke a permit where there has been a false or misleading
application or there is a noncompliance with the approval management
plan.
§ 319-23. Violations and penalties; additional remedies.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be liable
to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty. The
Judge before whom any person is convicted of violating any of the above
provisions of this chapter shall have the power to impose any fee or term
of imprisonment not exceeding the maximum stated herein. Each and every
day such a violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct
offense. In addition to the foregoing, the Borough of South River may
institute and maintain a civil action for injunctive relief restraining the
continuance of any unlawful tree removal project.
Chapter 324
VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 193.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 310.
Planning Board under the terms of this chapter. Said appeal shall be
made within 30 days of the date upon which notice of denial or other
action of the Planning Board is served upon the applicant.
B. The Borough Council shall consider the findings of the Planning Board
and the testimony of the applicant and may thereafter take the
following actions:
(1) Affirm the decision of the Planning Board.
(2) Overrule the decision of the Planning Board and direct that a tree
removal permit be issued.
(3) Overrule the decision of the Planning Board denying the permit but
conditioning the issuance of said permit upon the satisfaction of
such conditions as the Borough Council shall impose.
(4) In special circumstances and upon a showing of good cause by the
applicant, waive a requirement of this chapter where said waiver
will not frustrate the basic intent and purpose of this chapter.
§ 319-21 TRAILERS § 319-23
315:955

ARTICLE I
Motor-Driven Vehicles
[Adopted 7-27-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-34 (Ch. 194 of the 1977
Code)]
§ 324-1. Certain vehicles restricted.
The Borough of South River hereby adopts a chapter prohibiting the use
and operation of certain motor-driven vehicles as follows:
§ 324-2. Property restrictions for vehicle use.
The property to be regulated by this article is as follows: all privately owned
property and publicly owned property off the improved right-of-way, except
driveways leading to and from the public right-of-way and residential rightof-
way.
§ 324-3. Legislative findings.
The Mayor and Council hereby enacts this article because it finds that
operation of such motorized vehicles has been conducted:
§ 324-4. Exceptions.
The terms and provisions of this article shall not be applicable to police
or other emergency vehicles, including but not limited to ambulances,
motorcycles, fire control vehicles and the like, or to motorized lawnmowers,
tractors or farm vehicles or construction equipment.
§ 324-5. Confiscation and impoundment of vehicles in violation.
The Police Department of the Borough of South River is hereby authorized
to confiscate and impound any motorized vehicle which is allegedly
operated in violation of the terms of this article. All towing charges as well
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle
including motorcycles, snowmobiles, minibikes, trail bikes, motor
scooters, go-carts, motorized skateboards, all-terrain vehicles (ATV's)
and dune buggies or any other vehicle in the class known as
recreational vehicles on any property or under any circumstances
described in § 324-2 hereof.
B. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized vehicle as described
in Subsection A hereof to permit any person to operate said vehicles on
any property or under any circumstances described in § 194-2 hereof.
A. In a manner so as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as to
disturb or interfere with the peace, quiet and tranquillity of others.
B. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety of others or the property of others.
§ 324-1 TRAILERS § 324-5
315:957
as storage fees shall be set pursuant to regulations promulgated by the
Chief of Police.
§ 324-6. Application for temporary permit. [Amended 12-14-1977 by
Ord. No. 1977-50; 8-22-1979 by Ord. No. 1979-40]
Notwithstanding anything contained in this article to the contrary,
application may be made to the Mayor and Council to obtain a permit
for a time period not exceeding nine months for the use of any vehicle
regulated by this article on specific property. Notice of the application
shall be served on all residents and owners of property within 200 feet of
the subject property. The Mayor and Council may issue a permit for the
property if it finds that the proposed area shall be sufficient for the intended
purpose, that adequate parking is available, that the means of ingress and
egress are adequate to prevent a traffic hazard, congestion or excessive
interference with normal traffic movement on adjacent public streets and
thoroughfares and that the property can be so used without adversely
affecting the neighborhood. Any permits so issued shall be restricted to
the extent that there shall be no use of any such vehicle on Sundays nor
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday, and no
vehicle shall be so used within eight feet of the boundary lines of any
licensed premises at any time whatsoever. The Mayor and Council may
renew any such permits issued to an applicant for continuing nine-month
periods upon reapplication by any citizen. No notices or hearings shall be
required upon reapplication.
§ 324-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall be adjudicated to have violated the terms of this
article shall be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article I, General
Penalty.
§ 324-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 324-7
315:958
ARTICLE II
Bicycles
[Adopted 5-10-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-14]
§ 324-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Any conveyance upon which a person may ride propelled wholly
or in part by human muscular power and having two tandem wheels.
BICYCLE RACK — A rack for parking bicycles in locations described and
designated under § 324-10 of this article.
§ 324-9. Parking.
§ 324-10. Bicycle rack location guidelines.
Bike racks may be placed in the public right-of-way in accordance with the
following:
A. Applicability. A person may park a bicycle on any street, sidewalk or
other thoroughfare only in accordance with the terms and conditions of
this section.
B. Prohibited acts. No person may park a bicycle where parking is
prohibited or restricted by an official traffic control device; nor shall
any bicycle be parked in the Borough where the parking of the bicycle
impedes the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other
traffic; nor shall any bicycle be parked so as to constitute a hazard to
pedestrians, traffic and/or property; nor shall any person park a bicycle
on a street or other thoroughfare or on or near any parking lot in such a
manner as to obstruct the movement of a legally parked motor vehicle.
C. Mandatory use of bicycle racks. At all locations where bicycle racks are
provided, in addition to the prohibitions set forth in Subsection B above,
no person shall park and/or secure a bicycle near or to any publicly or
privately owned tree, fence, pole, post or other property, nor may any
person park and/or secure a bicycle where an official control device or
any applicable law or ordinance prohibits the parking or securing of
bicycles at that location, but instead shall park a bicycle in a bicycle
rack.
D. Any bicycle found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to
removal and impoundment by the South River Police Department. It
shall be the responsibility of the South River Police Department to hold
said impounded bicycle until such time as the lawful owner is located or
for a period of at least six months, whichever comes first.
§ 324-8 TRAILERS § 324-10
315:959
§ 324-11. Riding on sidewalks.
Any person riding a bicycle on a sidewalk shall:
§ 324-12. Impoundment; redemption; fees.
A. There must be at least a six-foot clear walkway, to comply with the
Americans with Disabilities Act, in addition to any frontage occupied by
street furniture.
B. A bicycle rack may not be located directly in front of a store/building
entrance or exit or in a driveway.
C. Any street utility vaults, such as electric, must be located with a twofoot
clearance from a bicycle parked at a rack, not the rack itself.
D. A bicycle rack may not be located in a blue curb zone (disabled
parking).
E. A bicycle rack may not be located closer to the curb than two feet; a
three-foot distance from the curb is preferred.
F. A bicycle rack shall be located two to three feet from any street
encroachments.
A. Yield to pedestrians.
B. In company with other bicycle riders, ride only in single file.
C. Ride at a reduced speed in the presence of pedestrians.
A. Whenever any bicycle shall be impounded because of its unfitness for
safe operation, it shall be surrendered at the end of the impoundment
period to the owner or, in the case of a juvenile, to the parents or the
guardian of the owner upon payment of a charge for storage at the
discretion of the Chief of Police; but, if a charge is made, it shall not
exceed such amount as provided in Subsection B below for the first and
subsequent impoundments. In the case of seizure of a bicycle because it
has been found in the possession of a person not the legal owner
thereof, the owner shall be notified of such seizure, provided the name
of the owner can be determined. If the bicycle is not reclaimed by the
legal owner thereof, it shall be subject to destruction after the
expiration of a six-month period that begins on the date of seizure. The
destruction of said bicycle shall be in accordance with the policies and
procedures for the destruction of found property as established by the
South River Police Department.
B. Impoundment fees.
(1) First impoundment: $2.
(2) Subsequent impoundments: $5.
§ 324-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 324-13
315:960
§ 324-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person over the age of 18 who violates § 324-9 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.
§ 324-13 TRAILERS § 324-13
315:961
Chapter 333
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Utilities Department — See Ch. 86.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 129.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 169.
Sewers — See Ch. 275.
Subdivision and site plan review — See Ch.
295.
Water supply — See Ch. 390.
§ 324-13 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 324-13
315:962
ARTICLE I
Water Use
[Adopted 1-28-1930 (Ch. 199 of the 1977 Code)]
§ 333-1. Applicability.
The following regulations shall be considered a part of the contract with
every person who uses water from the waterworks, and the fact of using the
water shall be considered as expressing assent on the part of the user to be
bound thereby.153
§ 333-2. Applications for use of water. [Amended 6-21-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-21]
All applications for the use of water must be made at the Utilities
Department in the Borough of South River, in the form prescribed, and
such applications shall fully and truly state the various uses to which the
water is to be applied; and, should water subsequently be required for other
purposes, notice must be given and approval secured before the desired
change or changes may be made.
§ 333-3. Furnishing of suitable materials for connection. [Amended
12-26-1946]
Effective three months from the date hereof, all water services in the
Borough of South River from the main to the meter shall be Type K soft
copper tubing. Suitable corporation cocks and curb cocks will be furnished
by the Utilities Department to the licensed plumbers of the Borough to
connect with the aforesaid copper tubing.
§ 333-4. Maintenance of pipes and fixtures. [Amended 9-9-1982 by
Ord. No. 1982-34; 2-5-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-4; 12-10-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-35; 6-21-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-21]
A. All consumers of water shall keep the water pipes and fixtures within
their premises and the service line to the main in good repair and
protect the same from frost at their own expense. In the event that any
water leaks shall develop in the service line to the main, the consumer
shall be responsible for and repair the same immediately upon notice of
the Utilities Department, Director of Public Works or his agent, which
notice shall specify the time at which such repairs shall be made. In the
event that the repair is not determined by the Utilities Department,
Director of Public Works or his agent to be of an emergent nature, the
153. Editor's Note: These regulations were established by an ordinance of the Board of Public
Works of the Borough of South River on January 28, 1930, and were amended from time to
time by the Board of Public Works. However, the Board of Public Works was abolished on
March 7, 1973, by Ord. No. 1973-5. Currently there is a Utilities Department in the
Borough under the direction of the Utilities Committee of the Borough Council, and
amendments to the regulations are now adopted by the Mayor and Council. Regarding
certain resolutions adopted by the Board of Public Works pertaining to changes in policy
as to extensions of waterlines and to annual rental fees for hydrants, consult the offices of
the Utilities Department.
§ 333-1 TRAILERS § 333-4
315:963
§ 333-5. Placement and use of stopcock. [Amended 3-26-1980 by
Ord. No. 1980-8; 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-35; 6-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-21]
§ 333-6. Plumbing requirements. [Amended 3-26-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-8; 6-21-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-21]
The Utilities Department will not connect with plumbing which has not
been done by a plumber licensed by the proper Borough authorities unless
said plumbing has been examined and approved by the Plumbing Subcode
Official and return made in due form.
§ 333-7. Two or more parties using one service pipe.
When two or more parties take water through one service pipe, the
provisions in regard to the cutting off of the supply pipe shall be applicable
to all the parties although one or more of them may be innocent of any cause
of offense.
§ 333-8. Responsibility for tenants' bills.
Owners of premises will be held responsible for the water bills of their
tenants.
consumer shall be given at least 24 hours to make the repair. If the
consumer shall not perform the repair work within the time set forth
in such notice, the Utilities Department shall cause such repair to be
made, and the consumer shall be liable to the Utilities Department for
all costs incurred in the making of said repairs. Failure to comply and
reimburse the Borough for costs incurred can result in a lien placed on
the property. [Amended 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-26]
B. All consumers shall keep the water meter accessible and protect the
same from frost and damage at their own expense.
A. A stopcock and box shall in all cases be placed at the curbline, which
shall be used only by the Utilities Department, Director of Public Works
or his agent or by permit granted in writing by the Utilities Department,
Director of Public Works or his agent, and any persons turning on the
water when it has been turned off at the curb shall be subject to the
penalties in § 333-36.
B. The Utilities Department shall not be liable for any damages resulting
from a failure to observe this important regulation.
C. The water in no case must be left running without a special permit by
the Utilities Department, Director of Public Works or his agent.
D. All consumers of water shall keep the stopcock and box in good repair
and protect the same from frost at their own expense.
§ 333-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 333-9
315:964
§ 333-9. Supplying water to others. [Amended 3-26-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980-8; 6-21-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-21]
No water taker shall supply water to parties not entitled to its use, except
upon permission from the Utilities Department, Director of Public Works or
his agent, given in writing, under the penalty provided in § 333-36 for each
and every offense.
§ 333-10. Nonliability of municipality. [Amended 6-21-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-21]
The consumer shall not be entitled to damages nor will any part of payment
be refunded for any stoppage of supply occasioned by an accident to any
portion of the works nor for stoppage for the purpose of addition or repairs.
The Utilities Department, Director of Public Works or his agent shall have
the right to shut off the water to make extensions, alterations and repairs.
§ 333-11. Accessibility of premises. [Amended 3-26-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980-8]
All apparatus and places supplied with water must be accessible and open
to the inspection of the Utility Engineer or his agents at all times, and all
pipes and fixtures shall be subject to rejection by said Utility Engineer if
considered unsuitable for the purpose. Failure to comply with this section,
upon proper notification, will result in discontinuation of services.
§ 333-12. Increase in or extension of fixtures.
No increase or extensions of fixtures shall be made without written
permission from the Utility Engineer.
§ 333-13. Presumption of use of fixtures.
In all occupied premises all water fixtures of whatever nature will be
deemed and held as used and will be charged for as long as the fixtures
shall remain connected with the water pipes.
§ 333-14. Use of fire hydrants.
No one will be allowed to use water through fire hydrants or pipes for any
other purpose except upon written permission from the Utility Engineer.
§ 333-15. Payment for new service. [Amended 6-21-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-21]
Upon a request for any new service, the bills for work done or materials
furnished by the Utilities Department must be paid before the water shall
be turned on.
§ 333-9 TRAILERS § 333-16
315:965
§ 333-16. Furnishing of meters. [Amended 6-21-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-21]
All users of water shall be provided a meter by the Utilities Department
of the Borough of South River, said meter to be installed and paid for by
the user of said water, and in no case, except subject to special permission
of the Utilities Department, shall any water connection be made without a
meter.
§ 333-17. Payment of bills; discontinuance of service; building.
[Amended 2-9-1967; 3-26-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-8; 8-14-1996 by
Ord. No. 1996-20]
§ 333-18. Claims for deductions. [Amended 6-21-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-21]
All claims for deductions must be made in writing to the Utilities
Department, which has full power to grant said deductions.
A. All water bills of consumers shall be payable at the office of the Utilities
Department by the due date. In the event that any such bill is not paid
on or before 40 days from the date of the first past-due balance, then
the service to the premises owned or occupied by the person or persons
in arrears shall be shut off. Such service shall not be turned on until all
arrearages have been paid, together with as provided in Chapter 155,
Fees. This shall be in addition to and not in limitation of any other
statute or ordinance. [Amended 11-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-26]
B. In the case of water service being required for building purposes, the
applicant shall therefor pay a service fee equivalent to the current
residential quarterly minimum rate charged in advance. The balance
due for such service shall be paid in full as outlined above, immediately
upon completion of said building.
C. In the event that a water consumer is unable to pay any water charges
as billed by the Borough of South River, said consumer may request to
be placed on an installment payment plan to allow any arrearages and
charges to be brought current. Said installment agreement shall be
liberally granted by the Business Administrator; however, all future
charges at the time said agreement is entered are due and payable
upon receipt. In addition, upon the entering of any installment
agreement, said water consumer shall pay a fee as provided in Chapter
155, Fees, by the Business Administrator. Said administrative charge
shall be in addition to any other charges which may accrue according to
Borough Code. Failure to comply with the payment plan will result in
immediate discontinuance of service. [Amended 11-25-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-26]
D. The option of a duplicate mailing of tenant water and electric bills is
available to owners at an annual cost of $32. [Added 11-25-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-26]
§ 333-16 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 333-19
315:966
§ 333-19. Water rates. [Last amended 4-3-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-7]
§ 333-20. Interest on delinquent bills. [Added 6-24-1969]
§ 333-21. Tapping procedures and connection fees. [Amended
1-22-1948; 3-26-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-8; 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
A. The minimum charge per quarter for all consumers within the Borough
of South River shall be as provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
B. The quarterly rates of all water consumed by consumers in all meter
size categories shall be as provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
C. The current exemption policy maintained by the Utilities Department of
the Borough of South River shall continue through the last day of the
third quarter in the 1988 calendar year. Thereafter, all consumers of
water within the Borough of South River shall pay for all water
consumed at the rates set forth in this section, except as follows:
(1) Any municipally owned, operated or controlled building, structure,
facility or use shall be exempt from any charge for water
consumption.
(2) Every person, a citizen and resident of this Borough, of the age of
65 or more years, or less than 65 years of age who is permanently
and totally disabled, and their surviving spouses (age 55 or more),
having an income not in excess of the allowable maximum
permissible for senior citizen tax deductions per year, excluding
social security, capital gains (on property where a senior citizen
deduction was claimed) and other funds approved by the state
statutes, and residing in a dwelling house owned by him, shall be
entitled to a credit in the amount of 10%, but not to exceed the
amount provided in Chapter 155, Fees, for each quarterly water
bill, which shall be received so long as said consumer shall provide
proper proof or documentation to the Utilities Department of his
qualified status.
A. The Revised Statutes of New Jersey, more particularly N.J.S.A. 54:4-67,
permits an interest charge on delinquent payment of water bills, and
pursuant thereto the following shall apply:
(1) Thirty days from the date of billing, no interest shall be applied.
(2) From the 31st day to the 60th day from the date of billing, an
interest charge of 8% will be applied.
(3) After the 30th day from billing, customer's service will be
discontinued and subject to normal charges for reinstatement of
such service. [Amended 3-26-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-8]
B. All such water billings must be paid in proper sequence, and "skip
paying" of such water billings will not be permitted.
§ 333-19 TRAILERS § 333-21
315:967
1996-22; 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-36; 8-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-13]
§ 333-22. Meter operation. [Amended 3-26-1980 by Ord. No.
1980-8]
A. Where a tap for a service connection to any water main is required,
application therefor shall be made either by the property owner or by
the plumber contracting for or doing the plumbing work in connection
therewith. All excavation and trench work must be done by the plumber.
Payment for taps shall be made upon application therefor, but the
acceptance of payment or the issuance of a permit does not bind the
Utilities Department to make such tap if for any reason it may deem
such work inadvisable. The schedule of charges in Chapter 155, Fees,
shall be made for tapping for a service connection.
B. In the event an application requires a determination that a property
may need an increase in water capacity, an escrow deposit of $2,500
shall be paid to the South River Utilities Department. The escrow shall
be utilized for the professional services of the Borough Engineer in
conducting a review and analysis of the potential increase in capacity
for the development. The escrow shall be deposited by the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough, or his/her designee, in an account for
such purposes under the sole control of the Borough. Said escrow may
be commingled with similar escrows from other applicants, but
accurate accounts and records shall be kept so as to identify particular
escrows and charges made against the same. At the conclusion of the
Municipal Engineer’s report and analysis, the applicant shall be entitled
to the return of the balance of the escrow.
C. All connection fees to be paid to the Borough shall be determined
annually on January 1 of the calendar year by calculating the total past
capital costs of the Borough's water system to date and dividing that
total cost by the number of equivalent (or service) connections existing
within the Borough. This calculation shall be made by the appropriate
personnel of the Finance Department or Utilities Department of the
Borough in order to enable the Borough to receive capital cost of its
water system from users as they enter the system. The rates for the
different size connections shall be posted by the Utilities Department
annually in a conspicuous place where permits are issued.
D. Said rates shall be as provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
A. If a meter gets out of order and fails to register, the consumption will be
charged at the average daily consumption shown by the meter when in
order, based on a similar quarter for the previous year's consumption.
B. All water which passes through a meter will be charged for, whether
used or wasted.
§ 333-21 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 333-22
315:968
§ 333-23. Licensing of plumbers and pipe fitters. [Amended
9-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-31]
Properly licensed plumbers and pipe fitters wishing to do business in
connection with the South River waterworks shall execute a surety bond,
to be approved by the Board, in the sum of $1,000. The condition of
this bond shall be that the plumber shall conform to and be governed by
the rules and regulations adopted by said authorities and shall save the
Departments harmless from all damages and expense caused by neglect
to provide suitable protection from accident or defective work. The abovementioned
bond shall be renewed annually.
§ 333-24. Application for license.
Each plumber and pipe fitter shall state in his application for license his
actual place of business, together with name of firm under which said
business is done, and shall immediately notify the Utility Engineer of any
change in either.
§ 333-25. Reports by plumbers and pipe fitters.
§ 333-26. Approval of plumbing and piping.
The strength of all plumbing and piping will be subject to the approval of
the proper officers of the Department.
§ 333-27. Service pipes and connections.
C. Consumers shall be responsible for maintaining access to meters at all
times. In the event that Borough personnel must clear access to any
meter, consumers shall be responsible for the cost of obtaining access
in accordance with the prevailing Borough wage scale. [Added
11-26-1980 by Ord. No. 1980-45]
A. Plumbers and pipe fitters shall make full, written returns for each
service, upon blanks furnished by the Department, of the ordinary and
special uses to which the water is to be applied, whether for new works,
alterations or additions, with a full description of all apparatus and
arrangements for using the water. The return shall be made within 48
hours after the completion of the work. The water will in no case be
turned on until return is made.
B. No plumber or pipe fitter shall be allowed to turn on the water.
A. Each house must have a service pipe from the main and meter, the
minimum advance charge being the current residential quarterly
minimum for each meter. No permission will be granted for two or more
houses to take water from the same tap in main. [Amended 3-26-1980
by Ord. No. 1980-8]
§ 333-22 TRAILERS § 333-27
315:969
§ 333-28. Obtaining of sewer permit. [Amended 3-26-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980-8; 12-10-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-35]
At the time a permit is granted for the tapping of the water main, a sewer
permit must be secured for the same premises if such premises are located
on streets where both water and sewer pipes are laid, and the inspection of
both water and sewer connection shall be properly made and approved by
a Plumbing Subcode Official of the Borough before the work is covered up.
In any case where either water or sewer is tapped without a permit and the
work is covered up before inspection and approval by a Plumbing Subcode
Official of the Borough, a fine as provided in § 333-36 will be levied and
collected from the person or persons who are doing or did such work. At
the discretion of the Plumbing Subcode Official, any work may be ordered
uncovered to allow for a proper inspection as required.
§ 333-29. Prevention of backflow.
Whenever an apparatus is installed to store or contain water, there must be
a check valve on the inlet pipe thereof to prevent the water from flowing
back through the meter caused by a decreased pressure in the street main.
§ 333-30. House drains.
House drains must, wherever possible, be given an even grade to the main
sewer not less than 1/4 inch per foot.
§ 333-31. Stormwater connections prohibited; private stormwater
drain inlet retrofitting.
B. No permission will be given for any water connection over 100 feet
away from the main.
C. No hydrant or faucet connection with the water system which is used
for any other purpose than that of fire protection or sprinkling shall be
maintained in the grounds of any person or persons. No other outside
hydrants will be permitted.
A. Definitions: For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases,
words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein
unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
manmade channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by
§ 333-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 333-31
315:970
Borough of South River or other public body, and is designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but, is not limited to a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to
its jurisdiction.
B. Prohibited connections. No stormwater connections to the Borough
sewer system will be allowed to any licensee, who may be subject to
forfeiture of his license and penalties under his bond.
C. Prohibited conduct. No person in control of private property (except a
residential lot with one single-family house) shall authorize the
repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of individual potholes),
resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion
or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface
that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that
property unless the storm drain inlet either:
(1) Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
(2) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Subsection D
below prior to the completion of the project.
D. Design standard: Storm drain inlets identified in Subsection A above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see Subsection D below.
(1) Grates.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
§ 333-31 TRAILERS § 333-31
315:971
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(b) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in
grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch
grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways,
plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and
stormwater basin floors.
(2) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the
curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no
more than seven square inches, or be no greater than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(3) This standard does not apply:
(a) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards;
(b) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch
basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery
of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through
one of the following:
[1] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[2] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(c) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(d) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New-Jersey-
Register-listed historic property.
E. Enforcement. This article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough of South River.
F. Violations and penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
§ 333-31 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 333-31
315:972
§ 333-32. Fire service. [Added 12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-45;
amended 2-24-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-4; 3-8-1988 by Ord. No.
1988-7; 1-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1]
$2,000, imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days for each storm drain inlet
that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
G. When effective. This article shall be in full force and effect from and
after its adoption and any publication as may be required by law.
A. Fire service. Quarterly charges shall be made for fire service lines as
provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
B. Connection fees.
(1) Connection fees for such fire service lines shall be as set forth in
Chapter 155, Fees, or as modified pursuant to Subsection B(2).
(2) The Borough Engineer shall, no later than September 1 of each
calendar year, provide the governing body with a written
recommendation as to the connection fees to be charged for fire
service lines connected in the following calendar year. The
governing body may, no later than November 15 of the same year,
adopt, by resolution, a connection fee schedule for fire service lines
connected in the following calendar year. Within 10 days of passage
of said resolution, the Borough Clerk shall publish same in a
newspaper authorized by law to publish the Borough's legal notices
and shall post said resolution at the offices of the Borough Clerk
and the Utilities Department. Said fee schedule shall be effective
on January 1 of the calendar year following its adoption and shall
remain in effect until December 31 of the year in which a
subsequent resolution fixing connection fees is adopted pursuant to
this subsection.
C. For the purpose of determining pipe size, measurement shall be made
where the private line connects to the Borough system.
D. All fire service lines and systems shall be installed with an appropriate
water switch and alarm system which shall be activated to signal the
Borough Police and/or Fire Departments or a private central station
manned 24 hours a day, in order that the Borough shall be aware of
water flow through said system. In addition, such waterflow alarm
installations shall be constructed in accordance with the latest revisions
of the National Fire Protection Association Standards 13, 70, 72A, 72B,
72C and 72D. Standards and details of the private fire service line
installations from the Borough system to the sprinkler system supply
header are on file with the Water Utilities Department of the Borough.
E. A minimum quarterly charge will be charged for each fire hydrant
installed on private property, as provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 333-31 TRAILERS § 333-33
315:973
§ 333-33. Extension of water mains. [Added 4-24-1947; amended
5-12-1949; 9-9-1954; 5-12-1960; 5-26-1960; 11-30-1970]
The following shall be the procedure for extensions of water mains within
the Borough of South River:
§ 333-34. Water main installation specifications. [Added 2-13-1964]
A. Landowners.
(1) With regard to landowners, other than developers and subdividers,
on accepted and opened Borough streets, there will be no
reimbursement for waterline installations. All water main
extensions henceforth shall be made at the expense of the
benefiting landowners.
(2) Landowners on accepted and opened Borough streets shall install
water mains voluntarily or may petition the Mayor and Borough
Council to install same upon an assessment basis. Such
installations shall be under the supervision of the Utilities
Department and the Borough Engineer. Such mains shall extend
the full frontage of such landowner's lot. In such cases, the Utilities
Department will furnish, at its own expense, fire hydrants, valves,
tees and/or crosses for installations at street intersections as may
be needed for installation by said landowners by their contractors.
Mains, valves and fittings shall be a minimum of eight inches in
diameter; in those cases where the Board shall deem it advisable
that larger mains be installed to provide for the present welfare
and future development of the Borough, it shall direct that such
mains be installed, and the additional material cost thereof shall be
borne by the Board.
B. Developers and subdividers.
(1) With regard to developers and subdividers of land, there will be no
reimbursement for waterline extensions. Developers and
subdividers of land shall install all water main extensions at their
expense in land being developed or subdivided by them. This shall
include all cast-iron mains, necessary Smith cuts, tees and crosses
at street intersections, and such fire hydrants and valves as may be
required by the Board; size, type and manufacture (where
applicable) to be determined by the Board.
(2) Mains, valves and fittings shall be a minimum of eight inches in
diameter and shall be laid under the supervision and subject to the
approval of the Utilities Department. In those cases where the
Board shall deem it advisable that larger mains be installed to
provide for the present welfare and future development of the
Borough, it shall direct that such mains be installed, and the
additional material cost thereof shall be borne by the Board.
A. Material.
§ 333-33 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 333-34
315:974
(1) Pipe and fittings. Standardized mechanical joint cast-iron pipe and
fittings for water shall meet the following: Class 200-200 pound
pressure. Pipe shall be cast iron produced centrifugally in sandlined
molds. Each pipe shall be provided with a mechanical joint
socket on one end, and the other end shall be plain. Pipe and
fittings shall be cement-lined. Cement lining shall be in accordance
with ASA A21.4-1953 (AWWA CL04-53). [Amended 9-22-1966]
(2) Gate valves. Standardized mechanical joint cast-iron gate valves for
water shall meet the following: working pressure: 200 pounds cold
water. Gate valves shall be American Waterworks Association
approved, inside screw, nonrising stem, parallel seats, wedge pin
mechanism as specified by the South River Utilities Department.
Each gate valve installed shall be provided with a cast-iron
adjustable valve box. ASA A21.11-1953 (AWWA C111-53).
(3) Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be as specified by the South
River Utilities Department. Operating details and size of hydrant
valve opening shall be as approved by the Utility Engineer of said
Utilities Department. Hydrant inlet elbow shall be normally six-inch
size flanged and drilled 125 pounds American cast-iron flange
standard. Auxiliary gate valve shall be normally six-inch size
flanged by mechanical joint ends as approved by said Utilities
Department.
B. Installation.
(1) Pipe and fittings.
(a) Depth of cover for pipe and fittings shall be four feet.
(b) Pipe shall be provided with a solid uniform bearing throughout
the entire length. Selected backfill material shall be carefully
rammed with proper tools around and over the pipe up to a
cover of at least two feet.
(c) Pipe shall be laid in a manner to assure that all valve stems and
valve boxes be set plumb.
(d) All pipes, valves and fittings shall be thoroughly cleaned before
being lowered into the trench, or before joining, and shall be
kept clean until final acceptance of work. The exposed ends of
all uncompleted lines shall be closed with tight wooden plugs
adequately secured at all times when pipe-laying is not in
progress.
(e) Adequate means must be taken to prevent settlement, where
required, blocking of sound yellow pine, two inches thick, 10
inches wide and 30 inches long with wedges of four inches by
four inches yellow pine eight inches long shall be provided at
such spacing as is necessary to prevent settlement.
§ 333-34 TRAILERS § 333-34
315:975
(2) Gate valves.
(a) Each valve shall be provided with a cast-iron adjustable valve
box so installed that the cover is flush with the final finished
road surface.
(b) Valve stems and valve boxes shall be set plumb. Valve boxes
shall be centered and installed so that the valves can easily be
operated from the street level by use of a proper valve wrench.
(3) Fire hydrants.
(a) Fire hydrants shall be installed complete with auxiliary
(secondary) gate valve and adjustable cast-iron valve box. The
hydrant, valve stem and valve box shall be set plumb. The valve
box shall be centered and installed so that the auxiliary valve
can easily be operated from the street level by use of a proper
valve wrench. The cover of the valve box shall be one inch
above the surrounding ground level.
(b) Before installing fire hydrants, all foreign matter shall be
removed from the interior of the barrel.
(c) Hydrants shall be placed so that the center line of the hydrant
is from two feet zero inches to two feet six inches back of the
top of the face of the curb. Steamer hose nozzle shall face the
street. Hydrant elbows shall be placed on a solid block or
concrete slab foundation not less than four inches thick and 15
inches square. The back side of the hydrant opposite the pipe
connection shall be firmly wedged against the vertical face of
the trench to prevent the hydrant from blowing off the line.
Bottom of the ditch and lower part of the hydrant barrel shall
be surrounded with coarse gravel so that water released from
the standpipe by the drain valve may escape quickly.
(d) Hydrants must be firmly supported underground all around the
standpipe, since the proper working of the safety breakable
section depends on the unyielding support of the ground
standpipe. Solid ground support shall be at the ground level
line mark on the hydrant barrel, resulting in center line of the
hose and steamer nozzles being 16 inches to 18 inches above
the ground level. The preceding requires thorough and careful
compaction of backfill after correct positioning of the hydrant.
(e) When a hydrant is ready for service, it shall be opened and
closed to see that all parts are in working condition. After
closing a hydrant, the standpipe interior shall be inspected to
make sure of proper draining.
C. Pressure testing. A hydrostatic pressure test of 150 pounds per square
inch shall be applied to each valved section for a minimum period of two
hours. The line shall be thoroughly blown free of air. The pressure test
§ 333-34 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 333-34
315:976
shall be made preferably with backfill in place, except at pipe joints, so
that any leaking joints may be made watertight before placing the final
cover.
D. Sterilization.
(1) All pipelines for potable water supply shall be thoroughly flushed
and chlorinated following the pressure testing.
(2) The chlorinating agent shall be applied at the beginning of the line
adjacent to the source of supply for filling. The chlorine shall be
introduced through a corporation cock or other approved
connection to the newly laid pipe.
(3) The water from the source of supply shall be controlled to flow very
slowly in the newly laid pipe during the application of the chlorine,
which shall be applied in amounts such as will produce a dosage of
at least 40 to 50 parts per million. In the event that the pipeline is
already filled, the dose shall be increased to such concentration
and shall be applied for a sufficient period to produce a residual of
not less than five parts per million at all of the outlets of the line
being chlorinated, including the ends.
(4) Treated water shall be retained in the pipe long enough to destroy
all non-spore-containing bacteria. The period shall be at least three
hours. After the chlorine-treated water has been retained for the
time required, the chlorine residual at the pipe extremities and
other intermediate points shall be at least five parts per million.
(5) Back pressure causing a reversal of flow from the section being
chlorinated to the supply shall be prevented.
(6) In the process of chlorinating newly laid pipe, all valves and other
pipeline accessories shall be operated while the pipe is filled with
the chlorinating agent.
(7) Following chlorination and after the entire length of line is ready
for service, all treated water shall be flushed thoroughly from the
newly laid pipeline at its extremities until the replacement water
throughout its entire length will, upon test both chemical and
bacteriological, be proved equal to the quality introduced at the
permanent source of supply.
(8) Should the initial treatment prove ineffective, the chlorination
procedure shall be repealed until confirmed tests show that water
from the newly laid pipeline conforms to the requirements as stated
above.
(9) A notarized statement with test results submitted by competent
recognized firms proficient in this type of work that the
requirements of pressure testing and sterilization as outlined above
§ 333-34 TRAILERS § 333-34
315:977
§ 333-35. Air-conditioning units. [Added 12-23-1965]
The following controls and regulations as relate to water-cooled
nonrecirculating-type air conditioners be and the same are hereby adopted,
the same becoming effective the date of the adoption of this section:
§ 333-36. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
have been satisfied is required before acceptance by the Utilities
Department of the Borough of South River, New Jersey.
A. Customers wishing to use the local potable water supply for
nonrecirculating-type water-cooled air conditioners must first complete
such application for a permit and file the same with the Utility Engineer.
B. The Utility Engineer of the Utilities Department will review such plans
and specifications for said equipment and inform the applicant of the
requirements, limitations, controls and regulations affecting such
equipment.
C. If the nonrecirculating-type water-cooled air conditioner is three
horsepower capacity or more, the Utility Engineer will require the
installation of a suitable and approved method of recirculating the
potable water used in cooling such type of equipment.
D. The intent of the above is for the purpose of further conserving the
potable water supply to the Borough of South River, New Jersey.
§ 333-34 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 333-36
315:978
ARTICLE II
Water Emergency Restrictions
[Adopted 12-9-1963 (Ch. 200 of the 1977 Code)]
§ 333-37. Declaration of emergency authorized.
At such times as the Mayor, with the advice and consent of 2/3 of the
Council, formally declares that, in the judgment of the Mayor and Council,
an emergency exists requiring the taking of such measures for the
conservation of water for domestic and sanitary purposes and fire
protection as are hereinafter specified, this article shall become effective
and remain effective until such time as the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council, declares such emergency to have
terminated.
§ 333-38. Proclamation of type of emergency.
Upon the making of such proclamation of emergency, the Mayor shall
proclaim whether the emergency is of the type or character requiring
the restricted use of water hereinafter set forth under Subsection A, or
under Subsection B, whereupon the Borough Clerk shall forthwith give
written notice of said proclamation, specifying its type and character, to the
residents of the Borough:
§ 333-39. Notice of emergency.
Immediately following the issuing of any of the emergency proclamations
hereinbefore provided, due notice shall be given to the users of the Borough
of South River water system within 48 hours after the issuing of said
proclamation. The provisions of this article shall become and remain
effective until the date when the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
at least 2/3 of the Council, shall proclaim and declare said emergency
terminated.
A. Proclamation A shall prohibit the use of water for the sprinkling of
lawns, shrubbery and gardens and other related uses on certain days of
the week and during certain hours of the day as specified in a resolution
adopted by the Borough Council based upon recommendations made by
the Utility Engineer, who shall be responsible for investigating all
complaints regarding inadequate water supply. [Amended 2-9-1977
by Ord. No. 1977-6]
B. Proclamation B shall prohibit the use of water from the Borough of
South River water system for the sprinkling of lawns, shrubbery and
gardens until such proclamation shall be terminated. This proclamation
shall be based upon the recommendations made by the Utility Engineer,
who shall be responsible for investigating all complaints regarding
inadequate water supply, and based upon results of the investigation
made by him or employees of the Borough under his supervision.
[Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977-6]
§ 333-37 TRAILERS § 333-40
315:979
§ 333-40. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-9-1977 by Ord. No.
1977-6]
During the continuance of the emergency, any person or persons, firm or
corporation violating any of the restrictions imposed by the proclamation
issued pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction thereof before the Judge of
the Municipal Court, suffer the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article I,
General Penalty.
§ 333-40 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 333-40
315:980
Chapter 339
WATER SPORTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 339-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the definitions hereinafter
given them:
JET SKIING — Any self-propelled engine with the capability to transport a
single individual across water at a high rate of speed.
PUBLIC WATERWAYS — Any body of water, including but not limited to
lakes, ponds, streams, rivers or brooks, which shall be wholly located within
the boundaries of or adjoin the Borough of South River.
WATERSKIING — Anything with a rider being towed behind a powered
vessel by means of a towrope or towline except another vessel.
§ 339-2. Restricted and prohibited activities.
The following activities shall be restricted or prohibited in the public
waterways of the Borough of South River as follows:
A. Waterskiing.
(1) All operators of power vessels towing ski or aquaplane riders must:
(a) Keep at least 100 feet from shore, wharf, pier, bridge structure,
abutment, other vessels or persons in the water.
(b) Have a competent observer on board (wide angle mirror not
accepted).
(c) Have a towline not exceeding 75 feet in length, nor less than 50
feet.
(2) No waterskiing allowed after sunset or before sunrise or during
times of restricted visibility.
(3) All skiers shall wear a United States Coast Guard approved Type I,
II, III or Type V Hybrid Personal Flotation Device.
B. Jet skiing.
(1) All operators of jet skis must:
(a) Not operate said apparatus in such a manner so as to become
airborne or completely leave the water while crossing the wake
§ 333-40 WATER SPORTS § 339-2
339:981
§ 339-3. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by the state, county or
local authorities within the jurisdiction; said violations being heard in the
Municipal Court of the Borough or township in which said violations
occurred.
§ 339-4. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of any portion of this chapter shall be as set forth
or provided in the New Jersey Statutes Annotated or, if not provided, shall
be as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, General Penalty.
of another vessel within 100 feet of the vessel creating the
wake.
(b) At all times proceed at a safe speed so that it can take proper
and effective action to avoid collision and be stopped within a
distance appropriate to the prevailing circumstances and
conditions.
(c) Not tow any water-skier, raft or other motorized vehicle.
(d) Keep at least 100 feet from any bridge structure, other vessels
or swimmers.
(2) No jet-skiing allowed after sunset or before sunrise or during times
of restricted visibility.
(3) All skiers shall wear a United States Coast Guard approved Type I,
II, III or Type V Hybrid Personal Flotation Device.
C. Operation of any watercraft. No person shall operate or permit another
to operate:
(1) Any watercraft while under the influence of an intoxicating liquor, a
narcotic, a hallucinogenic or habit-producing drug or with a blood
alcohol concentration of 0.10% or more by weight of alcohol.
(2) Any watercraft at a speed so that it cannot take proper and
effective action to avoid collision and be stopped within a distance
appropriate to the prevailing circumstances and conditions.
(3) Any watercraft transporting or containing on board any narcotic,
hallucinogenic or habit-producing drug.
D. Swimming. No individual shall be allowed to swim in the public
waterways unless said waterways have been approved by the federal,
state or local authorities and then only during posted times.
§ 339-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 339-4
339:982
Chapter 344
WRECKERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 193.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 198.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 258, Art. II.
§ 344-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be called the "Borough of South
River Wrecker Ordinance."
§ 344-2. Definitions. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-37]
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED TOW LIST — A list of licensed towing businesses, maintained
by the Police Department and used for the purpose of calling the
appropriate towing service for vehicles deemed to be abandoned by the
Police Department.
ABSORBENT MATERIAL — Refers to any material such as sand or "speedy
dry" used to collect liquids such as radiator fluid, gasoline, or diesel fuel
spills.
ADMINISTRATIVE YARD FEES — Refers to a one-time fee that is assessed
to the vehicle owner to handle the costs of a vehicle while in storage. This
fee shall be used to cover the administrative costs associated with placing
and keeping the vehicle in storage.
BOROUGH — Refers to the Borough of South River.
CLEAN-UP — Refers to the removal and/or disposal of any debris left on
the roadway or property as a result of a motor vehicle accident or vehicle
recovery.
CONVENTIONAL WRECKER — Refers to a vehicle used to tow or remove
other vehicles via an hydraulic beam or winch beam, capable of handling
passenger cars and small trucks, and which has a gross weight of not less
than 10,000 pounds.
CRUISING — The driving of a wrecker to and fro along any Borough street
for the purpose of soliciting business in the Borough.
DEAD STORAGE — Refers to the storage of a towed vehicle upon an order
of the Police Department at the tow truck operator's storage area after a
twenty-four-hour grace period from the time of the arrival of said vehicle at
the storage facility.
§ 339-4 WATER SPORTS § 344-2
339:983
FLATBED WRECKER — A vehicle used to tow or lift and carry other vehicles
via tilt-body flatbed or wheel lift, capable of handling passenger cars and
small trucks, such as a pickup or small-panel trucks.
HEAVY-DUTY WRECKER — A wrecker commercially manufactured with
a chassis, hydraulic in nature, with a capacity of not less than 26,001
pounds' gross vehicle weight with under-reach capabilities, and axle lift
with minimum 25,000 pounds' lift capability and 80,000 pounds' tow
capability.
IMPOUND — Refers to the act of storing and confining a vehicle upon an
order of the Police Department at either the tow truck operator's storage
area or at a Borough facility as the result of abandonment, involvement in
an accident, or suspected criminal activity.
OWNED — Owned, rented or leased.
PERSON — Any individual, sole proprietorship, firm, partnership,
association, corporation or other organization, and the singular or plural,
masculine, feminine or neuter thereof, unless the contrary is clearly
expressed.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — Refers to the South River Police Department.
POLICE IMPOUNDS — Refers to motor vehicles that are stolen, abandoned,
involved in a crime, unregistered, uninsured, unsafe, obstructing the safe
and proper flow of traffic, involved in a fatal accident or accidents which,
in the judgment of the police may become fatal, or vehicles that are being
operated by unlicensed drivers or whose license to operate a motor vehicle
has been revoked or suspended.
PRIMARY WRECKER OPERATOR — A Borough-licensed wrecker operator
who responds to the scene of a police tow.
ROTATING WRECKER LIST — Refers to a list of licensed tow truck
operators maintained by the South River Police Department which contains
the names and addresses of all licensed tow truck operators who will be
called on a rotating basis when the Police Department determines that the
assistance of such services are required within the Borough.
STANDBY TIME — Refers to the additional time a tow truck operator spends
at the scene other than the time required for the actual tow and/or recovery
of the vehicle. Examples of waiting time include, but are not limited to, time
spent waiting while EMS, fire, and Hazmat perform all necessary services
and/or the police investigate the incident scene.
SUBCONTRACTOR — A Borough-licensed tow operator called to the scene
by the primary wrecker operator to assist.
TOW TRUCK OPERATOR — Refers to a person who is engaged in the
business of towing and storing motor vehicles or offering the services of a
tow vehicle and storage.
TOW VEHICLE — A vehicle, such as a flatbed wrecker or conventional
wrecker, that is equipped with a boom, winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts
§ 344-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 344-2
339:984
or under-reach equipment designed by its manufacturer for the removal and
transport of private passenger automobiles and small trucks.
WINCHING — Refers to the movement of a motor vehicle by the use of a
cable and a winch from a position that is accessible for direct hook up by
conventional means or loading onto a tow vehicle. Pulling a motor vehicle
onto a tilt bed or carrier, or lifting a motor vehicle with a conventional tow
sling, does not constitute winching.
WRECKER LICENSE — Refers to a license issued that allows a tow truck
operator to engage in the activity of towing and storing motor vehicles at
the direction of the Borough of South River. This license entitles the tow
truck operator to be placed on the Police Department's rotating wrecker
list.
§ 344-3. Expiration of licenses.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be issued to expire and shall
expire on the 31st day of December next succeeding the date of insurance,
unless sooner suspended or revoked by the Borough Council as hereinafter
provided.
§ 344-4. License fees. [Amended 2-25-1982 by Ord. No. 1982-4]
The fee for a license for a wrecker and the fee for any such license issued
on or after August 1 of any year shall be as provided in Chapter 155, Fees.
All fees shall be payable to the Clerk of the Borough.
§ 344-5. Application for license. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-37]
Applications for licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon blank forms
prepared and made available by the Chief of Police and shall state under
oath:
A. The name and address of the applicant, if an individual; the name and
address of each partner, if a partnership; the name, date and state
under which organized, if a corporation, and if a foreign corporation,
whether the same is authorized to do business in the State of New
Jersey. A corporate applicant shall indicate the names of directors,
principal officers and local representatives and their business
addresses.
B. A description of each tow vehicle to be utilized by the tow truck
operator in conducting his/her business, which shall include the year,
make, model, type, vehicle identification number, proof of registration
and proof of insurance for each vehicle.
C. The length of time for which the wrecker has been in use as a wrecker.
D. That the applicant has available space for properly accommodating and
protecting all disabled motor vehicles to be towed or otherwise
§ 344-2 WATER SPORTS § 344-5
339:985
§ 344-6. Investigation by Chief of Police.
Within seven days after receipt of an application as herein provided, the
Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant
and of his proposed business operation to be licensed. The Chief of Police
may delegate the inspection of the wrecker to an independent person, who
may or who may not be engaged in business in the Borough, who shall be
qualified by experience and training to make such inspection and who shall
report to the Chief of Police whether the wrecker is in a thoroughly safe
and sanitary condition. Within 14 days after completion of the inspection
and investigation, the Chief of Police shall either approve or deny the
application.
§ 344-7. Standards for approval or denial by Chief of Police.
removed from the place where they are disabled and that the disabled
vehicles will not be stored or allowed to remain on public property or
Borough streets or on property which is not zoned for such storage.
E. Such other information which the Chief of Police shall deem necessary
or proper to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and to determine
whether there has been compliance with the terms hereof.
F. A list of all personnel who are authorized by the applicant to provide
services on behalf of the applicant.
A. The Chief of Police shall approve the issuance of a license upon making
the following findings:
(1) That the public convenience and necessity will be served by the use
of the wrecker for which application has been made.
(2) That the wrecker to be licensed is in a thoroughly safe and sanitary
condition.
(3) That the requirement of this chapter and all other governing laws,
statutes and ordinances have been met.
(4) That the wrecker has been properly licensed and inspected by the
State of New Jersey and has the necessary stickers affixed. No
wrecker shall be licensed as a wrecker which is using dealer
license plates.
(5) That the insurance policies or certificates as required herein have
been procured and supplied.
B. The Chief of Police shall also have the authority to deny wrecker license
applications for any of the following reasons: [Added 12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-37]
(1) Incomplete, inaccurate or falsified application.
(2) Unsafe or inadequate towing vehicles and/or equipment.
§ 344-5 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 344-7
339:986
§ 344-8. Issuance of license.
Upon approval of the Chief of Police, upon receipt of payment from the
applicant of the proper license fee for each wrecker license and upon
receipt of insurance policies approved by the Borough Attorney, the Clerk
of the Borough shall issue a license dated in accordance with the expiration
date stated herein.
§ 344-9. Display of license.
The Chief of Police shall issue to the person owning a licensed wrecker
a card not less than four inches in width nor more than six inches in
length in such form as may be set by the Chief of Police, which shall
be at all times prominently displayed on the right front windshield of
each wrecker, and which shall bear the name and business address of
the owner, official license number of the wrecker, the rate of fares and
conditions of employment under which such wrecker is operating and a
notice that, in case of any complaint, the Chief of Police be notified. Such
card shall have attached thereto the signature of the Chief of Police and the
date of inspection of the wrecker, together with blank spaces upon which
entry shall be made of the date of every inspection of the wrecker by the
inspector.
§ 344-10. Insurance policies.
(3) Noncompliance with any provision of the Borough's wrecker
ordinance.
(4) The business location is not in a zone where the use is permitted
(South River locations only).
(5) The owner pleaded guilty or was convicted of a zoning or property
maintenance violation in the Borough of South River during the 12
months preceding the application date.
(6) Criminal or motor vehicle convictions of the owner or his
employees which, in the reasonable belief of the Chief of Police,
would jeopardize the safety of customers.
(7) Inadequate or insecure storage facilities.
A. No wrecker shall be licensed hereunder, nor shall any licensed wrecker
be operated within the Borough unless there shall be deposited with the
Borough Clerk the following insurance policies or certificates of
insurance:
(1) Auto garage keeper's policy. Auto garage keeper's legal liability
policy covering fire, theft and explosion in the minimum amount of
$10,000 and collision coverage subject to $500 deductible, with
each accident deemed a separate claim. [Amended 7-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-22]
§ 344-7 WATER SPORTS § 344-10
339:987
§ 344-11. Charges. [Amended 11-13-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-26;
1-29-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-2; 2-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-7;
10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-34; 6-9-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-23]
Charges for the transportation, hauling or services of disabled vehicles by
any licensed wrecker or operation of any licensed wrecker shall not exceed
the following rates:
(2) Auto garage legal liability policy. Auto garage legal liability policy
covering the operation of the licensee's equipment or wrecker or
any bodily injury or property damage. This policy will be in the
amount of $100,000 per person and $300,000 per accident.
B. Each policy herein must contain an endorsement providing 10 days'
notice to the Borough in the event of any material change therein or
intention to cancel said policy for any cause. In the event that any policy
is changed so as to fail to conform to any of the above requirements or if
any policy of insurance is to be canceled for any reason, the Chief of
Police shall notify the person responsible for the policy, and it shall be
corrected or reinstated or replaced with a conforming policy within 10
days after the notice is received by the Borough, but before the date of
cancellation. If the policy or certificate is not corrected, reinstated or
replaced within 10 days prior to the date of cancellation, the Chief of
Police shall immediately suspend the wrecker license and shall pick up
from the owner all indications of licensing, including any stickers, cards
or other means of identification.
A. For conveying a disabled vehicle from any point in the Borough, when
towed, transported and/or conveyed or removed anytime of the day or
night: see Chapter 155, Fees.
B. For conveying a disabled vehicle from any point in the Borough to any
other point outside the Borough which is greater in mileage than
transporting said vehicle to the business address location of the
wrecker company, the rate is to be determined by mutual agreement.
C. Dead storage: see Chapter 155, Fees.
D. In the event a motor vehicle is in a ditch or otherwise so disposed as to
require services to be performed which are in addition to and apart
from the simple act of towing, the licensee shall be authorized to
impose a reasonable charge in addition to that set forth above.
E. There shall be a charge as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, required to
cleanup the scene from which the tow was initiated. Said scene cleanup
shall include, but not be limited to, cleanup of glass, accident debris
and absorption of petroleum or other vehicle fluids in such a way to
allow the scene to be safe for operators of motor vehicles.
F. In the event that a dispatched wrecker arrives on the scene and is
required to standby or wait prior to beginning the removal of a vehicle,
there shall be a charge as provided in Chapter 155, Fees, as standby
§ 344-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 344-11
339:988
§ 344-12. Qualifications for driver.
No person shall drive a wrecker who is under the age of 18 years and who
has not in his possession a license duly issued to him to operate a motor
vehicle in the State of New Jersey.
§ 344-13. Conditions for issuance.
A wrecker license hereunder shall be issued subject to the following
conditions:
§ 344-14. Rotating call list.
time. There shall be no charge for standby time for the first 59 minutes
the wrecker operator is at the scene and is unable to begin its duties.
Any part of an hour after the elapse of the first 59 minutes shall be
counted as one full hour, and the full hourly rate for standby time shall
be charged. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-37]
A. The licensee shall prominently display the license issued by the Chief of
Police in the right front windshield of the wrecker.
B. No licensee or his agents or servants shall solicit, demand or receive
from any persons any pay, commission or emolument whatever, except
the proper fee authorized for transporting the disabled vehicle in
accordance with the schedule of service rates listed in § 344-11.
C. Licensees, their agents and servants shall keep and maintain towing
equipment which is adequate to perform such towing in a reasonably
workmanlike manner.
D. Each and every licensee hereunder shall record in a book kept solely for
such purpose the details of each disabled vehicle towed, serviced or
transported by him or his agents or servants or employees, together
with full information concerning the details surrounding the hire, the
name of the owner of the towed vehicle and of the patron engaging him;
which book shall be kept open for inspection at all times to a duly
authorized representative of the Police Department of the Borough or a
duly authorized representative of the Borough Council.
A. A licensee performing towing service for the Borough or called by a
police officer shall perform on a rotating basis. When the owner or
driver of a disabled vehicle indicates a choice of a specific licensee, that
licensee shall be called, and no wrecker shall be assigned from the
rotating list. No licensee shall respond to the scene of an accident
except upon notification by the police officer in charge in police
headquarters or upon request of the driver or owner of a disabled
vehicle.
B. Such additional rules and regulations regarding the rotation of
wreckers as may be hereafter promulgated by the Borough Council
shall take effect immediately after service of a copy thereof on holders
§ 344-11 WATER SPORTS § 344-14
339:989
§ 344-15. Applicability.
Except as to the prohibition against cruising, the provisions of this chapter
are applicable to the engaging of wreckers by the Police Department of
the Borough of South River either on its own initiative or at the request of
owners, drivers or lessees of vehicles requiring the services of wreckers.
§ 344-16. Right of owner of disabled vehicle to call certain wrecker.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the owner, lessee, agent or driver of a
vehicle which is disabled from calling a wrecker of his choice to remove his
vehicle.
§ 344-17. Power to require removal of vehicles.
The Police Department shall have the power to require wreckers to remove
vehicles where:
of all licenses for wreckers in the Borough. Service upon a licensee may
be made by sending by ordinary mail a copy of the additional rules and
regulations to said licensee's business address.
C. If it becomes apparent that a Borough-licensed tow truck operator
cannot handle a job due to exigent circumstances, or if a separate law
enforcement authority directs, the officer in charge may, at his/her own
discretion, forego the rotating wrecker list and summon a towing
service with proper equipment. If fees for this service cannot be
negotiated at the scene, the towing service may be directed by the
police to perform the required services with reasonable fees to be paid
by the owner. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-37]
D. The Chief of Police or designee may institute additional reasonable
rules, regulations, requirements or standards if deemed necessary
under emergency or exigent circumstances and in such circumstances
may suspend rotation. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-37]
A. There is obstruction of a public right-of-way or private property.
B. A vehicle has been vandalized or presents a fire or safety hazard or an
attractive nuisance.
C. An abandoned vehicle bears no discernible registration or identification
data.
D. An abandoned vehicle is not licensed or operable.
E. A vehicle is violating any emergency no-parking provisions as set forth
in the Borough Code.
F. Any other condition where permitted or required by law.
§ 344-14 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 344-18
339:990
§ 344-18. Number of licensed wreckers limited. [Amended
12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-37]
It is hereby determined under the lawful exercise of the police power of the
Borough that public convenience and necessity require that the number of
wrecker companies that are licensed to operate within the Borough shall be
limited to five because of the limited area of the Borough.
§ 344-19. Equipment specifications. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-37154]
A. All Borough-licensed wreckers shall be equipped with a minimum of the
following equipment that is in good repair:
(1) A reflective safety vest that shall be worn by the tow truck operator
while working on any street, roadway, or public right-of-way.
(2) One large street broom and shovel.
(3) A three-eighths-inch safety chain.
(4) Safety flares for night work.
(5) A minimum of 20 pounds of absorbent material such as sand or
speedy dry which is suitable to collect liquids such as fluid, oil,
gasoline or diesel fuel spills.
(6) Fire extinguisher (five-pound carbon dioxide or dry chemical).
(7) Jumper cables.
(8) Pry bar or similar tool.
(9) Hammer.
(10) Tire changing equipment.
(11) One steering lock bar (conventional wreckers only).
(12) Conventional wreckers shall also be equipped with a wheel lift.
(13) At least one four-ton snatch block.
(14) Portable lighting equipment (heavy wreckers only).
(15) An amber light permit.
(16) Emergency warning lights that shall be of sufficient candlepower
and intensity to be visible from one-quarter mile away.
(17) Emergency warning lights must be at sufficient height to be seen
over the towed vehicle.
154. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 344-19 as § 344-23.
§ 344-18 WATER SPORTS § 344-19
339:991
§ 344-20. Rules and regulations; inspections. [Added 12-23-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-37]
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish reasonable rules and
regulations for the inspection of the fitness and safety of all Boroughlicensed
wreckers (before and after licensing) and their associated
equipment. The Chief of Police and his/her designee shall have the right
at any time to inspect any wrecker for compliance with the safety
requirements of this chapter, the regulations established under this chapter
and the laws of the state or the United States. If, as a result of this
inspection, it is determined that the wrecker is not in compliance with any
law or regulation, the owner of said wrecker shall be given a period of
five business days to correct such violation or noncompliance, during which
time the wrecker shall not be dispatched from the rotating wrecker list. If
the violation or noncompliance is not corrected within said five-day period,
the permit for that wrecker shall be suspended.
§ 344-21. Performance standards. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-37]
Light- and medium-duty tow operators shall not be required to maintain
a principal place of operation within the Borough but shall maintain a
principal place of operation within 10 miles of the Borough's boundaries.
A heavy-duty tow operator shall maintain a principal place or operation
within 15 miles of the Borough's boundaries. All tow operators shall comply
fully with all of the zoning, land use and property maintenance codes of the
municipality in which the tow operator's business is located.
B. No towing company on the Borough's rotating wrecker list shall operate
a flatbed or conventional wrecker that is more than 20 years old for
Borough-sanctioned towing services.
C. All current Borough-licensed wrecker companies shall have until
January 1, 2010, to comply with the requirements of this section. Any
and all new Borough-licensed wrecker companies shall be in
compliance with the requirements of this section prior to the issuance
of their approved Borough wrecker license.
A. Each place of business shall maintain the following:
(1) A storefront including signage displaying the business name,
address, and phone number.
(2) A person in the office to greet customers rendering service.
B. Information displayed on vehicle. All licensed Borough wreckers shall
be required to display their company name, vehicle number and rates
charged on a clearly visible location on their tow vehicle.
C. Availability of services.
§ 344-19 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 344-21
339:992
(1) All Borough-licensed tow trucks shall provide twenty-four-hourper-
day, seven-day-per-week towing services.
(2) All releases of vehicles and personal property from vehicles shall be
conducted during the tow truck operator's normal business hours,
exclusive of all exigent circumstances that may be required with
the authority and consent of the Police Department.
D. Method of payment for services rendered. All Borough-licensed
wreckers must accept all forms of payment from the customers that
they serve, including but not limited to cash, checks, and credit cards.
E. Response times.
(1) Any Borough-licensed towing company contacted by the Police
Department must confirm that it is responding within five minutes
of the initial call for service or it will forfeit its turn on the
Borough's rotating wrecker list.
(2) Response time to the scene of a tow must be within 30 minutes of
the time of the confirmation of assignment through the Police
Department communications desk or the towing company shall
forfeit its turn on the Borough's rotating wrecker list.
F. Registered towing personnel.
(1) The operator of the tow truck company must register all personnel
who are authorized to provide services on behalf of the tow truck
company. This registration shall include the following information
for each person:
(a) Name, address, and phone number
(b) New Jersey driver's license number and expiration date.
(c) Social Security number.
(d) Signed statement by each person setting forth his/her
understanding that the background check will be performed by
the South River Police Department, the results which will be
used by the South River Police Department in determining
eligibility of the towing and storage contractor for inclusion on
the on-call tow list.
(2) The tow operator must update this registration as necessary to
ensure that it remains current.
G. Clean-up of debris. The tow operator shall be responsible for the cleanup
of vehicle debris, including glass, plastic, fuel, oil, chemicals and
hazardous waste materials in accordance with state law.
H. Unavailable for service. Should the tow truck operator not be available
for service when called upon by the South River Police Department, the
next wrecker on the towing list shall be contacted. A tow operator may
§ 344-21 WATER SPORTS § 344-21
339:993
§ 344-22. Unclaimed vehicles. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-37]
only subcontract towing services to a licensed wrecker service for the
Borough of South River.
I. Compliance with the requests of the Police Department.
(1) All tow truck operators shall comply with the requests of the police
officer in charge.
(2) No tow truck operator shall respond to the scene of an accident or
any scene requiring a police tow except upon notification by police
headquarters.
(3) No tow truck operator waiting to conduct a tow shall obstruct the
safe and proper flow of traffic on any roadway or right-of-way
without the consent of the police officer(s) on scene.
J. Failure to meet minimum performance standards. Failure to comply
with these aforementioned performance standards may result in the
suspension or removal of a tow truck operator from the Borough's
rotating wrecker list as outlined in § 344-23.
K. Itemized payment receipts. Each tow truck operator shall be required
to issue to the owner of a vehicle a written itemized receipt for all fees
paid in association with the vehicle tow.
L. Release of police impounds. No tow truck operator shall release a police
impound vehicle without verifying that the owner of the vehicle has
obtained an official Police Department vehicle release form.
A. All tow operators, in order to be in compliance with N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1,
shall notify the South River Police Department Traffic Safety Bureau
regarding any unclaimed vehicle within three days after taking
possession of the vehicle. The following information shall be included
upon notification:
(1) The year, make, model, color and vehicle identification number.
(2) The odometer reading of the vehicle.
(3) Photograph of vehicle.
B. The South River Police Department Traffic Safety Bureau will make
notification of possession to the owner of record or holder of interest
and provide information needed for the tow operator to make its own
further notice as set forth herein.
C. After notification by the Traffic Safety Bureau, the person storing the
vehicle shall notify the owner of record and holder of interest by
certified mail, return receipt requested, of the schedule of costs for
§ 344-21 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 344-22
339:994
§ 344-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-37]
storing the motor vehicle and instructions on how the vehicle may be
reclaimed.
D. If the person storing the motor vehicle fails to provide such notice to the
owner of record or security interest holder within 30 days of the date on
which the storer of the vehicle received the notice from the Traffic
Safety Bureau, the maximum amount that such person may charge the
owner of record or the security interest holder for storing the motor
vehicle shall be $750, provided that the owner of record or security
interest holder submits a proper claim for the vehicle not later than the
30th day following the date the notice is delivered from the Traffic
Safety Bureau to the person storing the vehicle. If the owner of record
or security interest holder fails to submit a proper claim for the vehicle
on or before that 30th day, the person storing the vehicle may charge
the security interest holder reasonable costs for storage.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article I,
General Provisions, and each violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter and each day there is a violation thereof shall be deemed and
taken to be a separate and distinct offense. In addition, the Mayor and
Council, after a hearing, may revoke or suspend any license issued
hereunder or may refuse to renew any license previously issued
hereunder for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. A towing operator's license may be revoked and the tow business
removed from the rotational list by Mayor and Council if the tow
operator's performance is determined to be unreliable, inadequate, or
poses a threat to the public safety of the Borough after an investigation
conducted by the Chief of Police or his/her designee. Should the Mayor
and Borough Council determine that a license shall be revoked or
suspended or that there are reasonable grounds for refusing to renew a
license due to failure of an applicant to comply with the provisions of
this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall immediately notify the applicant
or licensee that the governing body will hold a hearing on whether or
not said license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed if the applicant
or licensee files a notice of appeal of said determination with the
Borough Clerk within 10 days of the date that notice of the
determination is received by the applicant or licensee. The Borough
Clerk, upon receiving such notice of appeal, shall inform the applicant
or licensee of the time, date and place of the hearing, which shall be
held no less than 10 days nor more than 20 days from the date of
service of said notice of appeal upon the Borough Clerk. The applicant
or licensee shall then have an opportunity to be heard on the issue of
whether or not said license should be renewed, revoked or suspended.
An applicant or licensee shall have the further right to appeal any
subsequent determination of the Borough Council to the Superior Court
§ 344-22 WATER SPORTS § 344-23
339:995
Chapter 350
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 50.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 129.
Fees — See Ch. 155.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 174.
Outdoor cafes and restaurants — See Ch. 241.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 246.
Rental properties — See Ch. 262.
Subdivision and site plan review; stormwater
management — See Ch. 295.
Swimming pools — See Chs. 300 and 385.
§ 350-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the Borough of South River."
§ 350-2. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority of the Municipal Land Use
Law, Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 350-3. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., in order to establish a pattern for the use of land predicated on the
Land Use Element of the Master Plan and in furtherance of the following
related objectives:
of New Jersey within 20 days after service of a resolution setting forth
such determination.
C. Suspension from the rotating wrecker list will be a suspension of police
towing privileges only. The towing company will remain licensed during
the suspension period and will be bound by the rules and regulations
governing the licensing of wreckers within the Borough.
D. A tow truck operator who has been terminated from the rotating
wrecker list shall be considered unlicensed and must reapply for a
license at the conclusion of the termination period.
E. A tow truck operator who has been either terminated or suspended
from the rotating wrecker list shall be responsible for responsible for
the adherence to towing rates, storage charges and service fees as set
forth in § 155-31 (wrecker fees) for police-towed vehicles that remain
on the tow truck operator's lot during the suspension or termination
period.
§ 344-23 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-3
339:996
§ 350-4. Interpretation and scope.
A. To encourage municipal action to guide and regulate orderly growth,
development and redevelopment in accordance with the Borough's
Master Plan in order to promote the public health, safety, morals,
convenience and general welfare.
B. To provide adequate light, air and open space, convenience and safety
of access.
C. To prevent overcrowding of land and buildings and to avoid undue
concentration of population.
D. To establish zoning districts and to set forth regulations governing
these districts, in order to encourage the most appropriate use of land
throughout the Borough.
E. To regulate and restrict buildings and structures to specified districts,
their type, and the nature and extent of their use.
F. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
G. To ensure that development of this municipality does not conflict with
the development of adjacent municipalities.
H. To conserve and enhance the value of property throughout the Borough
of South River.
I. To facilitate the adequate provision of municipal services and the
appropriate expenditure of public funds.
J. To promote the general welfare of the public by providing for affordable
housing within the Borough of South River.
K. To provide a realistic opportunity to accomplish the Borough of South
River's fair share of the regional need for low- and moderate-income
housing and establish a mechanism for assuring that housing units
designated for occupancy by low- or moderate-income households
remain affordable to and occupied by such households.
L. To protect the value, established character, and the social and economic
well-being of both private and public property.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements.
B. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any
way to impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or
ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this chapter, nor with
any permits previously issued or which shall be issued pursuant to law
relating to the use of buildings or premises nor with any private
restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private
§ 350-3 WATER SPORTS § 350-4
339:997
§ 350-5. Establishment of districts; Zoning Map; interpretation of
boundaries.
agreement; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon
the height of buildings or the percentage of lot coverage or requires
greater lot area, yards or other open spaces than are imposed or
required by such ordinances, permits or private restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall control.
A. Districts. For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of South River is
hereby divided into the following zoning districts differentiated
according to use and building regulations:
R-100 Single-Family Residential District
R-75 Single-Family Residential District
O-P Office Professional District
B-1 Neighborhood Business District
B-2 General Business District
L-I Light Industrial District
E-I Educational Institution District
W-R Waterfront Revitalization District
MSR Main Street Rehabilitation District
CEM Cemetery Conservation District
PR Park, Open Space, Recreation and Conservation District
B. Official Zoning Map. The aforesaid zones are established by the
locations and boundaries set forth and indicated on the official Zoning
Map of the Borough of South River, hereby made and declared to be a
part of this chapter. A map entitled "Zoning Map, Borough of South
River," prepared by Bignell Planning Consultants, Inc., indicating
locations and boundaries shall be attached to all copies of the Zoning
Ordinance for information purposes only.155
C. Amendments to Zoning Map. If, in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey,
changes are made in the district boundaries or other matters portrayed
in the Zoning Map by the Borough Council, such changes shall be made
promptly by the Borough Planner after the amendment has taken effect
as provided by law. For each change in the map, note shall be made in
the revision box of the date of revision. These changes are to be
endorsed upon the map on the effective date of the amendment.
D. Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. Whenever an
uncertainty or ambiguity exists as to the true location of any boundary
155. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 350-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-5
339:998
§ 350-6. Schedule of district regulations.
§ 350-7. Definitions and word usage.
line of any district (zone) shown on the map, the following rules shall
apply:
(1) Center lines. District boundary lines indicated as following or
approximately following streets, highways or other public or
private ways shall be construed to follow the center lines thereof.
(2) Platted lines. District boundaries indicated as following or
approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines as the same appear on the Tax Maps of the
Borough as revised.
(3) Determination by Board of Adjustment. Where, due to scale, lack of
detail or illegibility of the Zoning Map, there is uncertainty,
contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of any district
boundary line as shown thereon, the determination thereof shall lie
with the Board of Adjustment after public hearing.
A. The schedule of regulations applying to each zoning district, entitled
"Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements" (hereafter called
the "schedule"), is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter and is
attached hereto.156
B. The schedule is intended to summarize the major regulations by zoning
district, including those applying to lot size, yards, building heights and
other regulations that may be easily summarized in tabular form. It is
not meant to provide comprehensive coverage of all requirements and
provisions of this chapter. Areas and dimensions therein are minimum
requirements unless otherwise noted.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated, the
following terms are to be used and interpreted as defined below. The
term "shall" indicates a mandatory requirement, and the term "may"
indicates a permissive action. Terms used in the present tense include
the future tense; terms in the singular number include the plural
number and vice versa, except where the natural construction of the
writing indicates otherwise; the word "lot" shall include the word "plot";
the word "structure" shall include the word "building"; the word
"occupied" shall include the words "used," "designed," or "intended to
be occupied"; the term "such as" shall be considered as introducing a
typical or illustrative example rather than as an entire inclusive
designation of permitted or prohibited uses, activities or structures; the
term "Board" shall be the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, whichever has jurisdiction in a particular application.
156. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 350-5 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:999
B. All terms, phrases and/or terms defined in the following documents, as
amended, are adopted and included by reference in this chapter unless
specifically defined otherwise in this section:
(1) The Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).157
(2) The Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.).
(3) The Substantive Rules of the N.J. Council on Affordable Housing
(N.J.A.C. 5:9-1 et seq.).
(4) The Procedural Rules of the N.J. Council on Affordable Housing
(N.J.A.C. 5:95-1 et seq.).
C. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases are
defined as follows:
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property, or a cessation of
the use of property, without the intention to resume by the owner or
lessee without any intention of transferring rights to the property to
another owner or of resuming the use of the property.
ABUT — To physically touch, border on, adjoin, or be directly across
from, or be separated from such a common border by a right-of-way,
alley, or easement.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — See "building, accessory."
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — For the purposes of this chapter, the
Planning Board/Zoning Board, as the case may be, shall act as
administrative officer and shall carry out all duties assigned as such
when an application has been submitted to either Board.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having more than 25% of its
stock-in-trade, floor area, or display area used for the sale or rental of
books, magazines, publications, tapes, or films that are distinguished or
characterized by the emphasis on sexually oriented material depicting,
describing, or relating to sexual activities or anatomical genital areas.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE — An establishment offering as a
substantial portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, publications,
video- or audiotapes or films, or computer disks, computer games,
CD-ROMs and other computer-related media of an explicitly sexual
nature or anatomical genital areas or establishment devoted to live
entertainment or the showing of films or videos of a sexually explicit
nature or anatomical genital areas.
AFFORDABLE — To be within financial means of low- or moderateincome
households as provided for by N.J.A.C. 5:94-7.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts
or in the existing facilities which alter the use of the building or an
enlargement, whether by extension of a side or by increasing in height
157. Editor's Note: The Municipal Land Use Law is abbreviated "MLUL" in this chapter.
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1000
or by moves from one location or position to another. The addition or
expansion of dormers is to be considered an alteration. "Alteration"
shall also mean to significantly change the appearance of exterior
elements of a structure or to change the materials used.
AMUSEMENT CENTER — A business establishment utilized, wholly or
in part, for the accommodation of six or more coin-operated amusement
devices.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance or direction
of the issuance of a permit pursuant to Section 25 or 27 of Chapter 291
of the Laws of New Jersey 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or 40:55D-36).
APPROVING AUTHORITY/BOARD — The Borough of South River
Planning Board or Zoning Board, when acting pursuant to the authority
of Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.).
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within an area of the Borough subject to a one-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE/FACILITY — A facility licensed by the
N.J. Department of Heath and Senior Services to provide apartmentstyle
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living
services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor. Apartment units offer, at a minimum, one
unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable
door on the unit entrance.
ATTIC — That part of a building which is immediately below and wholly
or partly within the roof framing.
AUTOMOTIVE GASOLINE STATION — See "gasoline station."
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR GARAGE — Any establishment offering major
motor vehicle repair services which require extensive or prolonged
mechanical work, including body or frame work, painting or the
dismantling of engines or major components of the vehicle. These
establishments may also provide the vehicle maintenance services
performed by an automotive service station.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES — Any establishment selling, renting or leasing
new or used automobiles, light trucks, vans, trailers, or recreational
vehicles and where no repair or body work whatsoever is performed.
Automotive sales uses shall be defined to exclude automotive repair
garages and/or service station uses.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND SERVICES — Any establishment selling,
renting or leasing new or used automobiles, light trucks, vans, trailers,
or recreational vehicles and where repair or body work or vehicle
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1001
washing facilities are incidental to the operation of the new or used
vehicle sales.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION — Any establishment offering minor
motor vehicle maintenance services which do not require extensive
or prolonged mechanical work. These services encompass oil changes,
lubrication, minor tune-ups, installation of batteries, tires, wiper blades
and similar equipment, wheel balancing and steering alignment and the
replacement of minor mechanical parts.
BANK — A freestanding building, with or without a drive-up window,
for the custody, loan, or exchange of money; for the extension of credit;
and for facilitating the transmission of funds; main or branch offices
of a state or federally chartered banking institution that is open to
the public and engaged in deposit banking and that performs closely
related functions such as making loans, investments, and fiduciary
activities.
BANK, DRIVE-THROUGH — Buildings, or portion thereof, which
encourage or permit customers to conduct personal financial
transactions while remaining in their motor vehicles.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — A space having 1/2 or more of its floor-to-ceiling height
above the average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-toceiling
height of not less than 6.5 feet.
BILLBOARD SIGN — See "sign, billboard."
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any building, together with any related
structure, accessory building, any land appurtenant thereto, and any
part thereof, which contains two or more units of dwelling space
arranged or intended for single room occupancy, exclusive of any such
unit occupied by an owner or operator, and wherein personal or
financial services are provided to the residents, including any
residential hotel or congregate living arrangement (N.J.S.A. 55:13B-3).
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is part of the structural support of
the building and is intended, through its design and construction, to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
BUFFER — An open, unoccupied area of land in which no building,
parking area or other improvement is located, consisting of trees,
shrubs, solid fencing, earth berms, or a combination of all, so installed
as to provide both a visual and an acoustical barrier between properties
and to create an aesthetically pleasing and attractive view to mask or
obscure the use, function or structure located upon the site.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy and having
a roof.
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1002
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate structure detached from but
located on the same lot as the principal structure, the use of which is
incidental and accessory to that of the principal structure.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The land covered by a building, measured
from the exterior surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor, of all
principal and accessory buildings on a lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline
of mansard roofs, and to the average height between the eaves and the
ridge level for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. Chimneys, spires, water
towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections, other than
signs, shall not be included in calculating building height.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — See "principal building."
BULKHEAD — A retaining wall behind which fill is placed, created
along a body of water, constructed to separate land and water and
establish a permanent shoreline.
BUSINESS OFFICE — See "professional office."
CABLE TELEVISION COMPANY — A cable television company as
defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-3.
CAR WASH — A commercial building or structure, or portion thereof,
where vehicles are washed or cleaned with a combination of
mechanical devices, automatic or semiautomatic application of cleaner,
brushes, rinse water, wax and heat for drying. Car washes may also
contain vacuum machines used to clean the interior of vehicles.
CELLAR — A space with less than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above
the average finished grade of the adjoining ground with a floor-toceiling
height of less than 6.5 feet.
CHECK CASHING ESTABLISHMENT — An office or other
establishment used for the operation of a check cashing business
licensed pursuant to P.L. 1993, c. 383. The term "check" shall include
a check, draft, money order, negotiable order of withdrawal or any
other similar type of negotiable instrument. Not included within this
definition are automatic teller machines and main or branch offices of a
state or federally chartered banking institution.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — A private establishment enrolling six or more
children and where tuition, fees, or other forms of compensation for the
care of children is charged for providing for the care, supervision, and
protection of children, whether or not licensed or approved to operate
as a child-care center by the N.J. Division of Youth and Family Services.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for
the movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such
means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways,
pipes and conduits.
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1003
CLUB, FRATERNAL — A nonprofit corporation, organization or
association of persons who are members thereof which owns or leases
a building, or part thereof, for use of members or guests. Said clubs
or lodges shall have been principally established for the promotion of a
common objective and shall be distinctly not considered as a semipublic
use under the provisions of this chapter. Food, meals and alcoholic
beverages may be served as an incidental function of this use, provided
that adequate facilities are present and further that all federal, state
and municipal laws are complied with.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
CO-LOCATION — The use of a tower or other structure by a person
other than the applicant for the purpose of providing wireless
communications, without resulting in an increase of the height of the
tower or structure.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to
a site designated as a development and designed and intended for
the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
Common open space may contain such complementary structures and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
— See definition in MLUL; adopted herewith by reference.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE —
See definition in MLUL; adopted herewith by reference.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as
specified by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the Board and
all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of
the application for development, including, where applicable, but not
limited to a site plan or subdivision plat, provided that the Board may
require such additional information not specified by ordinance or any
revisions in the accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary
to make an informed decision as to whether the requirements
necessary for approval of the application for development have been
met. The application shall be deemed incomplete when lacking of any
such additional information or any revisions in the accompanying
documents so required by the Board. An application shall be certified as
complete immediately upon the meeting of all requirements specified
by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the Board and shall
be deemed complete as of the day it is so certified by the Board for
purposes of the commencement of the time period for action by the
Board.
CONCEPT PLAN — A preliminary presentation and attendant
documentation of a proposed subdivision or site plan of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification
and prepared for informal review to alert applicants to problems and
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1004
requirements before the submission of a formal development
application.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon showing that such a use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards of the location of operation of such
use as contained in this chapter and upon the approval of the
appropriate board.
CONDOMINIUM — Ownership of real property, combining ownership
in fee simple of a dwelling unit and undivided ownership in common
with other purchasers of the common elements in the structure and
including the land and its appurtenances, formed under the
Condominium Act.158
CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY/LIVING ARRANGEMENT —
Residential housing that consists of private dwelling units with an
individual bathroom and an optional individual food preparation area,
in addition to central dining facilities, and within which congregate
housing supportive services such as meals, housekeeping, laundering,
and personal care are provided.
CONSTRUCTION — Any act or progress that requires a building permit
and that adds an addition into an existing building or erects a new
principal or accessory structure on a lot which is subject to the design
standards for the district in which the property is located, and including
the construction, erection, reconstruction, alteration, conversion,
demolition, removal, repair or equipping of buildings or structures.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail establishment generally up to 5,000
square feet selling primarily food products, household items,
newspapers and magazines, candy, and beverages and a limited amount
of freshly prepared foods such as sandwiches and salads for offpremises
consumption and which does not include automotive service
stations.
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The County Planning Board, as defined
in Section 1 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.1), of the county in
which the land or development is located.
COURTYARD — An open unoccupied space bounded on at least two
opposing sides by a building wall but not a front, side or rear yard.
"Courtyard" shall apply to multifamily or high-rise buildings only.
CUL-DE-SAC — A dead-end street with a turnaround at the end.
CURB LEVEL — The grade of the curb in front of the midpoint of the lot
as established by the Municipal Engineer.
DANCE HALL/DISCOTHEQUE — Any room, place of business or
building wherein people assemble for the main purpose of dancing to
158. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1005
music emanating from either a live band or entertainment group or
a preinstalled audiophonic recording system which dispenses musical
renderings over a series of loudspeakers controlled by a disc jockey or
other person in charge. Admission can be had either with or without
payment of a cover fee and whether such admission can be obtained
through the presentation, use or acceptance of a membership card
or other contrivance, whether or not said membership card or other
contrivance is or may be available to the public generally by purchase
or gratuitous act.
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any facility operated for the purpose of
providing care, protection and guidance to 10 or more individuals
during only part of a twenty-four-hour day. This term includes nursery
schools, preschools, day-care centers for individuals, and other similar
uses but excludes public and private educational facilities or any facility
offering care to adults for a full twenty-four-hour period.
DAY-CARE CENTER, ADULT — Any facility operated for the purpose of
providing care, protection and guidance to 10 or more adult individuals
during only part of a twenty-four-hour day.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of
land to be developed.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure,
or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in use of
any building or other structure or land or extension of use of land for
which permission may be required pursuant to Chapter 291 of the Laws
of New Jersey 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED PERSON — See definition in MLUL;
adopted herewith by reference.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning ordinance, land subdivision
and site plan ordinance, Official Map ordinance or other municipal
regulation of the use and development of land or amendment thereto.
DORMITORY — A building used as group living quarters for a student
body or religious order as an accessory use to a college, university,
boarding school, convent, monastery.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development and means necessary for water supply preservation or
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1006
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation
of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for
the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage,
erosion and sedimentation.
DRIVE-THROUGH USE OR ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment that
by design, physical features, service or packaging procedures
encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or
be entertained while remaining in their vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — A private paved or unpaved space providing vehicular
access to the property and parking spaces and which is accessory to the
use served.
DWELLING — Any building or portion of a building containing one
or more dwelling units which is designed to be and is substantially
separate from any other dwelling walls, whether attached or
semiattached, or from isolation or detachment of structures, all as
defined herein.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A dwelling having two or more party walls
in common with another dwelling but which otherwise is designed
to be and is substantially separate from any other structures, except
accessory structures.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A dwelling having no walls in common
with another dwelling and which is designed to be and is substantially
separate from any other structure or structures, except accessory
structures.
DWELLING, EFFICIENCY — A dwelling unit consisting of a single room
or common space, inclusive of bathroom and kitchen facilities.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building which is used or designed as
a residence for three or more families or households living independent
of each other except that rooming houses, boardinghouses, hostels,
lodging houses, hotels, motels, and dormitories are specifically
excluded by this definition as multifamily structures.
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED — A dwelling having a party wall in
common with another dwelling but which otherwise is designed to be
and is substantially separate from any other structure or structures,
except accessory buildings.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached residential building
containing one dwelling unit only and not occupied or designed for
occupancy by more than one family or household unit and having
separate rooms for living, sleeping, cooking, and sanitary facilities,
entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot. The dwelling may
have more than one kitchen.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of at least
three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access
to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1007
separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fireresistant
walls.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or portion of any building designed,
arranged or used for permanent living quarters for one or more persons
living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking and bathroom
facilities but not including hotels or other buildings for transient
quarters.
DWELLING UNIT DENSITY — See "density."
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — Areas which include but
are not limited to stream corridors and floodplains, streams, bodies
of water, wetlands (as defined by NJDEP), slopes greater than 10%,
shallow depth to bedrock (less than two feet), high acid or erodible soils
(as defined by the SCS), mature stands of trees, aquifer recharge areas,
aquifer discharge areas, unique natural features and wildlife habitats or
such areas as may be so designated by federal, state or county agencies
of jurisdiction.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, alter, relocate or affix and
includes the painting of signs or displays on the exterior surface of a
building. Excavations, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a
part of erection.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice and gravity.
EXTENDED CARE FACILITY — A long-term facility or a distinct part of
a facility licensed or approved as a nursing home, infirmary unit of a
home for the aged, or a governmental medical institution.
FACADE — The total wall surface, including door and window areas, of
a building's face extending from grade to top of the parapet, wall, or
eaves and the entire width of the building. Each wall surface shall be
considered a separate facade.
FAST FOOD — See "restaurant."
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — See definition in MLUL; adopted herewith
by reference.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone,
wire, metal, or any other manufactured material or combination of
materials.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the municipal agency taken
on a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all
conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been
completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been
installed or guarantees properly posted for their completion, or
approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantees.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision or site
plan which is presented to the Board for final approval in accordance
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1008
with these regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed with the
proper county recording officer, in the case of a subdivision.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
Borough.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in
which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles,
as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
of complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
by more than 0.2 foot.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The floor area within the perimeter of the
outside walls of the building or structure under consideration, including
areas used for human occupancy in basements and attics, without
deduction for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns or
other features, but excluding rooftop penthouses containing
mechanical equipment. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches,
or attics not used for human occupancy.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — See definition in MLUL;159 adopted herewith by
reference.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION — A group of people formally organized
for a common interest, usually cultural, religious, or entertainment,
with regular meetings, rituals, and formal written membership
requirements.
FRONTAGE — The side of a lot abutting the street. For corner lots and
through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered
frontage.
FRONT LOT LINE — The line separating the lot from a street and/or
street right-of-way. (Special definitions may apply if there is no access
to a public street.)
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or part of a principal
building used only for the storage of motor vehicles as an accessory
use. In a residential zone, a garage is intended for and used for storing
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
159. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4.
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1009
privately owned motor vehicles, boats and trailers and personal
belongings of the family or families resident in the principal residential
use on the lot.
GARAGE, PUBLIC PARKING — Any building which is used for
commercial purposes and is used only for the storage of motor vehicles
and is available to the general public.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A group of architecturally harmonious
multifamily dwellings in which there are no more than 2 1/2 habitable
stories above curb level.
GASOLINE STATION — Any establishment, including any area of land
or structures thereon, offering motor vehicle refueling services.
GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS — The conditions under which
preliminary approval is granted, including zoning plat details,
improvements, off-site improvements and design standards
GO-GO BAR — Any building or place of business which offers alcoholic
beverages, beer or wine for sale and allows consumption of alcoholic
beverages, beer or wine on the premises and which also provides
entertainment wherein a male or female dances while clad in a minimal
amount of clothing, for the entertainment of patrons.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of South
River.
GRADE, FINISHED — See definition in MLUL; adopted herewith by
reference.
GROSS DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units existing or
permitted on a housing site divided by the total area of the tract. The
result is expressed as dwelling units per acre.
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling
and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental
and secondary to the use of the dwelling and in connection with which
there are no displays or commodities sold upon the premises, and which
does not alter the exterior of the property. Beauty shops, barbershops
and similar services shall not be included in this definition.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A community association, other
than a condominium association, that is organized in a development in
which individual owners share common interests and responsibilities
for costs and upkeep of common open space or facilities.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office of a member of a
recognized profession providing professional services on an
appointment-only basis in his place of residence. The issuance of a state
or local license for regulation of any gainful occupation shall not be
deemed indicative of the occupation being classified as a recognized
profession under the terms of this chapter. Recognized professions shall
include only medical care for human beings; the clergy; architecture;
engineering; law; accounting; planning; or similar professional
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1010
occupations which may be so designated by the Planning Board upon
finding both of the following: that such occupation is truly professional
in character by virtue of the need for similar training and experience
as a condition for the practice thereof and that such occupation serves
clients on an appointment-only basis as opposed to serving a walk-inoff-
the-street clientele. A home professional office shall not include the
office of any person professionally engaged in the purchase or sale
of economic goods. Dancing studios, real estate offices, convalescent
homes, mortuary establishments and trades or businesses of any kind
not herein expressly permitted shall not be deemed to be professional
uses.
HOSPITAL — An institution which maintains and operates organized
facilities and services for the diagnosis, treatment or care of persons
suffering from illness, injury or deformity and/or obstetrics and in
which all diagnosis, treatment, surgery and care are performed under
the direction of persons licensed to practice medicine or osteopathy in
the State of New Jersey and which conform to the revised standards for
hospital facilities as adopted by the State of New Jersey.
HOTEL/MOTEL, EXTENDED-STAY — A limited-stay hotel containing
furnished rooms with refrigerator, cooktops, microwave ovens, dishes,
and washers and dryers on the premises rented out to be occupied
for sleeping purposes by transient guests who have their residence
elsewhere and do not use as a permanent address. The extended-stay
facility is for transients staying five or more days, with an average of
seven to 10 days, and may contain a variety of room types, including
studio and one- and two-bedroom suites.
HOTEL/MOTEL, FULL-SERVICE — A building containing furnished
rooms without kitchen facilities rented out to be occupied for sleeping
purposes by transient guests who have their residence elsewhere and
do not use for a permanent address. A general kitchen, dining room or
meeting room may be provided within the building or as an accessory
building, Customary hotel/motel services must be provided, such as but
not limited to maid services, the laundering of linen, telephone and
secretarial or desk service and the use and upkeep of furniture. Fullservice
hotels always contain restaurants and possibly a bar or lounge
with entertainment, personal services, health club and retail stores.
HOTEL/MOTEL, LIMITED-SERVICE — A building containing furnished
rooms without kitchen facilities rented out to be occupied for sleeping
purposes by transient guests who have their residence elsewhere and
do not use for a permanent address. A general kitchen, dining room or
meeting room may be provided within the building or as an accessory
building, Customary hotel/motel services must be provided, such as
but not limited to maid services, the laundering of linen, telephone
and secretarial or desk service and the use and upkeep of furniture. A
limited-service hotel does not provide any restaurant or food service or
recreational facilities.
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1011
IMPERVIOUS (SURFACE) COVERAGE — The area which is improved
and overlain by structures and/or materials which results in the
reduction and/or prevention of absorption of water into the ground.
It includes surfaces such as conventionally surfaced streets, roofs,
sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, and other similar structures.
IMPROVABLE — Land which is not prevented from having buildings,
pavement or decking constructed on it due to development restrictions
intended to protect environmental features such as wetlands,
floodplains or water bodies.
INDUSTRIAL PARK — A planned, coordinated development of a tract
of land developed according to a comprehensive plan to provide two
or more separate industrial buildings. Such development is planned,
designed, constructed, and managed on an integrated and coordinated
basis with special attention given to on-site vehicular circulation,
parking, utility needs, building design and orientation, and open space.
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding,
any citizen of the State of New Jersey, and in the case of a civil
proceeding in any court or in an administrative proceeding before a
municipal agency, any person, whether residing within or without the
municipality, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may
be affected by any action taken pursuant to Chapter 291 of the Laws
of New Jersey 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) or whose rights to use,
acquire or enjoy property have been denied, violated or infringed by an
action or failure to act pursuant to Chapter 291 of the Laws of New
Jersey 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
INTERIOR LOT — A lot bounded by a street on one side; any lot other
than a corner lot.
JUICE BAR — Any building or place of business which does not offer
alcoholic beverages, beer or wine for sale and which also provides
entertainment.
JUNKYARD — An area, lot, structure, or part thereof, used primarily
for the collecting, storage, sale, buying, trading, or abandonment of
any refuse and/or discarded materials, or the collecting, auctioning,
dismantling, demolition, salvaging, cannibalizing, abandonment or
processing of structures, automobiles, or other vehicle equipment and
machinery, or parts thereof, with the deposit of domestic, commercial,
industrial or sanitary wastewater or garbage excluded. For purpose of
this chapter, the use of more than 400 square feet of the area of any lot
for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, scrap metals or other
scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of
automobiles not in operating conditions or other vehicles or machinery
or parts thereof, which is not accessory to a permitted use, shall be
classified as a junkyard.
LABORATORY — A building or group of buildings in which are located
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1012
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of
products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
LAND — Includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
surface.
LANDSCAPED AREA — Areas containing trees, shrubs and ground
covers, unpaved pedestrian and recreation areas, ponds, streams or any
other areas or features which can be reasonably included, but shall not
include areas occupied by buildings or structures, paving for parking,
loading or access thereto, required buffers or areas utilized for outside
storage.
LANDSCAPING — Changing, rearranging, or adding to the original
vegetation or scenery of a piece of land to produce an aesthetic effect
appropriate for the use to which the land is put. It may include
reshaping the land by moving the earth, as well as preserving the
original vegetation or adding vegetation. The term includes lawns,
trees, plants, and other natural materials, such as rock and wood
chips, and decorative features, including sculpture, patterned walks,
fountains, and pools.
LOCAL UTILITY — Any sewerage authority created pursuant to the
Sewerage Authorities Law (N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq.), and utilities
authority created pursuant to the Municipal and County Utilities
Authorities Law (N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1 et seq.), or any utility authority,
commission, special district or other corporate entity not regulated
by the Board of Regulatory Commissioners under Title 48 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes that provides gas, electricity, heat, power,
water or sewer services to municipal residents thereof.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat
or otherwise permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT AREA — An area of land which is determined by the limits of the
lot lines bounding the area and shall be expressed in terms of square
feet. Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall not be
included in calculating lot area.
LOT, CORNER — At the junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets when the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed 135°. All lot lines that front on a street shall be considered front
lot lines. There shall be no side lot line on the side of a building fronting
on a street. The lot line or lines generally parallel to the rear of the
building shall be considered the rear lot line or lines. In the case of
a building facing toward the interior angle, rather than solely on one
street frontage of the other, there shall be no side lot lines, and any
lot lines other than those considered front lot lines shall be considered
to be rear lot lines. Corner lots shall provide the minimum front yard
setback for the respective zone for all intersecting streets, with the
exception of lots with a fifty-foot frontage, where one of the front yard
setbacks may be reduced to 15 feet. Residential corner lots on collector,
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1013
major or arterial streets shall have driveway access only to the street of
lesser traffic classification.
LOT COVERAGE CALCULATION, BUILDING — Determined by dividing
that area of a lot which is occupied or covered by the total horizontal
projected surface of all buildings, including covered porches and
accessory buildings, by the gross area of that lot.
LOT DEPTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the street line
and the nearest part of the rear lot line. The greater frontage on a
corner lot shall be its depth.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between side lot lines
measured along the street line. The minimum lot frontage shall be the
same as the lot width, except that on curved alignments with an outside
radius of less than 500 feet, the minimum distance between the side
lot lines measured at the street line shall not be less than 60% of the
required minimum lot width.
LOT LINE — The boundary line of a parcel of land as shown on a
certified filed map or as defined by a filed map, or both. A lot line shall
not be considered unless legally subdivided.
LOT LINE, FRONT — Any line sharing commonality and coexistent with
a street right-of-way line. All lot lines coincident with street right-of-way
lines shall be considered front lot lines.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line, other then a street line, which is
parallel to the front line or within 45° of being parallel to the front
lot line. A rear lot line shall also include any lot lines on an offset to
a through lot which constitutes the rear lot line of an adjacent zoning
lot. Lot lines for unusual lot configurations may be determined by the
Director of Planning.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot running through from one street to another
along two more or less parallel public streets or streets that do not
intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The straight and horizontal distance between side lot
lines at setback points on each side lot line measured at equal distance
back horizontal from the street line. The minimum lot width shall be
measured at the minimum required building setback line. Where side
lot lines are not parallel, the minimum lot width at the street line shall
be not less than 60% of the required minimum lot width. The lesser
frontage of a corner lot shall be its width.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement) of a structure.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, other than cash, which
may be accepted by the Borough for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter.
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1014
MAJOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which
proposes new development on five acres or more; involves planned
development or any new street or extension of any off-tract
improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to § 295-42, Off-tract
improvements.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision. In addition, any proposed subdivision which would
otherwise qualify as a minor subdivision shall be classified as a major
subdivision if the subdivision under consideration represents a further
subdivision of an original tract of land for which previous minor
subdivision(s) has been approved by the Board within the past three
years. The original tract of land shall be considered any tract in
existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME or MOBILE HOME — See definition in MLUL;
adopted herewith by reference.
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment or place of business primarily
engaged in providing body massage by persons who are not licensed
by the State of New Jersey as physical therapists or other similar
professions.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of the municipality as set forth and
adopted pursuant to Article III of the Municipal Land Use Law.
MEDICAL AND DENTAL OFFICE — Any place used for the
administering of medical or dental treatment free, or any place used as
an inpatient or outpatient medical or dental treatment center wherein
certain medical or dental conditions and disorders are treated primarily
through surgical intervention that is commonly performed in normal,
private medical or dental practice.
MENTALLY ILL PERSON — See definition in MLUL: adopted herewith
by reference.
MINI-MART, GASOLINE STATION — A facility located on the same
lot and as an accessory to a gasoline station, that also offers for sale
prepackaged food items and tangible consumer goods, primarily for
self-service by the consumer. Hot beverages, fountain-type beverages,
and pastries may be included in the food items offered for sale, but food
items that are prepared or individually proportioned on the premises
shall be prohibited.
MINI-WAREHOUSE or SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A
building or group of buildings that have controlled access and security
within a compound containing various sizes of structures which are
compartmentalized and/or controlled access stalls and/or locker areas
for lease to or rent to individuals for storage of goods within a building
or buildings.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which
proposes new development less than five acres, does not involve
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1015
planned development or any new street or extension of any off-tract
improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to this chapter, and
contains the information reasonably required in order to make an
informed determination as to whether the requirements of Article IV of
Chapter 295 have been met.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land that does not involve
the creation of more than three lots, a planned development, and new
streets or the extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which
is to be prorated pursuant to § 295-42. Only one minor subdivision shall
be permitted on one parcel of land during any twelve-month period.
MOBILE HOME — See "manufactured home."
MOTEL — See "hotel/motel."
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A building containing
three or more dwelling units occupied or intended to be occupied by
persons living independently of each other, or a group of such buildings.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — Refers to either the Municipal Planning Board
or the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the governing body when acting
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, depending on which Board
has the reviewing authority. The word "agency" shall mean "municipal
agency."
NIGHTCLUB — A commercial establishment serving alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises and in which dancing is
permitted and includes the term "cabaret."
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a
zoning ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision
or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension
or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of a zoning ordinance but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSING HOME — A facility licensed by the state for five or more
convalescent or aged people, which may include kitchen facilities,
recreation areas and similar necessary adjunct uses for patient care.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32.
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1016
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street right-ofway.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street right-ofway.
OPEN PORCH — A roofed structure supported by columns but having
no side walls which projects beyond the main walls of a building.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided
that such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures,
streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are
designated to be incidental to the natural openness of the land.
OWNER — Any person, agent, firm, corporation, or partnership that
alone, jointly or severally with the others 1) has legal or equitable
title to any premises, dwelling, or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof, or 2) has charge, care or
control of any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, as agent of the
owner or as executor, administrator, trustee, or guardian of the estate
of the beneficial owner. The person shown on the records of the
Recorder of Deeds of the county to be the owner of a particular
property shall be presumed to be the person in control of the property.
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space available for the parking of
a motor vehicle, which shall be held to the area and dimension
requirements specified in this chapter.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under
Section 7.1 of Chapter 291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-11).
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted
by a municipality, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of
credit under the circumstances specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5, and
cash.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS (STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE) —
Standards adopted by ordinance regulating noise levels, glare,
earthborne or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation,
noxious odors, toxic materials, explosive and inflammable matters,
smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of unsightly
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1017
objects or conditions and such other similar matters as may be
reasonably required by the municipality; required by applicable federal
or state laws or municipal ordinances; required by the Borough
Engineer specifically pertaining to design and construction of all
facilities in a first-class manner.
PERMITTED USE — A use by right which is specifically authorized in
a particular zoning district, subject to the restrictions applicable to the
zoning district and without the need for special administrative review.
PERSONAL SERVICES BUSINESS — An establishment or businesses
which provide services of a personal nature, such as hair care, nail
and skin care, tanning salons, and other similar types of services. The
term "personal services business" specifically excludes tattoo parlors,
massage parlors and check cashing establishments.
PHILANTHROPIC USE — Those active services or functions exclusively
devoted to the active effort to promote human welfare, maintained or
supported by act or gift or organized nonprofit distribution of funds.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A structure owned and/or used by a religious
organization for worship, religious training, or education; may include,
in addition to the principal structure, accessory structures and/or
dwelling units for religious organization personnel located within an
accessory structure that is use primarily for religious training or
educational purposes. This definition includes the terms "church,"
"synagogue," "temple," "mosque," or other facility that is used for
prayer by persons of similar beliefs.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development.
PLAT/PLOT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant
to this chapter prior to final approval, after specific elements of a
development application have been agreed upon by the municipal
agency and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map, with supporting
documentation, indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision or site
plan which is submitted to the municipal agency.
PROJECTION — An extension of a building which protrudes or juts out
from the vertical plane of the building not more than two feet.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the primary
use of the lot on which it is located.
PRINCIPAL USE — The main or primary use of land or structures as
distinguished from a secondary or accessory use.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession maintained for the conduct of that profession.
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1018
PROPERTY LINE — A lot or parcel line that defines the limits of
ownership for a piece of property; a line of record bounding a lot that
divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any
other public space.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof owned,
leased, or managed by any branch of government or any of its
departments, divisions, bureaus, boards, councils, authorities or other
agencies.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — See definition in MLUL; adopted herein.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the municipality, municipal agency, Board of Education,
state or county agency or other public body for recreational or
conservational uses.
PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS — A noncommercial, not-forprofit
facility, designed to serve the recreation, either active or passive,
needs of the residents of the community and made available to the
public. This definition may include public school and public institution
ball fields, if they meet the above definition.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any public utility regulated by the Board of
Regulatory Commissioners and defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
QUASI-PUBLIC — Private organizations and groups of a fraternal,
church or charitable nature.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any building, structure, or vehicle
designed and/or used for living or sleeping and/or used for recreational
purposes and equipped with wheels to facilitate movement from place
to place, and automobiles when used for living or sleeping purposes and
including pickup coaches (campers), motorized homes, boats, travel
trailers, and camping trailers not meeting the specifications required
for a manufactured home or a mobile home.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL — Recreation facilities operated as a
business and open to the general public for a fee.
RECREATION, PUBLIC — Recreation facilities operated as a nonprofit
enterprise by the Borough, other governmental entity or any nonprofit
organization and open to the general public.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure; or the renovation of a
previously deficient housing unit, which is occupied by a low or
moderate-income household, to meet municipal or other applicable
housing code standards as further described in N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.2(b)3.
RESERVE STRIP — A privately owned strip of land of less than the lot
depth required by the Zoning Ordinance and bounded on one side by
a proposed street and on the other by the boundary of a subdivision
containing said proposed street.
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1019
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing the residential housing units which have
a common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESTAURANT — An establishment regularly and primarily used for the
purpose of providing meals to the public, having an adequate kitchen
and dining room equipped for the preparing, cooking and serving of
foods for its customers and in which no other business except such as
is incidental to such establishment is conducted, wherein the food and
drink are consumed within the principal building. Such uses shall not
be interpreted to include and are hereby defined to exclude drive-in,
drive-through, take-out, and fast-food restaurants or other similar uses.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where patrons are served
food, soft drinks, ice cream, and similar confections inclusive of
refreshment stands, commonly called "snack bars," "dairy bars,"
"hamburger stands" or similar uses, where customers and patrons are
served food, soft drinks, or ice cream primarily for their immediate
consumption outside the confines of the building or structure in which
the business is conducted thereto, seats or other accommodations as
provided for their patrons.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — An establishment that by design,
physical facilities, service, and/or packaging procedures encourages
and permits customers, being located in a designated drive-through
lane, to receive quick food service using a window or series of windows
while remaining in their motor vehicles. This is accomplished through a
limited menu of items prepared and held for service or prepared quickly
and generally served in disposable wrapping or containers.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A restaurant which may or may not have
tables but which is essentially designed to dispense quick, ready-made
food of a limited variety. The patron obtains food directly from the
dispensing counter for consumption on or off such premises.
RESTAURANT, TAKE-OUT — An establishment where food and/or
beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption, where all or a
significant part of the consumption takes place outside the confines of
the restaurant, and where ordering and pickup of food may take place
from an automobile.
RESUBDIVISION — See definition in MLUL. Adopted herewith by
reference.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC —
ROOMING HOUSE — A boardinghouse wherein no personal or
financial services are provided to the residents. (N.J.S.A. 55:13B-3)
A publicly owned strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, for utilities, or for another special use.
(1)
(2) Generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another.
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1020
SCHOOL, PRIVATE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Providing regular
instruction in academic and/or religious subjects from kindergarten
through Grade 12 during a normal school year; offering a diploma,
degree or certificate subject to regulations prescribed by the State
of New Jersey, Department of Education, supported in whole or part
by private funds and/or nonprofit quasi-public agencies, administered
supervised and directly affiliated with an exempted nonprofit religious
and/or cultural organization. This shall not include a commercial or
adult school or college giving special or limited instruction such as but
not limited to business, art, music, dancing or a nursery school.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC — Any school operated under the administrative
authority of a duly constituted state, county, regional or municipal
Board of Education providing regular instruction of subjects from
kindergarten through Grade 12 of a normal school year; offering a
diploma, degree or certificate subject to regulations prescribed by the
State of New Jersey, Department of Education, supported in whole or
part by public funds.
SCREENING — A visual barrier made up of planted or architectural
materials for the purpose of preventing the view of an object area by
the general public.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — See "mini-warehouse or self-service
storage facility."
SERVICE DRIVE — A roadway at least 22 feet in width which provides
common access to two or more uses and, where adjacent to a public
right-of-way, is separated from that right-of-way back by a planting strip
at least five feet wide.
SETBACK — The minimum horizontal distance between the street, rear
or side lot lines and the closest part of any building. The term "setback"
is synonymous with "required setback" and means a line beyond which
a building is not permitted to extend. When two or more lots under
one ownership are used, the exterior property lines so grouped shall
be used in determining setbacks. The front setback shall be measured
from any future right-of-way line as adopted in the Master Plan.
SETBACK, FRONT — A setback extending across the full width of the
lot between a front lot line and the foremost point of any structure,
excluding steps.
SETBACK LINE — A line established within any building lot that is
parallel to any street line or property line, on the horizontal plane, and
perpendicular to any street line or property line on the vertical plane,
between which no building or portion thereof may be erected.
SETBACK, REAR — Extends across the full required width of a site,
the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the
rear property line and the building line, except that on a corner lot
the rear yard shall extend only to the required front setback line offset
dimension to the street line.
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1021
SETBACK, SIDE — The minimum required horizontal distance between
the required front setback to the required rear setback.
SEX CLUB — A public or private place where persons pay either a
membership fee or an admission fee and where the activity on the
premises consists, in whole or in part, of direct sexual contact between
and among the patrons. Notwithstanding the fact that the owners or
operators of a sex club contend that the club is private, nevertheless
such places shall be deemed to be public if there is nothing about
the operation to distinguish a member from anyone else who seeks
admittance to the premises.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments planned,
developed and managed as a unit in an enclosed building or buildings
and utilizing such common facilities as customer parking areas,
pedestrian walks, truck loading and unloading space and utilities and
sanitary facilities.
SIGN — Any structure, or part thereof, or any device attached to a
structure which shall display or include any letter, work, model, banner,
pennant, flag, insignia, device, or representation used as, or which
is in the nature of, an announcement, direction or advertisement. A
sign includes every billboard, ground sign, wall sign, roof sign, sign
painted on the exterior surface of a building structure, illuminated
sign, projecting sign, temporary sign, awning and canopy sign, and
any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or
insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person, firm,
or corporation when the same is placed out of doors in view of the
general public. A sign does not include the flag, pennant, or insignia of
any nation, group of nations, or of any state, city, or political unit.
SIGN AREA — The maximum projected area of the shape which
encloses the sign, device or representation. In the case of lettering
attached to building facades, the sign area shall be the product of
the maximum vertical dimension multiplied by the maximum horizontal
dimension of all lettering and symbols which form the sign, including
the empty space between the letters and symbols.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — Any notice or advertisement, pictorial or
otherwise, used as an outdoor display not related to a use on the lot,
regardless of its size or dimension.
SIGN, DIRECTION — Signs limited to directional messages such as
"one way," "entrance," and "exit" and upon which no logo,
advertisement or other identification is placed.
SIGN, DIRECTORY — A sign, other than an identification sign, listing
the names, uses, tenants, occupants, or locations of the various
businesses or activities conducted within a building or group of
buildings, that is centrally located and intended to provide on-site
directions.
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1022
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign supported by one or more upright
poles, columns, or braces placed in or on the ground and not attached
to any building or structure.
SIGN, PROJECTING OR OVERHANGING — A sign attached to and
perpendicular to an exterior wall of a building which overhangs the
street right-of-way.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE —
SIGN, ROOF — A sign attached on a roof that projects higher than the
highest part of the building; also includes signs inscribed or painted on
a roof.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign, poster, handbill, circular or paper which
is in any way attached to any pole, tree, sign or other stationary object
or structure, or which is freestanding, which is intended to advertise
a specific community or civil event such as, but not limited to, fairs,
carnivals, concerts, charitable functions, garage sales or auctions or
any political campaign, candidate or event.
SIGN, WALL — A sign mounted flat against and projecting less than
four inches from, or painted on the wall of, a building or structure with
the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall.
This does not include window signs.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign mounted flat against a glass window which
does not exceed 15% of the total window area. Temporary communityrelated
posters are not included in the fifteen-percent calculation.
SINGLE NONPROFIT HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons
living together in one dwelling unit sharing living, sleeping, cooking
and sanitary facilities on a nonseasonal and nonprofit basis. Such living
arrangements must comply with the space-related occupancy
limitations set forth in the Property Maintenance Code of the
Borough,160 including but not limited to sleeping and bathroom
facilities and minimum amount of habitable floor area per occupant.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and
waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives,
parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage
facilities, utility services, landscaping structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices; and any other information that may be reasonably
A temporary sign that relates to the sale, lease, or rental of
property or buildings or to construction activities on site.
(1)
A sign indicating that a property or any portion thereof is available
for inspection, sale, lease, rent, but not including temporary
subdivision signs.
(2)
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 258, Property Maintenance.
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1023
required in order to make an informal determination pursuant to this
chapter.
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting
the sketch plat detail requirements of this chapter.
SPECIAL DISTRICT — A district established to accommodate a narrow
or special set of uses or for special purposes. The term can signify any
district beyond the conventional residential, commercial, industrial,
and agricultural districts.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic area, buttocks, female breast
below a point immediately above the top of the areola and human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse
or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
areas, buttocks or female breasts.
STORY — The portion of a building included between the upper surface
of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or the roof next above it.
Underground space shall be considered a story when the upper surface
of the floor next above is more than six feet above the adjacent ground
elevation at any point.
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building under a gable, hip, or
gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior
walls are not more then two feet above the floor of such story. A cellar
shall also be included as a half story.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway
or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law
or which is approved by official action as pursuant to law or which is
shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County
Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the
grant to such Board the power to review plats, and includes the land
between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas
and other areas within the street lines.
STREET LINE — The line determining the limit of the highway rights of
the public, either existing or contemplated. "Street line" and "right-ofway
line" are synonymous.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL — A street, or portion thereof, which is located
in a residential zone.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in or rearrangement of the
supporting members of a building or structure, such as walls, columns,
beams, girders and foundations, including any enlargement or addition
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1024
to the structure, or any change in the utility system or mechanical
equipment of a structure which significantly alters its usability, capacity
or function.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction of
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below
the surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land
hereunder for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or
development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within
the meaning of this chapter if no new streets are created: divisions of
land found by the municipal agency or Subdivision Committee thereof
appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all
resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size; divisions of property
by testamentary or interstate provisions; divisions of property upon
court order, including but not limited to judgments of foreclosure;
consolidation of existing lots by deed or the recorded instrument; and
the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land
owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and
certified by the administrative officer to conform to the requirements
of this chapter and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts
or parcels on the Tax Map or atlas of the municipality. The term
"subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision." See "minor
subdivision," "major subdivision."
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — A swimming pool located as an
accessory use on the same residential lot as the principal use it serves,
is utilized only by the owner(s) or his nonpaying guests and is not
operated for profit.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — A swimming pool open to the general
public or open to members only of a club or organization, whether
operated for profit or not.
TATTOO PARLOR (TATTOO PARLOR/BODY-PIERCING STUDIO) — An
establishment whose principal business activity, either in terms of
operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of one or more of
the following:
The placing of designs, letters, figures, symbols, or other marks
upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances
that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of
the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or
puncture the skin.
(1)
Creation of an opening in the body of a person for the purpose of
inserting jewelry or other decoration.
(2)
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-7
339:1025
TAVERN OR BAR — A place where the principal use or function is the
selling of alcoholic beverages and incident thereto may be the retail
sale or consumption of food as a permitted use, consistent with N.J.S.A.
33:1-12 et seq.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — A structure without any foundation or
footings and which is removed when the designated time period,
activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has
ceased.
TEMPORARY USE — A use established for a limited duration with the
intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.
TRACT — A designated parcel or area of land, including a lot or lots,
which is the subject of an application for development and which
includes any contiguous portions of street rights-of-way in which the
developer has property rights.
TRAILER HOME — Any dwelling unit for living or sleeping purposes
which is equipped with wheels or some device used for the purpose of
transporting such unit from place to place, whether by motor vehicle
or other means, or any factory-built unit equipped with wheels used for
living or sleeping purposes, whether the same is on blocks, posts or
any other type of foundation. "Mobile home" shall be synonymous with
"trailer home."
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings
or reproduction thereof.
USE — The specific purpose or activity for which land or buildings
are designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are
occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use of land or of a building or portion thereof
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land
or building and located on the same lot with the principal use.
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
USE, PERMITTED — A use of a building or land that conforms to the
provisions of this chapter.
USE, PRINCIPAL — A use which is the major use of the lot. In any
residential zone, a dwelling on a lot shall be deemed the principal use
of that lot.
USE, PUBLIC — Any use of land or structure or structures thereon
which is owned and used by the federal, state, county or municipal
governments. Public use shall also include property not owned by a
government entity but which is leased or used for that purpose.
USE, QUASI-PUBLIC — Any use which is public in nature but which is
owned and used by a private-interest group. Quasi-public uses include
§ 350-7 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-7
339:1026
§ 350-8. General regulations.
churches, parish houses, parochial schools, historical sites and similar
uses but do not include clubs, lodges or similar private uses.
USE, RESIDENTIAL — The use of a building or part as a dwelling unit.
VISUAL SCREENING — Any fence, wall, tree, hedge, or shrub or a
combination of them which limits visibility or provides screening from
adjacent use.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless service as
defined in the FTA, i.e., FCC-licensed commercial wireless
telecommunications services, including cellular, PCS, SMR, ESMR,
paging and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future
be developed. Wireless communications does not include any amateur
radio facility that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated
only by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used
exclusively to receive transmissions, nor does it include any parabolic
satellite antennas, nor does it include nonwireless telephone service.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device which is
used for the transmission and reception of electromagnetic wave
frequencies for the purpose of any wireless communications. For the
purposes of this chapter, wireless communications antennas shall not
be considered to be a public utility.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure, often in the
form of a monopole or lattice tower, on which one or more antennas are
attached, but shall not mean existing structures such as silos, steeples,
cupolas or water tanks.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with the principal building open,
unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings from the ground to the sky
except as otherwise provided by this chapter. The minimum required
yard shall be the same as required setback.
YARD, FRONT — The yard extending across the entire width of the
lot between the street line and the nearest part of any building. On a
corner lot, the front setback shall be required for all street frontages.
YARD, REAR — The yard extending across the entire width of the lot
between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the principal building.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along the side lot line from the front
yard to the rear yard and lying between the side lot line and the nearest
part of the principal building.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer
or his/her designee, which shall be required as a condition precedent
to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or
building which acknowledges that such use, structure or building
complies with the provisions of the Development Ordinance or variance
therefrom duly authorized by the appropriate municipal agency.
§ 350-7 WATER SPORTS § 350-8
339:1027
A. Applicability of district regulations to all buildings, structures and land.
(1) This chapter shall apply to the construction, nature and extent of
the use of all buildings and to the nature and extent of the use of all
land. Except as previously or hereinafter provided, no building,
structure or land or any part thereof shall be used or occupied and
no building or structure shall be erected, constructed, relocated,
repaired, enlarged, converted or structurally altered unless in
conformity with all of the regulations of this chapter specified for
the district in which it is located.
(2) All regulations set by this chapter within each of the districts shall
be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or
kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided.
(3) Any structure regulated by this chapter requiring a zoning permit
shall be subject to payment of a zoning permit fee as set forth in the
Fees Chapter of the Ordinances of the Borough of South River.161
B. Application to municipality. Any municipally owned, operated or
controlled building, structure, facility or use, either existing or
proposed, shall be permitted in any zone, it being the intention of this
section that whatever the Borough may be authorized to do shall
constitute a function of government, and that whenever the Borough
shall act, pursuant to granted authority, it acts as government in the
public interest and not as private entrepreneur.
C. Applicability to structures having been granted or pending approval.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any structure or part thereof for
which a building permit has been heretofore issued or for which plans
are on file with the Construction Official/Department.
D. Principal buildings.
(1) Second dwelling prohibited. In no case shall there be permitted
more than one residential building on each subdivision lot of
record, except multifamily housing developments.
(2) All principal buildings shall be built upon a lot with frontage on a
public street or on a private street approved by the Planning Board.
E. Accessory buildings.
(1) General regulations.
(a) No accessory structure may be built upon any lot on which
there is no principal building or principal structure.
161. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Fees.
§ 350-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-8
339:1028
(b) In any residential zone, no private detached garage, storage
shed, or other accessory building shall be within a required
front yard nor within a required side yard.
(c) An accessory building may be erected within a required side
yard or rear yard of any residential zone; provided, however,
that no building shall be erected closer than five feet from the
property line.
(d) Distance from adjacent buildings. The minimum distance of
any detached accessory structure from the adjacent main
building shall be five feet.
(e) Distance from street line. On through lots (any lot running
from one street to another), no accessory building erected in
the rear yard shall be nearer the street line than the minimum
distance specified for a front yard setback on the street which
the yard abuts.
(f) There shall be no utilities other than electric connected to any
detached accessory building.
(g) No usable second floor area shall be provided in any accessory
garage or building; said unusable second floor areas shall
include but not be limited to the use of dormers, basements,
etc.
(h) No subfloor or rough floor shall be permitted on the joists of
any accessory garage or building.
(i) No accessory garage or building, erected in any lot within any
zone, shall be used for any form of residential dwelling or
rooming unit purposes.
(j) Only one accessory building shall be permitted per residential
lot.
(k) Nothing contained herein shall prevent the construction of a
private garage as a structural part of a main dwelling, provided
that when so constructed the garage wall shall be regarded as
the walls of the main dwelling applying the front, rear and side
yard regulations of this chapter. Any accessory structure
attached to the main building shall be considered part of the
main building.
(l) In any residential district, a patio or deck located in
conjunction with a single- or two-family residential use shall
not be considered an accessory structure; however, such patios
and decks shall be subject to Patios and wood decks,
Subsection K of this section.
(2) Garden/utility sheds.
§ 350-8 WATER SPORTS § 350-8
339:1029
(a) In any residential district, a garden/utility shed may be erected
for the purpose of storing materials and equipment customarily
associated with a residential dwelling.
(b) A garden/utility shed may be erected within a required side
yard or rear yard of any residential zone; provided, however,
that no storage shed shall be erected closer than three feet
from any property line.
(c) All garden/utility sheds shall be permitted to have a maximum
height of eight feet.
(d) All sheds shall be permitted to have a maximum permitted
building area no greater than 100 square feet.
(e) Only one garden shed is permitted per residential dwelling
unit.
(3) Detached residential garages.
(a) In any residential district, an accessory detached residential
garage may be erected for the purpose of storing vehicles,
materials and equipment customarily associated with a
residential dwelling.
(b) A detached residential garage may be erected within a
required side yard or rear yard of any residential zone;
provided, however, that no part of the garage shall be erected
closer than five feet from the property line.
(c) Detached residential garages shall be permitted to have a
maximum height of 15 feet.
(d) Detached residential garages shall be permitted to have a
maximum permitted building area no greater than 220 square
feet.
F. Lot frontage.
(1) In the case of lots fronting on the turnaround of a cul-de-sac street
or fronting upon any other curved street, lot frontage (as
distinguished from lot width) may equal, but shall be no less than,
2/3 of the required lot width as set forth in the bulk table and as
defined herein.162
(2) All front yards must face on a dedicated public street or on a
private street approved by the Planning Board.
(3) Where a building lot has frontage upon a street which on the
Master Plan or Official Map of the Borough of South River is
contemplated for right-of-way widening, the required front yard
162. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 350-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-8
339:1030
area shall be measured from such proposed future right-of-way
line.
G. Required yards.
(1) No yard or any other open space required about or in connection
with any building or buildings for the purpose of complying with
this chapter shall be included as part of a yard or open space
similarly required for any other building.
(2) No existing yard or existing lot shall be reduced in dimension or
area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or
lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall meet or
exceed the minimum requirements established herein.
(3) Except as hereinafter specified in this subsection, every part of a
required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for the
following man-made structures:
(a) Accessory buildings in a required rear or side yard in
accordance with Subsection E above.
(b) The ordinary projection of parapets, cornices, eaves, leaders
and other ornamental features not to exceed 12 inches.
(c) Over 20 feet above the average grade level, nothing in this
chapter shall prevent the projection of a cornice, roof/gutter
overhang over the front yard and rear yard to an extent not
exceeding two feet nor over a required side yard.
(d) An open fire balcony, lattice-enclosed fireproof fire escape or
stairway projecting into a yard not more than four feet.
(e) Bay windows or balconies projecting not more than three feet
into a required yard.
(f) An aboveground oil tank, providing a side/rear setback of at
least five feet to the nearest property line.
(g) Fences, in accordance with Subsection I.
(h) Private residential driveways, in accordance with Subsection J.
(i) Patios and decks, in accordance with Subsection K.
(j) Swimming pools, in accordance with Subsection L.
(k) Vision clearance on corner lots. In any district on any corner
lot, within the triangular area determined as provided in this
subsection, no wall, fence, sign or other structure shall be
erected to a height in excess of three feet above curb level and
no vehicle, object or any other obstruction of a height in excess
of three feet shall be parked or placed, and no hedge, shrub or
other growth shall be maintained at a height in excess of three
§ 350-8 WATER SPORTS § 350-8
339:1031
feet, except that trees whose branches are trimmed away to a
height of at least 10 feet above curb level shall be permitted.
Such triangular area shall be formed by the two intersecting
street center lines and by a diagonal line connecting points
on these street center lines which are 90 feet from the
intersection of the street center lines for local roads and 200
feet for all other roads.
H. Site plan requirement. Except as hereafter exempted, no building
permit shall be issued for any building or use or for the enlargement of
any building or use unless a site plan is first submitted and approved in
accordance with Chapter 295, Subdivision and Site Plan Review;
Stormwater Management163 and no certificate of occupancy shall be
given unless all construction conforms to the approved plan, except that
site plan approval shall not be required for single-family and two-family
dwellings. However, all applications for one- and two-family dwellings,
while not required to file for and receive site plan approval, shall be
submitted to the Borough Engineer for a determination as to whether
any off-site improvements are necessary or any municipal facilities need
be extended off the site. If it is determined by the Engineer that such
improvements are necessary, then no building permit shall be issued
until a plot plan and other construction details showing such
improvements as deemed necessary by the Borough Engineer are
approved by the Engineer and filed with the Zoning Officer/
Construction Official. If it is determined by the Engineer that any offtract
improvements are necessary, then the applicant shall be required
to obtain site plan approval from the appropriate board.
I. Fences.
(1) A zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer for all fences,
except living fences, erected in the Borough.
(2) No solid fence shall be erected in a required front yard area on any
lot in any residential zone in the Borough. However, on a corner lot,
such a fence may be permitted when it extends only to a building
corner, and does not encroach into a front yard any farther than the
existing front building line.
(3) For the purposes of this chapter, a split-rail, chain-link or
equivalent fence shall not be considered solid fences, while
stockade, board-on-board, solid vinyl, chain-link with woven slats
or the equivalent shall be deemed to be solid fences.
(4) Fences at residential properties shall not exceed six feet in height.
(5) Fences at nonresidential properties shall not exceed six feet in
height.
(6) The height of all fences shall be measured from grade.
163. See Part 1 of Ch. 295.
§ 350-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-8
339:1032
(7) Fences proposed at any new construction project shall be included
as part of the site plan proposal presented for consideration before
the appropriate approving board.
(8) The following materials are prohibited for use as fencing materials
on any lot within the Borough:
(a) Barbed wire.
(b) Sharp pointed materials of any type to form the top of the
fence.
(c) Canvas, cloth or similar material.
(d) Electrically charged fences.
(e) Temporary fences, such as but not limited to snow fences,
expandable fences and collapsible fences, upon a lot with a
dwelling or structure on it; however, temporary fences shall be
permitted to protect any hazardous condition or excavation.
(9) All fences shall be constructed with the face or finished side facing
adjacent properties.
(10) Living fences shall be maintained in a neatly trimmed condition and
shall not extend into adjacent properties.
(11) Fences shall be constructed in a manner so as not to restrict the
flow of drainage.
(12) Fences around swimming pools shall conform with the swimming
pool subsection of this section.
(13)No part of any fence, fence post or wall shall be erected closer than
1/2 foot from the property line.
(14) A fence shall be required on any retaining wall over 36 inches in
height.
J. Driveways. [Amended 12-11-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-33]
(1) Nothing contained herein shall prevent a residential dwelling from
creating and maintaining a residential driveway on a residential
lot, which is intended to serve as an accessory parking space for
the principal single-family or two-family residential dwelling
located on the same lot.
(2) Such driveways shall be designed so as to provide off-street
parking so as to comply with the Residential Site Improvement
Standards parking requirements.164
164. Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.1 et seq.
§ 350-8 WATER SPORTS § 350-8
339:1033
(3) Driveways may be located in the required front yard of the site;
however, all driveways in all residential zones and for all residential
uses shall not extend to within five feet of a side property line.
(4) All driveways shall be constructed of macadam, blacktop, concrete,
stone pavers, or similar material as determined by the Zoning
Officer. No stone, gravel, dirt, sand or grass driveways shall be
permitted.
(5) The maximum driveway width at any point shall be no greater than
20 feet, exclusive of any curb returns or aprons at the point of
connection of the street.
(6) For purposes of determining impervious surface coverage, all areas
of a surface driveway shall be considered impervious, regardless of
the materials of construction. Pervious and semipervious paving
blocks constructed on top of a bed of compacted stone shall be
considered fully impervious.
(7) Residential driveways connecting to a county road shall provide a
hammerhead or similar turnaround to prevent backing movements
onto the county right-of-way.
K. Patios and wood decks.
(1) In all residential zones and for all residential uses, a patio, wood
deck or any combination of the two shall only be permitted as
accessory to a principal residential dwelling.
(2) When a patio or deck is proposed on a residential lot, the applicant
shall submit to the Construction Official a plot plan of the site
showing all property lines, buildings, the location of the patio/deck
and any surrounding walkways or other improvements. Such plot
plan shall show the dimensions and the distance to all property
lines for all existing and proposed improvements.
(3) Patios shall be constructed of concrete, concrete or stone pavers,
brick, slate, tiles, or other similar materials as determined by the
Zoning Official.
(4) Decks shall be constructed of natural or synthetic wood or a
combination of the two materials.
(5) Patios and decks may be erected within a required side yard or rear
yard of any residential zone; provided, however, that no such
structure shall be erected closer than five feet to any side property
line and 10 feet to any rear property line.
(6) No part of any patio or deck shall be located in a required front
yard.
(7) For purposes of determining impervious surface coverage, all areas
under an on-grade patio or under an above-grade deck shall be
§ 350-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-8
339:1034
considered impervious, regardless of the materials or methods of
construction. Pervious and semipervious paving blocks shall be
considered fully impervious.
(8) No patio or deck shall be erected which will have an area to exceed
10% of the total area of the lot(s) upon which it is located.
L. Swimming pools.
(1) When a private swimming pool is proposed on a residential lot, the
applicant shall submit to the Construction/Zoning Official a plot
plan of the site showing all property lines, buildings, the location of
the pool and any surrounding walkway or other improvements.
Such plot plan shall show the dimensions and the distance to all
property lines for all existing and proposed improvements.
(2) In all residential zones and for all residential uses, the minimum
setback from all property lines with respect to the installation of
aboveground swimming pools shall be a minimum of eight feet
measured from the edge of the water to the property line.
(3) In all residential zones and for all residential uses, the minimum
setback from all property lines with respect to the installation of inground
swimming pools shall be a minimum of eight feet measured
from the edge of the water to the property line. Such pools may
have a concrete or similar walkway or coping around the perimeter
of the pool so as to provide safe movement; however, no part of any
concrete walkway shall be closer than five feet to any property line.
(4) No part of any private swimming pool, including water surface,
coping, walkways or pool equipment, shall be located in a required
front yard.
(5) Pool maintenance equipment, filters, pumps and other equipment
essential to the operation of any residential pool shall be set back a
minimum of five feet from any property line. When a pool house,
shed or other accessory building is proposed to contain this
equipment, this building shall be subject to the accessory building
requirements of Subsection E of this chapter.
(6) For purposes of determining impervious surface coverage, the
surface area of open water shall be considered fully impervious and
shall count toward an impervious coverage calculation. All
concrete walkway and coping areas around an in-ground pool shall
be considered fully impervious and shall count toward an
impervious coverage calculation.
(7) No private swimming pool shall be constructed on any plot or lot
unless there is a residence thereon, and no property shall be
subdivided if the result will be that the said pool will be separated
in ownership from the residence property to which it was originally
attached.
§ 350-8 WATER SPORTS § 350-8
339:1035
(8) All swimming pools shall provide an eight-foot-deep distance from
the closest building line of the principal dwelling or accessory
dwelling located on the same lot as the pool.
(9) All swimming pools shall also comply with private swimming pools
chapter of this Code165 and all other state and building code
regulations.
M. Corner lots.
(1) A lot at the junction of and fronting on the corner of two or more
intersecting streets shall be classified as a corner lot and shall
provide a front yard setback on all street frontages.
(2) On a corner lot, all lot lines generally parallel to a street line shall
be side lot lines.
(3) When a corner lot is shaped so as to have a lot line that is not a
front lot line nor a side lot line, all other lot lines shall be classified
as rear lot lines.
(4) The greater frontage on a corner lot shall be its depth, and the
lesser frontage shall be its width.
N. Community residences.
(1) Community residences, as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2, for the
mentally and physically handicapped, victims of domestic violence,
homeless veterans, the terminally ill, disabled persons, and all
other groups specified by the Municipal Land Use Law and their
resident staff shall be permitted in any residential zone in the
Borough. Such community residences shall meet the minimum
area, yard and building requirements set forth for single-family
units in the zone in which located, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1.
(2) If more than 15 persons, exclusive of resident staff, are placed in
the residence, then the use becomes a conditional use which may
be permitted, provided that all of the terms and conditions
specified for this particular use in the conditional use section of this
chapter are complied with.166
O. Minimum amount of habitable floor area per occupant. Every new
residential building shall have a minimum of 150 square feet of
habitable floor area, exclusive of basement area, per occupant.
However, if such basement area is so constructed and finished as to be
usable for habitation and shall be intended for such use, then 50% of
the basement floor area constructed and finished as such shall be
counted in computing the total amount of habitable floor area.
165. Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Swimming Pools, Private.
166. Editor's Note: See § 350-25, Conditional uses.
§ 350-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-8
339:1036
P. Multifamily dwellings. The following requirements shall apply to
multifamily (three units or greater) apartment buildings when proposed
in the R-75 District:
(1) The project shall be developed in an area of not less than three
acres.
(2) The development shall not exceed a gross density of 3.3 units per
acre.
(3) The area of lot coverage by buildings, other than garages and
exclusive of public ways, shall not be greater than 25%.
(4) No structure shall contain in excess of 2 1/2 habitable stories above
curb level.
(5) No structure shall be built closer than 25 feet to any property line,
nor 50 feet from the center line of any public way.
(6) Each structure shall be so designed or so located in the project site
that the distance from at least one window of every room used for
human habitation shall be not less than 60 feet from the wall of any
structure on the site, and the distance from all other windows shall
be not less than 30 feet from the wall of any structure on the site,
such distance to be measured by a line perpendicular to the plane
of the surface of said window, except that this distance may be
reduced to not less than 30 feet for one exposure where a room is a
bathroom. No separate freestanding building shall be closer than
15 feet to any other building on the site.
(7) Adequate potable water and electricity must be available, and all
waterlines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and electrical
distribution facilities shall be installed in accordance with the
Borough's Subdivision and Site Plan Review Ordinance.167
(8) A minimum of 15% of the site shall be allocated, developed and
improved for usable recreation space or spaces, such as tot lots,
tennis courts and other similar organized activity areas as may be
recommended by the Board. No such space shall be less than 2,500
square feet in size or less than 75 feet wide.
(9) All areas of a garden apartment development not used for the
construction of buildings, roads, accessways, parking areas or
sidewalks shall be fully landscaped or grassed.
(10)No parking shall be permitted on any road or accessway within the
garden apartment development.
(11) No parking area may be placed closer to a building than 20 feet.
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 295, Part 1, Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 350-8 WATER SPORTS § 350-8
339:1037
(12) There shall be only one central television antenna in each building
for use of occupants therein.
(13)No front yard shall contain service facilities for the dwellings, such
as clothes drying, storage, or the like.
(14) The development shall exert no detrimental effect upon
surrounding areas due to poor design, inadequate parking, traffic
danger or destruction of neighborhood character.
Q. Zero-line houses. Zero-lot-line houses wherein one side yard may be
omitted entirely and two houses built semidetached:
(1) Two zero-lot-line houses are built at the same time with a common
party wall.
(2) Each remaining other side yard shall have a width equal to the
aggregate prescribed for both side yards on any one lot.
(3) If the two lots upon which the zero-lot-line houses are proposed are
under separate ownership, then application for conditional use
shall be made jointly by both parties.
(4) All adjoining structures shall be constructed so as to be of the same
exterior architectural style and design, and no structure shall be
constructed, renovated, maintained or altered in any manner so as
to change the exterior architectural style and design of said
structure from that of the adjoining structure.
R. Keeping of livestock. Given that the Borough is almost entirely
developed and that no farmland or farming activities are present in the
Borough at the adoption of this chapter, the following restrictions shall
be in affect to protect the health, safety and welfare of all residents. The
keeping of all livestock, farm animals, or exotic animals shall be
prohibited in all districts. Prohibited animals shall include any animals
kept outside a principal dwelling, within a barn or stable, in exterior
cages, coops or runs, or in open pasture space. Prohibited species shall
include all chickens, ducks, geese and similar waterfowl, goats, sheep,
lambs, llamas, and/or similar ruminant animals, wild species including
all wild cats, lions, tigers, all bear and wolf species, and all exotic
animals typically found in zoos, including all pachyderms, and primates.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any resident from keeping no
more than three domestic small animals in a cage, tank, or terrarium
which is no greater than five cubic feet in volume and when the
container is wholly contained within a residential dwelling. Such typical
permitted species shall be animals commonly available in a retail pet
store such as fish, small birds, small mammals or small reptiles and
similar animals weighing less than 10 pounds and as determined by the
zoning officer. All animals shall be kept in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 108, Animals, of the Code of the Borough of South
River and all state, local and federal laws governing such species. This
section shall not apply to licensed domestic dogs and cats.
§ 350-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-8
339:1038
§ 350-9. Affordable housing.
(Reserved)
§ 350-10. Nonconforming lots, structures and uses.
The following regulations shall apply to all nonconforming lots, structures
and uses existing at the time of adoption of this chapter:
S. On-site trailers. No shipping containers, tractor-trailer trailers, or
modular buildings not permanently affixed to the ground shall be
permitted in any zone unless use variance and site plan approval is
granted in accordance with the subdivision and site plan chapter of this
Code.168 This section does not apply to recreation vehicles or
manufactured housing.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to permit any nonconformities to
continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival.
B. Continuance of nonconforming uses. Any nonconforming use existing at
the time of the passage of this chapter may be continued upon the lot or
in the building so occupied. Except as required by the Borough to bring
the building or premises up to code, no nonconforming use of the
building or land shall be enlarged, structurally altered, extended to
occupy a greater area of structure or land, or moved in whole or in part
to any other portion of the lot occupied by such nonconforming use,
unless the use thereof is changed to a use permitted in the district in
which such building or premises is located.
C. Continuance of nonconforming structures. A nonconforming structure,
provided that the use of same is permitted in the district, may be
enlarged, provided that said enlargement complies with all
development regulations of the district.
D. Prohibition against the conversion of one nonconforming use to
another. Changes from one nonconforming use to another
nonconforming use are prohibited.
E. Conversion to permitted use. Any nonconforming building or use which
has been changed to a conforming use shall not be changed back again
to a nonconforming use.
F. Abandonment. If any nonconforming use of a building or land ceases for
any reason for 12 consecutive months or for 18 months during any
three-year period, such structure and premises in combination shall be
considered abandoned and shall not thereafter be used except in
conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
G. Restoration. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary hereinabove set
forth, nothing in this chapter shall prevent the reconstruction,
168. Editor's Note: See Ch. 295, Part 1, Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 350-8 WATER SPORTS § 350-10
339:1039
§ 350-11. Exceptions and permitted modifications to bulk
standards.
repairing, rebuilding and continued use of any nonconforming building
or structure damaged or destroyed by fire, explosion, flood, windstorm
or other act of God; provided, however, that there shall be no
enlargement of the original structure and that the work shall be
initiated within six months from the occurrence of such damage or
destruction and shall be diligently pursued to completion.
H. Repairs and maintenance of unsafe buildings. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe
and lawful condition of any part of a building declared to be unsafe or
unlawful by the Zoning Officer/Construction Official, Chief of the Fire
Department or other duly authorized Borough official. Such repairs and
maintenance work rendered necessary by wear and tear and required
to keep it in sound condition may be made to a nonconforming
structure, provided that no structural alterations shall be made to
supporting members of the building (walls, columns, beams, girders)
except such as are required by law, and also provided that such work
does not exceed 50% of the market value of such structure at the time
the work is to be done.
I. Adjacent nonconforming lots in single ownership. If two or more lots, at
least one of which is undeveloped, with continuous frontage are in
single ownership of record, regardless of separate deeds, at the time of
passage of this chapter, and if all or some of the lots do not meet the lot
area or lot width requirements established by this chapter, the lands
involved shall be considered to be an individual parcel for the purpose
of this chapter, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold which
does not meet lot area and width requirements established by this
chapter, and any action to use such land as more than one lot shall
require the granting of subdivision approval and the required
variances.
A. Exceptions to height limitations.
(1) The provisions of this chapter with regard to height shall not apply
to church spires, steeples, belfries, clock towers, noncommercial
radio towers, flagpoles, chimney stacks, skylights, scenery lofts,
antennas, water tanks, fire or parapet walls or roof structures for
the housing of elevators, stairways, ventilating fans, airconditioning
equipment or similar equipment and structures,
provided that such features shall be erected only to such height as
is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve.
(2) No part of any structure erected pursuant to Subsection A(1) to a
height in excess of the height limit for the zone in which it is
situated shall:
(a) Have a lot coverage in excess of 10% of the lot area.
§ 350-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-11
339:1040
§ 350-12. Zoning district regulations; purpose.
(b) Be used for residence or tenancy purposes.
(c) Have any sign, nameplate, display or advertising device of any
kind whatsoever inscribed or attached to that part of the
structure which exceeds the height limitation.
B. (Reserved)169
C. Exceptions to yard requirements.
(1) Where a lot is situated between two lots, each of which is
developed with a main building which projects beyond the
established front building line as required by this chapter and has
been so maintained since the enactment of this chapter, the
minimum front yard requirement of such lot may be the average
alignment of the front yards of said existing buildings.
D. Exceptions to maximize solar gain. In order to promote the
conservation of energy, variations in the front, side and rear yard and
area requirements of this chapter may be permitted, provided that the
purpose of such variations is to orient buildings so as to permit said
buildings to maximize solar gain and secure the full benefit of
prevailing winds.
A. Zone regulations.
(1) Schedule of Limitations. The restrictions and controls designed to
regulate the use of land, concentration of population, and traffic
generation in each zone are set forth herewith and as further
supplemented by this chapter.
B. Purpose of zone districts. Zone districts are established in order to
achieve the general purposes in § 350-3 and for the following specific
purposes:
(1) To protect buildings and property against fire, explosion, noxious
fumes, other hazards, offensive noise, vibrations, smoke, dust,
odors, heat, glare and other objectionable influences.
(2) To promote the aesthetic compatibility of all development with the
community.
(3) To protect residential and neighborhood commercial areas against
congestion by regulating the bulk of buildings in relation to the
land around them and to provide sufficient space in appropriate
locations for development to meet the needs and demands of the
anticipated growth in the population.
169. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, Exceptions to lot area and width requirements, was
repealed 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-5.
§ 350-11 WATER SPORTS § 350-12
339:1041
§ 350-13. R-100 Single-Family Residential District.
(4) To maintain and protect existing residential neighborhoods
throughout the Borough and increase residential land usage
through infill, rehabilitation and redevelopment.
(5) To encourage residential development which is compatible in
density with the surrounding neighborhood.
(6) To eliminate existing nonconforming uses in residential
neighborhoods and prohibit any future obtrusive nonconforming
uses from occurring.
(7) To prevent increased deterioration and blight of existing residential
neighborhoods through a continuation of current rehabilitation
programs and the creation of innovative programs to increase
home ownership and improve affordability to low- and moderateincome
households.
(8) To protect residential and commercial areas against the intrusion
of abnormal vehicular traffic and to provide sufficient space for offstreet
parking.
(9) To protect quasi-residential uses which require a residential
environment to effectively provide essential health and welfare
services to the Borough's residents.
(10) To promote the creation of a business-, professional- and serviceoriented
commercial environment.
(11) To encourage the tendency of commercial development to cluster
to the mutual advantage of both customers and merchants and thus
promote and establish prosperity and welfare.
(12) To promote the creation of a pedestrian-oriented neighborhood
commercial environment which encourages maximum pedestrian
activity.
(13) To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for attractive,
modern, landscaped industrial complexes which do not create any
hazards, nuisances or other objectionable influences, such as heavy
trucking, which would be offensive to adjoining lands that require
an environment free from these influences.
A. Permitted principal uses. No building, structure or premises shall be
used and no building or structure shall be erected or structurally
altered except for the following uses:
(1) Detached single-family dwellings.
(2) Public utility structures other than storage and maintenance uses
and garages.
§ 350-12 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-13
339:1042
(3) Community residences subject to § 350-8, General regulations, of
this chapter.
B. Permitted accessory uses and buildings: uses and buildings incidental
to the above uses, including but not limited to those specific below:
(1) Private one-car, two-car or three-car garages for the storage of
personal automobiles.
(2) Private swimming pools.
(3) Residential garden/utility sheds, decks and patios.
C. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted,
provided that all of the terms and conditions specified for the particular
use in § 350-25, Conditional uses, are complied with:
(1) Licensed nursing homes, including assisted living facilities and
adult day care.
(2) Nursery schools.
(3) Home professional offices and home occupations.
(4) Quasi-public clubs and organizations, and public and private,
nonprofit philanthropic, educational and charitable institutions.
(5) Houses of worship.
D. Bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule of regulations,170 except
as hereinafter provided:
(1) Houses of worship and quasi-public clubs and organizations and
public and private, nonprofit philanthropic, educational and
charitable institutions shall provide:
(a) A minimum lot area of 1/2 acre.
(b) Minimum front yard, side yard and rear yard of 30 feet each.
(c) A minimum lot width of 150 feet.
(d) All other bulk standards of the zone apply.
E. The maximum gross density permitted in this zone shall be four
dwelling units per acre for tracts of land greater than one acre (43,560
square feet).
F. Off-street parking requirements: as specified in § 350-27, Off-street
parking requirements, of this chapter.
G. Signs: as specified in § 350-26, Signs, of this chapter.
170. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 350-13 WATER SPORTS § 350-13
339:1043
§ 350-14. R-75 Single-Family Residential District.
H. Prohibited uses. [Amended 9-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15]
(1) All adult uses, including sex clubs, juice bars, go-go bars, pole
dancing clubs, nude clubs, adult book/novelty sales, unlicensed
massage parlors and other sexually oriented businesses as defined
by N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12.2, are prohibited in this zone.
(2) All uses not specifically permitted are prohibited.
A. Permitted principal uses. No building, structure or premise shall be
used and no building or structure shall be erected or structurally
altered except for the following uses:
(1) Detached single-family dwellings.
(2) Public utility structures other than storage and maintenance uses
and garages.
(3) Community residences subject to § 350-8, General regulations, of
this chapter.
B. Permitted accessory uses and buildings: uses and buildings incidental
to the above uses, including but not limited to those specific below:
(1) Private one-car, two-car garages for the storage of personal
automobiles.
(2) Private swimming pools.
(3) Residential storage sheds, decks and patios.
C. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted,
provided that all of the terms and conditions specified for the particular
use in § 350-25, Conditional uses, are complied with:
(1) Licensed nursing homes including assisted living facilities and
adult day care.
(2) Nursery schools.
(3) Home professional offices and home occupations.
(4) Quasi-public clubs and organizations, and public and private,
nonprofit philanthropic, educational and charitable institutions.
(5) Houses of worship.
(6) Multifamily dwellings.
§ 350-13 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-14
339:1044
§ 350-15. B-1 Neighborhood Business District.
D. Bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule of regulations,171 except
as hereinafter provided:
(1) Houses of worship and quasi-public clubs and organizations and
public and private, nonprofit philanthropic, educational and
charitable institutions shall provide:
(a) A minimum lot area of 0.4 acre.
(b) Minimum front yard, side yard and rear yard of 25 feet each.
(c) A minimum lot width of 150 feet.
(d) All other bulk standards of the zone apply.
E. The maximum gross density permitted in this zone shall be 5.8 dwelling
units per acre for tracts of land greater than one acre (43,560 square
feet).
F. Off-street parking requirements: as specified in § 350-27, Off-street
parking requirements.
G. Signs: as specified in § 350-26, Signs, of this chapter.
H. Parking restrictions: same as prescribed in the R-100 Residential
District.
I. Prohibited uses. [Amended 9-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15]
(1) All adult uses, including sex clubs, juice bars, go-go bars, pole
dancing clubs, nude clubs, adult book/novelty sales, unlicensed
massage parlors and other sexually oriented businesses as defined
by N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12.2, are prohibited in this zone.
(2) All uses not specifically permitted are prohibited.
A. Permitted principal uses. No building, structure or premises shall be
used and no building or structure shall be erected or structurally
altered, except for the following uses:
(1) All uses permitted in the O-P Office Professional District.
(2) Professional offices, including the office of a physician, dentist,
minister, architect, engineer, attorney or member of a similar
profession.
(3) Banks, finance, real estate offices and insurance offices.
(4) Retail shopping facilities where goods are sold only to the local
trade and where nothing is fabricated or manufactured, such as or
171. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 350-14 WATER SPORTS § 350-15
339:1045
similar to the following: grocery store, bakery, delicatessen,
drugstore, packaged liquor store, garden and flower shop, apparel
store, stationery store, computer store.
(5) Restaurants, cafes and taverns.
(6) Personal service establishments providing a service primarily for
the surrounding neighborhood, such as or similar to the following:
beauty shops or barbershops, dry-cleaning or tailoring shops,
electrical repair establishments, printing shops and studios for
instruction in music, singing, dancing, karate or art.
(7) Funeral homes.
(8) Mixed-use buildings. The permitted uses listed above may be
permitted in conjunction with one another in the same building and
on the same lot, provided that nonresidential uses occupy the
ground floors and that residential uses may only occupy upper
floors within a multistory building.
B. Permitted accessory uses and buildings.
(1) All uses and buildings deemed customary and incidental to the
principal use thereon.
(2) Off-street parking areas.
C. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted,
provided that all of the terms and conditions specified for the particular
use in § 350-25, Conditional uses, are complied with:
(1) Home professional offices and home occupations.
(2) Quasi-public clubs and organizations and public and private,
nonprofit philanthropic, educational and charitable institutions.
(3) Houses of worship.
D. Bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule of regulations,172 except
as hereinafter provided:
(1) Freestanding residential uses in the B-1 District shall comply with
the bulk regulations established for the R-75 Zone.
(2) Houses of worship and quasi-public clubs and organizations and
public and private, nonprofit philanthropic, educational and
charitable institutions shall provide:
(a) A minimum lot area of 0.4 acre.
(b) Minimum front yard, side yard and rear yard of 25 feet each.
172. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 350-15 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-15
339:1046
§ 350-16. B-2 Business District.
(c) A minimum lot width of 150 feet.
(d) All other bulk standards of the zone apply.
E. Off-street parking requirements: as specified in § 350-27, Off-street
parking requirements, of this chapter.
(1) Notwithstanding any restrictions above, commercial enterprises
may park marked fleet vehicles that are an integral part of their
business or industrial use on their private property but not on the
street.
F. Signs: as specified in § 350-26, Signs, of this chapter.
G. Landscaping and buffers: as specified in § 350-27, Landscaping and
buffering, of this chapter.
H. Prohibited uses and buildings.
(1) All adult uses, including sex clubs, juice bars, go-go bars, pole
dancing clubs, nude clubs, adult book/novelty sales, and unlicensed
massage parlors, are prohibited in this zone.
(2) All uses not specifically permitted are prohibited.
A. Permitted principal uses. No building, structure or premises shall be
used and no building or structure shall be erected or structurally
altered except for the following uses:
(1) Uses permitted in the O-P and B-1 Districts.
(2) Retail stores serving a widely distributed clientele, including
automobile sales and lumber and building material suppliers.
(3) Recreational and amusement facilities operated for private profit,
including bowling alleys, skating rinks and similar indoor theaters.
(4) Personal services and service agencies serving a widely distributed
clientele, motels, hotels, small animal hospitals, diners and
nightclubs.
B. Permitted accessory uses and buildings: uses and buildings incidental
to the above uses, including but not limited to maintenance and storage
buildings.
C. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted,
provided that all of the terms and conditions specified for the particular
use in § 350-25, Conditional uses, are complied with:
(1) Gasoline service stations and repair garages, auto body garages.
(2) All conditional uses permitted in the B-1 Zone with the same
conditions listed therein.
§ 350-15 WATER SPORTS § 350-16
339:1047
§ 350-17. O-P Office Professional District.
D. Bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule of regulations,173 except
as hereinafter provided:
(1) Freestanding residential uses in the B-1 District shall comply with
the bulk regulations established for the R-75 District.
E. Parking restrictions. Parking is subject to § 350-27, Off-street parking
requirements, of this chapter.
F. Signs. Signs are subject to § 350-26, Signs, of this chapter.
G. Prohibited uses.
(1) All adult uses, including sex clubs, juice bars, go-go bars, pole
dancing clubs, nude clubs, adult book/novelty sales, and unlicensed
massage parlors, are prohibited in this zone.
(2) All uses not specifically permitted are prohibited.
A. Permitted principal uses. No building, structure or premises shall be
used and no building or structure shall be erected or structurally
altered except for the following uses:
(1) Business and professional offices and office buildings.
(2) Finance, real estate and insurance offices.
(3) Medical offices, clinics and testing laboratories.
(4) Education training centers.
(5) Single-family detached dwellings.
(6) Municipal emergency service facilities.
B. Permitted accessory uses and buildings: uses and buildings incidental
to the above uses, including but not limited to those specified below:
(1) All uses permitted in the R-100 Residential District.
(2) Off-street parking areas.
(3) All uses and buildings deemed customary and incidental to a
permitted principal use.
C. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted,
provided that all of the terms and conditions specified for the particular
use in § 350-25, Conditional uses, are complied with:
173. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 350-16 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-17
339:1048
§ 350-18. L-I Light Industrial District.
(1) Licensed nursing homes, including assisted living facilities and
adult day care.
(2) Nursery schools.
(3) Home professional offices and home occupations.
(4) Quasi-public clubs and organizations; public and private nonprofit
philanthropic, educational and charitable institutions.
(5) Houses of worship.
D. Bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule of regulations.174
E. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted,
provided that all of the terms and conditions specified for the particular
use in § 350-25, Conditional uses, are complied with:
(1) Home professional offices and occupations.
(2) Quasi-public clubs and organizations.
F. Off-street parking requirements.
(1) Parking is subject to § 350-27, Off-street parking requirements, of
this chapter.
(2) Notwithstanding any restrictions hereinabove contained,
commercial or industrial enterprises may park marked fleet
vehicles that are an integral part of their business or industrial use
on their private property but not on the street.
G. Signs. Signs are subject to § 350-26, Signs, of this chapter.
H. Prohibited uses.
(1) All uses not specifically permitted are prohibited.
(2) All adult uses, including sex clubs, juice bars, go-go bars, pole
dancing clubs, nude clubs, adult book/novelty sales, and unlicensed
massage parlors, are prohibited in this zone.
A. Permitted principal uses. No building, structure or premises shall be
used and no building or structure shall be erected or structurally
altered except for the following uses:
(1) Uses permitted in the B-1 Commercial District, excluding all
residential, fraternal, quasi-public uses, houses of worship and
nursing homes.
174. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 350-17 WATER SPORTS § 350-18
339:1049
(2) Research institutions and laboratories for scientific or industrial
research or testing, including experimentation and product
development, provided that no such operation shall be conducted
or equipment used which would create hazardous, noxious or
offensive conditions beyond the boundaries of the site.
(3) Utility and service activities of an industrial character, such as
repair and maintenance yards, storage facilities, depots and
stations.
(4) Activities of a general industrial nature, such as light
manufacturing, fabrication, textiles, processing or assembling of
goods, that will not result in any nuisance or hazard beyond the
limits of the lot occupied by such activity.
(5) Warehousing and storage buildings, except for bulk storage and
hazardous materials.
(6) Auto sales, service garages, body shops, auto inventory storage,
commercial parking lots.
B. Permitted accessory uses and buildings: uses and buildings incidental
to the above uses, including but not limited to those specified below:
(1) Off-street parking areas.
(2) All uses and buildings deemed customary and incidental to a
permitted principal use.
C. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted,
provided that the applicant can demonstrate that the business will not
create any conditions that are toxic, corrosive, noxious, hazardous,
injurious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, refuse
matter, garbage, smoke, gas fumes, vapor or noise that is dangerous to
the comfort, peace, enjoyment, health or safety of the community and
also fully comply with Subsection K of this section, Additional industrial
activity and material storage requirements, which shall also be
conditional use criteria:
(1) Gasoline service stations, repair garages, and body shops, provided
that all of the terms and conditions specified for the particular use
in § 350-25, Conditional uses, are also complied with.
(2) Bulk assembly and fabrication of iron, steel and metal products,
metal processing, including metal treatment and processing, such
as enameling, galvanizing and electroplating, reduction, smelting
and refining of precious or rare metals, and the casting of
lightweight nonferrous metals.
(3) Manufacture of stone, clay, ceramic, macadam or cement products.
(4) Chemicals product manufacturing not involving noxious odors or
danger from fire.
§ 350-18 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-18
339:1050
(5) Bulk processing of wood and lumber.
D. Prohibited uses. [Amended 9-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15]
(1) No building or premises shall be used for any heavy industry,
mining trade, or any business or purpose of any kind that is toxic,
corrosive, noxious, hazardous, injurious or offensive by reason of
the emission of odor, dust, refuse matter, garbage, smoke, gas
fumes, vapor, or noise that is dangerous to the comfort, peace,
enjoyment, health or safety of the community.
(2) Residential uses and all other uses permitted in any residential
zone in the Borough.
(3) Sex clubs and unlicensed massage parlors are prohibited.
(4) No building used as a juice bar, go-go bar or pole dancing club shall
be erected or structurally altered within 200 feet of any residential
dwelling in the Borough. Nothing contained herein shall reduce the
distance requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-7 with respect to
"sexually oriented businesses" as described in N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12.2.
(5) All uses not specifically permitted are prohibited.
E. Bulk requirements: as specified in the schedule of regulations.175
F. Off-street parking requirements: as specified in § 350-27, Off-street
parking requirements, of this chapter.
(1) Notwithstanding any restrictions herein above contained,
commercial or industrial enterprises may park marked fleet
vehicles that are an integral part of their business or industrial use
on their private property but not on the street.
G. Landscape requirement: subject to § 350-28, Landscaping and
buffering, of this chapter.
H. Buffer requirement. Where any lot in this zone abuts a zone line of any
other district other than the L-I District, a landscape buffer area shall
be established. Such buffer shall be located on the lot(s) in this zone
and shall be no less than 50 feet deep and shall consist of an undulating
earthen berm, average eight feet in height, which shall be planted upon
with a dense mixture of shade and evergreen trees for the purpose of
establishing a physical separation of the sound and visual impacts of
industrial uses. Fencing, walls, and other screening methods may be
incorporated into the buffer area. Where the property line in this zone
abuts the R-75 or R-100 Residential Districts, the buffer shall be
increased to 100 feet in depth.
175. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included at the
end of this chapter.
§ 350-18 WATER SPORTS § 350-18
339:1051
I. Signs. Signs are subject to the sign regulations of § 350-26, Signs, of
this chapter.
J. Requirements for the storage of materials. All materials and equipment
not stored within the main buildings shall be stored in completely
enclosed buildings or otherwise shall be screened by walls, fences or
landscaping to screen such materials and equipment from outside the
boundaries of the lot.
K. Additional industrial activity and material storage requirements. All
uses involving the storage or handling of flammable or explosive
materials or hazardous chemical substances shall comply with the
following additional standards:
(1) All activities involving flammable or explosive material and/or
storage of same shall, at a minimum, comply with the most
stringent standards and regulations set forth in the most current
editions of the BOCA Basic Building Code and the BOCA Fire
Prevention Code.
(2) All utilitarian, material storage or exposed equipment areas of the
site shall be fully screened from view with a solid fence, no less
than six feet in height.
(3) The applicant shall furnish to the reviewing board, Health
Department and Environmental Commission information
identifying all chemicals and substances to be used and stored on
site, as well as all pollutants to be generated and all wetlands,
watercourses and/or floodplains on the site and the impact of the
facility on such.
(4) The applicant shall furnish the above-named municipal agencies
with copies of all applications and permits presently on file or
which are proposed to be filed with state and federal agencies with
respect to discharges into air or water. These applications and
permits shall disclose quantities, chemical nature and physical
characteristics of discharge, such as but not limited to temperature
and velocity.
(5) Uses with accessory outdoor storage areas, such as building
materials, equipment or outdoor storage tanks or vessels, shall be
provided in such a manner so as to ensure that there will be no
infiltration into or contamination of the Borough water resources,
including the Farrington Sands, Old Bridge Sands and surface
water sources. The contact of hazardous chemical substances and
salts with rainfall water, overland water flow and/or storm runoff
shall be prevented by adequate cover and containment
mechanisms, including but not limited to sheds, impervious
membranes or ground cover and berms.
(6) All outdoor aboveground facilities for the storage of any hazardous
chemical substance shall be located at a minimum distance of 500
§ 350-18 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-18
339:1052
feet from any residential development or residential zone and 100
feet from a public right-of-way. Tanks or drums of fuel directly
connecting with heating devices or appliances located on the same
premises as the tanks or drums of fuel are excluded from this
provision. All outdoor storage of toxic chemicals is prohibited and
shall not occur in areas identified as groundwater recharge areas.
(7) The applicant shall provide the municipal agencies with a spill
prevention and containment control plan setting forth the manner
in which spillage of materials will be prevented and measures to be
taken on the event of a spill.
(8) If the appropriate board determines the need to have a technical
expert review an application which proposes to use or store
hazardous chemicals or toxic substances or to determine if said
chemicals are hazardous substances or toxic, the applicant shall
deposit, in addition to the fees set forth in § 155-25 in the Fees
chapter, sufficient money as may be determined by the appropriate
board for the payment of review fees for a technical expert. A
technical expert is a licensed professional person with a specific
knowledge of the proposed use of the applicant, which knowledge
is not within the expertise of the Borough Planner and/or Borough
Engineer. The deposit for the technical review fee need not be paid
until the Planning Board shall first determine the need to hear a
technical expert and the amount of deposit to be required. To the
end that there should be any amount unexpended for technical
review of any application, the unexpended balance shall be
refunded to the applicant, and should the fee deposited be
insufficient to satisfy the expense of the technical review, the
applicant shall be required to deposit such additional funds as may
be necessary in order to satisfy such expense within 10 days of
being notified of the amount of additional funds required.
(9) For the purposes of this section, a hazardous chemical substance
shall be defined as any radioactive material or single substance or
mixture containing a substance described in the most recent
edition of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
Hazardous Waste Management Regulations, New Jersey
Administrative Code Title 7, Subchapter F, Chapter 26, Subchapter
6.176
(10) All tank car and tank truck loading, unloading or storage areas
employed in the transfer or storage of hazardous substances shall
be designed such that a spill will be prevented from entering any
groundwater, other than a drain which leads to an approved
industrial waste, water treatment plant or other facility which will
effectively contain the spilled hazardous substance. Satisfactory
provisions for neutralizing leakage or spills of hazardous chemicals
or corrosive liquids shall be provided. All vehicles and rail cars
176. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 350-18 WATER SPORTS § 350-18
339:1053
§ 350-19. W-R Waterfront Revitalization District.
carrying hazardous chemicals or explosive materials as defined
under this section shall stand or be parked only in a secure area
where they are under the care, custody and control of an owner
or operator, who shall provide a qualified person to ensure that
movement of any vehicle or rail car complies with this chapter.
No transfer or storage of incompatible toxic hazardous substances
shall occur without applicable state and federal requirements of
proper labeling and storage having been met.
(11) Diking requirements. All chemical handling and storage areas and
all aboveground areas for the storage of bulk oil or gasoline shall
be diked in a manner acceptable to the Borough Engineer in order
to prevent pollution due to spillage of such materials. Any diking
recommended by the Department of Environmental Protection
shall also be required.
A. Intent and purpose. The intent of the Waterfront Revitalization District
shall be to comprehensively revitalize the South River waterfront. This
aims to encourage economic development and inject into all properties
in the district opportunities for development, growth and prosperity.
This chapter intends to promote retail, commercial and pedestrian
activity to create a vibrant mixed-use area.
B. Revitalization District goals.
(1) To create an attractive mixed-use district along the South River
waterfront to attract economic activity to the area.
(2) To create linkages to/from existing public parks and open space to
each other and the river.
(3) To create a highly visual public accessway leading to or along the
waterfront and to create opportunities to develop a landmark
waterfront-public space for the Borough.
(4) Provision for three-story development for property owners/
developers in the district to encourage development.
(5) To provide a coordinated parking program intended for
nonresidential uses.
(6) To discourage residential uses from this area so as to secure them
from fire, flood, panic and other man-made or natural disasters.
(7) To create a long-term land use policy for the district which
recognizes the history of flooding problems in this area, and aims to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough
during periods of mandatory flood evacuation of this area.
(8) To encourage large-scale (five acres or more) development of the
area.
§ 350-18 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-19
339:1054
C. District location. The location of the Main Street Revitalization Zone
shall be indicated on the Zoning Map of the Borough of South River,
based on the recommendations found in the 2011 Master Plan, and
shall include all parcels of lands contained therein.
D. Permitted principal uses.
(1) All uses permitted in the B-1 Neighborhood Business Zone, except
detached single-family residential dwellings.
(2) All office and personal service uses permitted in the O-P Office
Professional Zone.
(3) Mixed-use retail shopping centers, outlet malls, shopping villages
and office parks.
(4) Active recreation uses, including marinas, boat clubs, and other
commercial waterfront recreation.
(5) Art/artisan galleries, museums, art studios, health and fitness
centers, day spas, licensed physical therapists and licensed
massage and acupuncturists.
(6) Restaurants, cafes, excluding drive-in and drive-through
restaurants.
(a) Restaurants and eating establishments shall be permitted to
have entertainment in the form of various acts, including
musicians, comedians, magicians, diverse musical groups.
(b) Restaurants in this zone are permitted and encouraged to
provide outdoor eating areas
(7) In no fashion should any use permitted in this Code be intended to
permit any type of entertainment or adult use in this zone or permit
any use that would violate alcoholic beverage control,177 health
regulations,178 or police/fire regulations.
E. Accessory uses: uses and buildings incidental to the above uses,
including any use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any
use permitted in this district.
F. Conditional uses.
(1) Taverns and nightclubs shall be conditional uses and shall be
subject to site plan review and approval from the appropriate
board.
G. Prohibited uses.
177. Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Alcoholic Beverages.
178. Editor's Note: See Part III of this Code, Board of Health Legislation.
§ 350-19 WATER SPORTS § 350-19
339:1055
(1) Adult uses of any kind, including strip clubs, juice bars, go-go bars,
pole dancing, nude clubs, adult book/novelty sales, and unlicensed
massage parlors.
(2) Boardinghouses or rooming houses.
(3) Drive-through or drive-in uses.
(4) Gasoline stations, automobile sales, service and repair garages.
(5) All uses not specifically permitted are prohibited.
(6) Single-family residential dwellings. Due to the danger to human life
and the interest of securing life and property from damage due to
flooding, single-family residential dwellings shall not be a
permitted use in this zone. However, any single-family home
damaged by flooding or flood-related natural disaster shall be
permitted to be reconstructed as long as the damage to the
building does not exceed 50% of the pre-disaster condition of the
building. Such determination shall be made by the Zoning Officer/
Construction Official. This subsection is enacted in accordance
with Chapter 291, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65(e).
H. Bulk requirements. The bulk standards of the L-I Light Industrial
District shall apply:
(1) Minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width shall be 100 feet. Minimum lot depth shall be
100 feet.
(3) Front setback shall be 25 feet.
(4) Minimum one side yard shall be 10 feet. Both side yards shall be a
minimum of 25 feet.
(5) The rear yard setback shall be 20 feet.
(6) Maximum building height: three stories or 40 feet, whichever is the
lesser.
(7) The maximum percentage of building coverage shall be 40%. The
maximum percentage of impervious coverage shall be 70%.
(8) All accessory building shall have a minimum side and rear setback
of five feet.
I. Waterfront access requirement. Public access along/to the waterfront
shall be provided to the public via a walkway/pathway.
J. Mixed-use requirements.
(1) All retail uses shall be located in ground floor locations in all
buildings in this zone. Retail uses may be extended to the second
floor and then the third floor space above an existing ground floor
§ 350-19 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-19
339:1056
retail space when interior stairways or elevators are provided to
connect the spaces.
(2) All office and personal service uses shall be located on the ground
floor, second floor or third floor, provided that no office or personal
service use shall be located over a residential use.
K. Parking requirements.
(1) Unless hereinafter specified, all parking design requirements of
this chapter shall apply.
(2) To encourage a scale of development appropriate for this area,
mixed-use on parcels of two acres or more may propose a shared
parking arrangement for a particular development site. Such a
proposal should be submitted in the form of a parking study.
(3) All on-site parking and loading facilities shall be located in the side
or rear yards of each property, subject to all other requirements of
§ 350-27, Off-street parking requirements, of this chapter.
L. Loading requirements. Loading shall be subject to § 350-27, Off-street
parking requirements, of this chapter.
M. Landscaping requirements. Landscaping in this zone shall be subject to
§ 350-28, Landscaping and buffering, of this chapter.
N. Signs.
(1) All signs are subject to § 350-26, Signs, of this chapter.
(2) All billboard signs are prohibited.
O. Architectural design standards.
(1) All buildings in this zone shall be required to submit color
elevations or photo simulations, showing the appearance, colors,
materials and textures of all proposed development, to the
appropriate board.
P. Public and quasi-public improvements.
(1) Public plaza. The 2011 Master Plan envisions a public plaza at a
highly visible location creating an "entranceway" into the
Waterfront Revitalization District. To accomplish this, any
developer may, as a part of any development application, propose
the creation of this plaza as a public or quasi-public space. Such a
plaza may contain civic monuments, pedestrian areas,
transportation links, and public art. It should be barrier free,
extensively landscaped and situated to attract pedestrians into
abutting activity spaces.
§ 350-19 WATER SPORTS § 350-19
339:1057
§ 350-20. MSR Main Street Rehabilitation District.
(2) Outdoor dining. Outdoor dining in this district is contemplated for
areas facing quasi-public areas and the water, although outdoor
dining is permitted in all locations subject to the following:
(a) Tables, chairs, umbrellas, small private trash containers, and
planters are all permitted.
(b) All furniture should be made of painted metal, painted wood,
stained wood, or some combination of these materials. The
character of all furniture should complement the design of the
building and the business that it adjoins.
(c) The size of the table and chair groupings is limited to that
which will maintain a clear walking path of four feet zero
inches on the sidewalk, right-of-way, or walkway, sufficient
width to permit pedestrians to pass.
(d) Overhead elements, such as umbrellas, in quasi-public spaces
should allow for clearance for passing pedestrians.
(e) Outdoor dining uses shall comply with all other dining
provisions in this chapter.
A. Intent and purpose. The intent of the Main Street Rehabilitation District
shall be to encourage economic development and revitalization and
inject into all properties in the district opportunities for growth and
prosperity in conjunction with aesthetic improvements. This chapter
intends to encourage building rehabilitation and promote pedestrian
traffic to create a vibrant mixed-use neighborhood.
B. Rehabilitation District goals.
(1) To create an attractive mixed-use district along Main Street/Ferry
Street with an appropriate tempo and scale of buildings for a
downtown setting.
(2) To improve the aesthetics of the Main Street/Ferry Street district
with streetscape improvements, including street trees, sidewalk
improvements and streetlighting to create a sense of place.
(3) To recognize the role this area plays and its importance to the
character of the South River community.
(4) To create opportunities to create a landmark public space for the
Borough.
(5) Creation of a visual terminus point at key locations through the use
of building massing and visual corner elements.
(6) Provision of new retail or other nonresidential space along Main
Street wrapping around corners of other collector streets.
§ 350-19 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-20
339:1058
(7) Provision for a "density bonus" or "floor area bonus" for property
owners/developers in the zone to encourage development.
(8) To provide a coordinated parking program intended to meet
residential need and to encourage nonresidential uses.
(9) To eliminate buildings in poor repair and inappropriate land uses
and to encourage development at a pedestrian-friendly scale and
with linkages to public transit.
C. District location. The location of the Main Street Revitalization Zone
shall be indicated on the Zoning Map of the Borough of South River,
based on the recommendations found in the 2011 Master Plan, and
shall include all parcels and public lands contained therein.
D. Permitted principal uses.
(1) All uses permitted in the B-1 Neighborhood Business Zone.
(2) Residential apartments (on upper floors only).
(3) All office and personal service uses permitted in the O-P Office
Professional Zone.
(4) Art/artisan galleries, museums, art studios, health and fitness
centers, day spas, licensed physical therapists and licensed
massage and acupuncturists.
(5) Restaurants, cafes, excluding drive-in and drive-through
restaurants.
(a) Restaurants and eating establishments shall be permitted to
have entertainment in the form of various acts, including
musicians, comedians, magicians, diverse musical groups.
(b) Restaurants in this zone are permitted and encouraged to
provide outdoor eating areas with tables and chairs, provided
that all eating areas on the front facade of a building shall be of
temporary nature and shall not block pedestrian circulation on
any Borough sidewalk. Clear, straight and unobstructed
passage for pedestrians of at least five feet in width shall be
maintained at all times. [Amended 7-17-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-13]
(6) In no fashion should any use permitted in this Code be intended to
permit any type of entertainment or adult use in this zone or permit
any use that would violate alcoholic beverage control,179 health
regulations,180 or police/fire regulations.
179. Editor's Note: See Ch. 103, Alcoholic Beverages.
180. Editor's Note: See Part III of this Code, Board of Health Legislation.
§ 350-20 WATER SPORTS § 350-20
339:1059
E. Accessory uses: uses and buildings incidental to the above uses,
including any use on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any
use permitted in this district.
F. Conditional uses.
(1) Recreational facilities, video arcades, entertainment facilities
including bowling alleys, skating rinks, indoor theaters, taverns,
nightclubs shall all be conditional uses and shall be subject to site
plan review and approval from the appropriate board.
G. Prohibited uses.
(1) Adult uses of any kind, including strip clubs, juice bars, go-go bars,
pole dancing, nude clubs, adult book/novelty sales, and unlicensed
massage parlors.
(2) Boardinghouses or rooming houses.
(3) Freestanding residential uses.
(4) Drive-through or drive-in uses.
(5) Gasoline stations, automobile sales, service and repair garages.
(6) Houses of worship.
(7) All uses not specifically permitted are prohibited.
H. Bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area shall be 2,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width shall be 25 feet. Minimum lot depth shall be 100
feet.
(3) All buildings having a frontage on Main Street and Ferry Street
shall be located so as to provide a zero-feet setback to those
streets, with a tolerance of five feet. In the case of infill
development, new buildings shall be aligned with the average front
alignment of the surrounding buildings. In no case shall any
building have a front setback to Main Street or Ferry Street greater
than five feet.
(4) All buildings fronting on all streets other than Main Street and
Ferry Street shall provide a front setback of 10 feet to those streets.
In the case of infill development, new buildings shall be aligned
with the average front alignment of the surrounding buildings.
(5) The side yard setback shall be zero feet, provided that the lot line
does not abut a residential district, in which case the minimum
requirement will be 15 feet.
(6) The rear yard setback shall be 20 feet.
§ 350-20 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-20
339:1060
(7) When due to building orientation, lot configuration or other
conditions that preclude entry into the rear of the property for
parking area access, loading, refuse collection, emergency access,
or similar purpose, a paved alleyway no greater than 15 feet shall
be permitted alongside or within the frontage of the building.
Where a building shall contain more than one story, additional
stories may be constructed above said alleyway pursuant to all
applicable building codes with the aforementioned side yard
requirements.
(8) All buildings shall be two-and-a-half-story or three-story buildings
with a maximum building height of 40 feet.
(9) The maximum percentage of building coverage shall be 70%. The
maximum percentage of impervious coverage shall be 95%.
I. Mixed-use requirements.
(1) All retail uses shall be located in all ground floor locations in all
buildings in this zone. Retail uses may be extended to the second
floor and then the third floor space above an existing ground floor
retail space when interior stairways or elevators are provided to
connect the spaces.
(2) All office and personal service uses shall be located on the ground
floor, second floor or third floor, provided that no office or personal
service use shall be located over a residential use.
(3) All buildings may provide residential uses on any floor except the
ground floor or the basement floor. No more than 67% of the total
floor area of any building shall be dedicated to residential use.
(4) Regardless of the gross floor area of any building, the maximum
floor area of each and any separate and individual permitted use
shall be no greater than 2,500 square feet. Each single space
greater than 2,500 square feet shall require relief from the
appropriate board.
J. Requirements for buildings.
(1) Maximum building footprint shall be 10,000 square feet.
(2) No building shall exceed a building width of 200 feet along a single
street frontage unless broken up by a plaza or courtyard.
(3) Buildings should be placed to frame street corners.
(4) To be compatible with a pedestrian scale, each ground level
individual business shall provide a functioning, direct primary
street entry. A shared entry is permitted for access to upper-level
units and shall provide a glazed commercial doorway and an
entrance lobby area.
§ 350-20 WATER SPORTS § 350-20
339:1061
(5) All buildings shall have a base, middle and top, with the base
differentiated with different materials from the upper floors. The
top portions of all flat-roof buildings should provide parapets or
deep cornices on front facades.
(6) Buildings shall present a complete and discrete vertical facade
composition at an average street frontage of every 50 feet.
(7) Allowable projections on any second or third floor facade include
bow windows and flat canopies and may project two feet into a
front right-of-way. French balconies shall project not more than one
foot.
(8) Corner and tower elements are encouraged to create an
architectural focus for the area. Such an approved element may
exceed the building height without violating this chapter so long as
the element does not exceed the building height by eight feet for a
total height of no greater than 48 feet.
K. Parking requirements.
(1) Unless hereinafter specified, all parking design requirements of
§ 350-27, Off-street parking requirements, of this chapter shall
apply.
(2) All properties within this district with street frontage along any
street are subject to the special parking requirements on that
frontage.
(3) Due to the availability of existing parking for individual properties
and existing street parking spaces along Main and Ferry Streets
and along its streets, all ground floor retail, personal service and
restaurant uses that are permitted within the geographic limit of
this zone shall not be subject to any parking requirement. Future
parking needs, as they become evident, shall be satisfied through
the construction of strategic parking lots on properties to be
rendered available along or in the vicinity of Main Street.
(4) All office, bank and commercial uses that are permitted within the
geographic limit of this zone shall be subject to parking
requirements specified in § 350-27, Off-street parking
requirements.
(5) All residential uses that are permitted or approved by variance
within the geographic area of the zone shall have parking
requirements based on the Residential Site Improvement
Standards.181 Residential parking shall be provided off street.
(6) All on-site parking facilities shall be located in the side or rear
yards of each property, subject to all other requirements of
181. Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.
§ 350-20 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-20
339:1062
§ 350-27, Off-street parking requirements, of this chapter. All
parking shall be prohibited in front yards.
(7) Buildings on individual parcels in the zone are permitted to have
contiguous on-site parking areas with free-flowing traffic between
said parking areas.
(8) No parking lots shall be closer than five feet to any property line of
the parcel on which they are located, except for points of crossaccess.
There shall be available, as necessary, access to the rear of
such properties for accessing parking areas, refuse collection,
loading/unloading, entry of public safety vehicles and other
necessary functions which require such entry.
L. Loading requirements.
(1) Loading shall be subject to § 350-27, Off-street parking
requirements, of this chapter.
(2) On-street loading/unloading and dumpster tipping in the MSR
District shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
(3) All loading/unloading shall be permitted in the rear yard area only.
(4) Where rear or side yard parking, loading or other utilitarian
activities are proposed, a minimum ten-foot-wide buffer area shall
be required adjacent to all residential uses, all rights-of-way, and all
residential zones. Said buffer screen shall be comprised of a fivefoot-
to six-foot-high living evergreen wall and six-foot-high solid
fencing to provide screening for the abutting incompatible uses.
M. Landscaping requirements. Landscaping in this zone shall be subject to
§ 350-28, Landscaping and buffering, of this chapter.
N. Signs.
(1) All signs are subject to § 350-26, Signs, of this chapter.
(2) No ground signs shall be permitted. Only facade signs are
permitted in this district.
(3) The maximum permitted sign area shall be 10% of the front facade.
On corner lots, signs may increase to account for both facade
areas. There shall be a limit of one sign per use or tenant.
(4) When a ground sign is proposed, such signs shall be monumentstyle
signs with a height no greater than four feet. A planter base
shall be provided around the base of the sign. Such signs shall
require relief from the appropriate board.
(5) Shingle signs are permitted on the first and second floors. The
maximum area should not exceed four square feet, the materials
should be either painted wood or painted metal, and they should
§ 350-20 WATER SPORTS § 350-20
339:1063
include ornamental metal brackets of some kind. They should only
be externally illuminated, and the message should only give the
symbol or the name of the business.
(6) Surface-mounted signs on the first floor cornice/sign band shall
contain individually mounted letters or symbols and not be a large
board sign that obscures the cornice and its details. They should be
externally illuminated, and the message should only contain the
name or the symbol of the business.
(7) Surface-mounted signs are not permitted above the first floor.
(8) Awning signs shall be limited by the size of the fringe or the main
area of the awning, depending on the location of the sign.
(9) All billboard signs are prohibited.
O. Awnings.
(1) Cloth and canvas awnings are encouraged over building entrances
and shall provide a minimum of eight-foot clearance and shall not
extend more than four feet from the building facade.
(2) If an awning is so steeply sloped that it serves as a sign rather than
as shelter, the sign must meet all the criteria (size, message,
lighting, etc.) for wall signs that could be above the first floor.
(3) All types of colors and patterns are acceptable if they meet the
criteria for colors and signs: plain, striped, patterned, decorative,
and so on. They must, however, be compatible with the overall
building.
(4) If a single building contains more that one shopfront and more than
one shop, the two awnings can either be identical to complement
the building or they can differ to add variety and to express the
identity of the individual shops.
(5) If a single shop occupies the ground floor of two adjacent buildings,
the awnings in each building can be identical, since the objective of
maintaining the identity of the two buildings is met by the building
designs.
P. Architectural design standards.
(1) The following activities regarding any of the buildings in the MSR
Zone shall render the building(s) subject to the architectural
appearance requirements listed below:
(a) The new construction of a primary use building on a parcel of
land.
(b) The addition to an existing primary use building that is 10% or
more of the gross floor area of the existing building.
§ 350-20 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-20
339:1064
(c) The renovation or alteration in any manner of any outer wall of
a building that faces street frontage or is considered the front
of the building, including the addition of windows, doors or
similar elements.
(d) The renovation or alteration in any manner of any outer wall or
combination of outer walls of a building.
(e) The major internal renovation or alteration of a building which
constitutes 49% or more of the gross floor area.
(2) Architectural appearance requirements.
(a) Since all of the existing buildings within the limits of this zone
vary considerably in age and architecture in their present
state, it is difficult to impose on them a rigid architectural
design standard. Although beauty and character are
subjective, there shall be an underlying design theme to the
buildings and specifically to the facades so that a sense of
conformity to a time period is achieved. Variation, creativity,
uniqueness and distinction are encouraged, provided that
there is a visual flow from building to building with no evidence
of abrupt change or disruption in design or theme. Each
building, although having its own identity, should complement
the others in style and taste without the look of an exact copy.
(b) The prominent veneers to be used for facades and sides of
buildings facing the street shall be real brick (mortar or
painted), limestone, unpolished granite.
(c) The unpainted brick colors shall be in the brown, beige or red
tones. Stone coloring shall be more flexible but maintain a
subdued color scheme in keeping with the brick tones.
(d) Other veneers such as wood shingles, Hardi-Plank,
cementitious fiber shingles, cast iron, terra cotta, fiberglass,
glazed tile, painted wood or metal or other man-made siding
products and wood veneer products shall be considered
secondary veneers to complement the brick or stone. The
colors of such veneers shall be in subdued tones to blend in a
compatible and aesthetic fashion. The use of fluorescent colors
is prohibited, as are abrupt color changes, even in the subdued
tones, that clash visually.
(e) Aluminum siding, vinyl siding, faux brick face, metal panels,
stucco/EIFS treatments are strongly discouraged, except in
utilitarian areas not visible from the street.
(f) No blank walls. All facades or sides of buildings facing the
street shall have a decor that prohibits, for a maximum
distance of 15 feet horizontally, bare unadorned walls along
each floor. These walls shall have appurtenances either
§ 350-20 WATER SPORTS § 350-20
339:1065
decorative or functional to satisfy the condition. Such
appurtenances shall consist of windows, doors, columns,
lintels, cornices, balconies, overhangs, awnings, arches,
railings or any other architectural items that fit the herein
recommended design theme.
(g) Roofs should create visual interest. Roofs shall be of the Aframe
peak type wherever possible and include turrets,
dormers, cupolas, towers and gables to reflect "turn-of-thecentury"
attributes. Where it is necessary to install other than
a peaked roof due to structural or height restrictions, parapets,
cornices, eaves, turrets and other architectural devices that
also reflect the above-stated attributes shall be utilized.
(h) Windows for upper floors shall provide exterior muntins,
casings, aprons, trims, shutters, etc., to provide an attractive
and visually interesting facade.
(i) Window glass shall be clear or lightly tinted. Dark-tinted or
mirrored windows are prohibited.
(j) Windows should occupy 70% of the linear expanse of a retail
facade. Night security gates, grills or other security coverings
of windows are prohibited.
(k) Exterior facade sconce or gooseneck-style lighting is
encouraged.
(l) Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be fully screened from the
street.
(m) Buildings shall be richly detailed to create a visually
interesting facade.
Q. Public and quasi-public improvements.
(1) Public plaza. The 2011 Master Plan envisions a public plaza at a
highly visible location creating an "entranceway" into the Main
Street Revitalization District. To accomplish this, any developer, as
a part of any development application, may propose the creation of
this plaza as a public or quasi-public space. Such a plaza may
contain civic buildings, civic monuments, pedestrian areas,
transportation links, and public art. It should be barrier free,
extensively landscaped and situated to attract pedestrians into
abutting retail spaces.
(2) Off-site improvements. Within all lots in the district, the developer/
property owner shall construct and maintain all streetscape
improvements located on the street frontage of each property. This
shall include installing sidewalks, access alleys, utility easements,
curbs, gutters, undergrounding utilities, street furniture: benches,
§ 350-20 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-20
339:1066
§ 350-21. PR Park, Open Space, Recreation and Conservation
District.
trash receptacles, bicycle racks, street trees and planters, and
streetlights.
(3) Outdoor dining.
(a) Tables, chairs, umbrellas, small private trash containers, and
planters are all desirable elements of the street furnishings.
(b) All furniture should be made of painted metal, painted wood,
stained wood, or some combination of these materials. The
character of all furniture should complement the design of the
building and the business that it adjoins.
(c) The size of the table and chair groupings is limited to that
which will maintain a clear walking path of four feet zero
inches on the sidewalk, a sufficient width to permit pedestrians
to pass but also to create the slightly crowded feeling of a truly
vibrant place.
(d) Overhead elements, such as umbrellas, should allow for
clearance for passing pedestrians. A clearance height of seven
feet zero inches is required, which is adequate for most
pedestrians and yet preserves the sense of intimacy and
shelter that an umbrella gives to a seated group.
(e) Outdoor dining uses shall comply with all other dining
provisions in this chapter.
(4) Planters.
(a) Planters that sit on the sidewalk should be made of durable
materials. Plain ceramic pots and ornamental ceramic pots are
the most common style, but stone, some ornamental concrete
designs and certain large fiberglass pots can also be
appropriately attractive.
(b) The size of these pots should allow a walking clearance on the
sidewalk of at least four feet zero inches.
(c) Pots can be located either along the storefront or at the curb; if
at the curb they cannot be in the way of swinging car doors:
one foot six inches clear of the inside face of the street curb.
(d) Wooden window boxes under the storefronts are permitted.
(e) Plants should be selected which can stand the downtown
climatic conditions and which need a minimum of
maintenance. Merchants and/or building owners shall
maintain all planters they use on their property.
§ 350-20 WATER SPORTS § 350-21
339:1067
A. The purpose of the Park, Open Space, Recreation and Conservation
Zone is to preserve within the Borough lands that are identified as open
space, recreational facilities, environmentally sensitive, or lands
restricted to stormwater management use. Placed in this zone will be
public and quasi-public and other parcels that would be inherently
suitable for this zone based on their use and purpose. All federal, state,
county and municipal parks, private recreational lands, and lands
containing stormwater management facilities or similar facilities
encumbered by easement or deed shall be included in this zone.
B. Permitted principal uses. No building, structure or use shall be used
and no building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered
except for the following uses:
(1) Public parks and recreation facilities.
(2) Municipal, county, state-owned or preserved open space.
(3) Environmental education centers.
(4) Private stormwater management facilities, drainage structures,
basins and swales.
(5) Private lands of an environmentally sensitive nature encumbered
by conservation easements or similar deed restrictions.
(6) Municipal utilities.
C. Permitted accessory uses and buildings: uses and buildings incidental
to the above uses, including but not limited to those specified below:
(1) Active and passive recreation fields and sports courts, recreation
centers, seating, shelters, picnic facilities.
(2) Recreation offices and maintenance buildings related to the
recreation or conservation use.
(3) Public restroom facilities, lighting, parking and similar utilities
related to the healthy and safety of any permitted use.
D. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted,
provided that all of the terms and conditions specified for the particular
use in § 350-25, Conditional uses, are complied with:
(1) Notwithstanding any restrictions found herein, nothing in this
chapter shall prohibit any organization from using its own private
lands for the purposes of outdoor fund-raising activities, including
carnivals and amusement facilities consisting of mechanical or
electronic amusement devices, conditioned upon issuance of all
necessary permits from the Borough.
E. Bulk requirements. Buildings in this zone shall be subject to the bulk
standards of the R-100 Zone.182
§ 350-21 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-21
339:1068
§ 350-22. CEM Cemetery Conservation District.
F. Off-street parking requirements: as specified in § 350-27, Off-street
parking requirements, of this chapter. Development Ordinance.
G. Signs. Signs are subject to the sign regulations of § 350-26 of this
chapter.
A. The intent of the Cemetery Conservation Zone shall be to preserve
within the Borough lands that are currently operating as, or have
historically been used as, cemeteries and burial grounds. Placed in this
zone will be public, quasi-public and private parcels that would be
inherently suitable for this zone based on their current use and
purpose. This chapter seeks to protect existing cemetery parcels from
development that would be incompatible with the intent of this zone
and to clarify the uses and building standards permitted therein.
B. Permitted principal uses. No building, structure or land shall be used
and no building or structure shall be erected or structurally altered
except for the following uses:
(1) Cemeteries and burial grounds, public and private.
(2) Mausoleums.
(3) Chapels and similar buildings for funeral or memorial services.
(4) Buildings for the sole purpose of cemetery administration and
maintenance.
C. Permitted accessory uses and buildings: uses and buildings incidental
to the above uses, including but not limited to those specified below:
(1) Flagpoles, monuments, gazebos, arbors, and similar structures and
buildings.
(2) Maintenance and storage buildings for articles in connection with
any of the above permitted uses.
(3) Traditional flagpoles.
(4) Fences, walls, gates and similar hardscape and landscape
structures.
(5) Parking lots for cemetery and funeral use.
(6) All other uses deemed customary and incidental to the operation of
a cemetery.
D. Bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area shall be two acres.
182. Editor's Note: See § 350-13.
§ 350-21 WATER SPORTS § 350-22
339:1069
§ 350-23. E-I Educational Institution District.
(2) Buildings in this zone shall be subject to the bulk standards of the
R-100 Zone.
E. Off-street parking requirements: as specified in § 350-27, Off-street
parking requirements, of this chapter.
F. Signs. Signs are subject to the sign regulations of this chapter.183
G. Parking restrictions. No parking shall be permitted within any required
front, side or rear yard.
H. Prohibited uses.
(1) All uses not specifically permitted are prohibited.
A. The intent of the Educational Institutional Zone shall be to preserve
within the Borough lands containing public, private, parochial schools,
nonprofit commercial schools, seminaries, colleges, academies or
similar educational institution for academic instruction teaching an
approved curriculum by the New Jersey Department of Education.
Placed in this zone will be public, quasi-public and private parcels that
would be inherently suitable for this zone based on their current use
and purpose.
B. Permitted principal uses. No building, structure or premises shall be
used and no building or structure shall be erected or structurally
altered except for the following uses:
(1) Public schools, private schools, parochial schools, nonprofit
commercial schools, seminaries, colleges, academies or similar
educational institutions
(2) Offices for the administration of a permitted educational
institution.
(3) Municipal facilities and utilities.
C. Permitted accessory uses and buildings: uses and buildings incidental
to the above uses, including but not limited to those specified below:
(1) Recreational facilities, sports fields and stadiums operated in
conjunction with a permitted educational institution use.
(2) Maintenance and storage buildings for equipment in connection
with any of the above permitted uses.
(3) Parking lots for official school use operated in connection with any
of the above permitted uses.
183. Editor's Note: See § 350-26, Signs.
§ 350-22 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-23
339:1070
§ 350-24. Lincoln School Overlay District. [Added 8-25-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-28]
D. Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted,
provided that all of the terms and conditions specified for the particular
use in Subsection 204-7 are complied with:
(1) Houses of worship, subject to the same conditional requirements
found in the R-100 District.184
(2) Quasi-public clubs and organizations and public and private,
nonprofit philanthropic, educational and charitable institutions,
subject to the same conditional requirements found in the R-100
Zone.
E. Height, area and yard requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area shall be two acres.
(2) Buildings in this zone shall be subject to all other bulk standards of
the R-100 Zone.
F. Off-street parking requirements: as specified in § 350-27, Off-street
parking requirements, of this chapter.
G. Signs. Signs are subject to the sign regulations of this chapter.185
H. Parking restrictions. No parking shall be permitted within any required
front, side or rear yard.
I. Prohibited uses. [Amended 9-23-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15]
(1) All adult uses, including sex clubs, juice bars, go-go bars, pole
dancing clubs, nude clubs, adult book/novelty sales, unlicensed
massage parlors and other sexually oriented businesses as defined
by N.J.S.A. 2C: 33-12.2, are prohibited in this zone.
(2) All uses not specifically permitted are prohibited.
A. Intent. The Lincoln School Overlay District (LSOD) is intended as a
means of revitalizing the former Lincoln School educational facility in
the Borough of South River. It provides the standards to transform this
vacant, underutilized and obsolete former educational property into a
viable land use, thus improving and stabilizing the fiscal health of the
Borough. Ancillary intents shall also be to:
(1) Promote the effective rehabilitation of this property currently
existing in the R-75 Single-Family Residential District;
(2) Provide for regulation of bulk height, parking and setback elements
of future site development;
184. Editor's Note: See § 350-13.
185. Editor's Note: See § 350-26, Signs.
§ 350-23 WATER SPORTS § 350-24
339:1071
(3) Incorporate appropriate traffic flow volumes and patterns and
access points to the site to minimize impacts to nearby existing
residential neighborhoods;
(4) Ensure that capacity of all utility and infrastructure systems
serving the site is adequate to support any proposed development;
(5) Encourage re-development through an enhanced but appropriate
density and variation of land uses as stipulated in this section.
B. Overlay.
(1) The Lincoln School Overlay District (LSOD) shall overlay the
existing development requirements of the R-75 Single-Family
Residential District and shall exist as an alternative set of
requirements only for the properties located within the boundaries
of the overlay district. When proposing development, a developer
may utilize either the existing zoning regulations of the underlying
district or may opt to utilize the requirements of the Lincoln School
Overlay District (LSOD) set forthwith in this section.
(2) The adoption of this section shall signify an amendment to the
Zoning Map of the Borough of South River amending the following
properties currently in the R-75 Single-Family Residential District
to also be included in the Lincoln School Overlay District (LSOD):
Block Lot
Block 38 Lot 18, also shown as Lot 18.01
Block 38 Lot 10
C. Principal permitted uses.
(1) Multifamily dwellings consisting of three or more dwelling units in
an apartment building or townhouse format shall be a permitted
use in this district.
(2) All uses permitted in the B-2 Zone, except as expressly prohibited
in Subsection E below.
(3) Mixed-use buildings with ground floor commercial uses and upper
floor office, commercial and/or residential uses.
D. Permitted accessory uses. Any accessory use on the same lot and which
is customary and incidental to the principal use on the lot shall be a
permitted accessory use.
E. Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited:
(1) Taverns, restaurants and nightclubs.
(2) Hotels and motels.
(3) Boarding and rooming houses.
§ 350-24 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-24
339:1072
(4) All uses not specifically permitted by zone or by state or federal law
are prohibited, inclusive of, but by no means limited to, refineries,
cement manufacturing, slaughterhouses, explosives
manufacturing, adult bookstores/movies and the like.
(5) All adult uses prohibited under § 350-16G(1) shall be prohibited
uses in this district.
F. Bulk requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area shall be one acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) Minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
(3) Minimum lot depth shall be 150 feet.
(4) Principal building:
(a) Minimum front yard shall be 50 feet on all sides of a lot
fronting on a county road, collector road, or arterial street as
shown on the Borough Master Plan, and shall be 30 feet on all
other streets.
(b) Minimum one side yard shall be 30 feet.
(c) Minimum both side yards is 60 feet.
(d) Minimum rear yard shall be 65 feet.
(5) Accessory building:
(a) Minimum side yard shall be five feet.
(b) Minimum rear yard shall be five feet.
(6) Maximum percent of lot coverage by all buildings shall be 40%.
(7) Maximum percent of impervious coverage by all buildings and
pavement shall be 70%.
(8) Maximum building height shall be 2.5 stories and building height
shall not be greater 35 feet. However, when an on-grade parking lot
is proposed to be located on the ground level or first floor level of a
building, and where two or more levels of habitable space is
proposed above said parking level, the permitted building height
may be increased to 3.5 stories and no greater than 40 feet.
(9) The maximum density shall be 18 dwelling units per acre.
G. Parking, loading and lighting requirements.
(1) All parking requirements provided for in the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) and in § 350-27, Off-street parking
requirements, of the Borough of South River shall apply.
§ 350-24 WATER SPORTS § 350-24
339:1073
(2) Off-street parking spaces, together with appropriate access
thereto, shall be provided on the same lot as the building it is
intended to serve in accordance with the standards of § 350-27, Offstreet
parking requirements, of the Borough of Borough of South
River.
(3) Off-street parking spaces may be located in side and rear yards
only.
(4) No parking space shall be nearer than 15 feet to any street line nor
nearer than five feet to any lot line or principal building, and
further provided that complete building perimeter parking is
prohibited.
(5) When a property shall have frontage on more than one street,
parking access shall be arranged so as to be provided on the
street(s) of lower traffic volume.
(6) All proposed development shall be accompanied by a parking/
traffic impact report addressing the impacts of trip generation and
on-site circulation on the surrounding neighborhood and roadway
system.
H. Signs.
(1) No freestanding signs shall be permitted in the Lincoln School
Overlay District (LSOD).
(2) Facade signs shall be permitted when nonresidential development
is proposed and shall be regulated in § 350-26, Signs.
I. Landscaping and buffering.
(1) All landscaping, buffering, street tree, shade tree, screening, and
tree replacement requirements of the Land Use and Development
Ordinance of the Borough of South River shall apply.
(2) When development is proposed abutting a single-family or twofamily
residential zone or use, a five-foot-deep and eight-foot-high
landscape buffer of screening trees, plantings and fencing shall be
provided on the perimeter of the development site in the Lincoln
School Overlay District (LSOD).
J. Pedestrian accommodations and access.
(1) Pedestrian connections shall be provided along the fronts of
buildings, between buildings and to the public sidewalk and
crosswalk areas.
(2) Where pedestrian routes that connect buildings and/or open plazas
with vehicular drives or routes, the pedestrian crossings shall be
adequately striped, raised and/or textured for safety.
§ 350-24 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-24
339:1074
K. Stormwater management. Development shall conform to the Borough
of South River's stormwater regulations.
L. Solid waste and recycling. Each building shall be designed to provide
for adequate storage of solid waste disposal, including provisions for
recycled materials. All areas for solid waste and recycling collection
shall be located within buildings or parking facilities in side or rear
yards. All exterior trash and recycling locations shall be enclosed and
located in a manner which is obscured from view of parking lots, streets
and adjacent residential uses or zoning districts by a fence, wall,
planting or combination of the three. If located outside the building, the
container shall be situated on the same horizontal plane as the
driveway providing access to the container.
M. Curbs, sidewalks, utilities, and all other public improvements. All
development shall include the installation of necessary public
improvements on the property they control as well as abutting rights-ofway,
as required in the existing land development ordinances of the
Borough. All developers shall be required to construct any off-tract
improvements necessitated by their development. All utility
improvements necessary to support the redevelopment shall be the
responsibility of the redeveloper. The redeveloper shall be responsible
for providing the necessary reports to indicate that there is sufficient
municipal water and sewer capacity available for the maximum buildout
of the project. Utilitarian improvements such as utility transformers
or meter banks shall be located in screened areas in side or rear yards
only. Placement of these or similar utilities in front yards or on front
facades is prohibited.
N. Environmental requirements. A preliminary environmental assessment
shall be required when demolition, rehabilitation and/or remediation is
proposed of any former educational, commercial or institutional
building older than 50 years old at the time of zoning application. All onsite
remediation shall be conducted with the approval of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to meet the standards of
remediation commensurate with the use proposed. The work and cost
of all such remediation shall be the sole cost of the developer.
O. Fiscal impact requirements. All applications for development in the
Lincoln School Overlay District (LSOD) shall be accompanied by a fiscal
impact report analyzing the economic impact of the proposed
development to the Borough of South River.
P. Architectural appearance. Any application for development shall be
accompanied by architectural exhibits showing an extremely attractive
building of significantly high architectural quality. No specific building
style is required; however, brick, natural stone, precast concrete and
other materials shall be provided to reflect permanence and resilience.
Dormers, parapets, mansard roofs, varied rooflines, dental moldings,
quoins, should be proposed. Buildings should have a clear base, middle
and top. Residential windows should contain grids and mullions along
§ 350-24 WATER SPORTS § 350-24
339:1075
§ 350-25. Conditional uses.
with shudders, French balconies, or other decorative brickwork window
trims. Appropriate screening should be provided for ground level
parking structures. Clock towers, cupolas, turrets, or other elements
should be considered and should respect the alignment of surrounding
streets, intersections and street views. Vinyl siding, stucco, and
external insulation finishing systems should not be proposed in visible
areas.
A. Intent.
(1) Recognizing the necessity for certain specific uses, while at the
same time appreciating the fact that they may be or may become
inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare of the
community if improperly designed or located without due
consideration to the existing conditions and surroundings, the
standards and procedures in this section are hereby established.
(2) A conditional use is a permitted use, not as a matter of right, but
rather at the discretion of the Planning Board based upon
satisfactory compliance with articulated criteria and standards as
specified herein.
(3) These standards are intended to provide the Planning Board with a
guide for the purpose of reviewing applications for conditional uses
as provided for by this chapter. In reviewing an application, the
Planning Board may act on site plans submitted to it or may
suggest modifications and changes. In approving an application,
the Planning Board may require, in addition to features specified,
such other features or design, in keeping with the intent thereof,
that will further the purpose of these standards and regulations.
Such features shall be provided and maintained as a condition of
the establishment and maintenance of any use to which they are a
condition of approval.
(4) Notwithstanding compliance with specific conditional use
standards hereinafter set forth, no conditional use will be
permitted if the use at the proposed location would be detrimental
to the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
B. Licensed nursing homes including assisted living facilities and adult
day care may be permitted in the R-100 and R-75 residential zones,
provided that:
(1) Such use fronts upon a street classified in the Borough's Master
Plan as other than a local street.
(2) Such building shall be a minimum of 150 feet from any other
dwelling, house or structure used for the housing of human beings
or from a church, library, school or other public building.
§ 350-24 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-25
339:1076
(3) The applicant shall comply with all state requirements for such use.
(4) Such building shall be set back at least 40 feet from the street and
rear lot lines and at least 20 feet from side lot lines.
(5) Off-street parking shall be provided for at least one space for each
three beds, plus one space for each staff member and employee,
based upon the maximum number estimated to be on duty at any
one time. Such off-street parking area shall be suitably screened
from adjoining residential lots by appropriate landscaping and/or
fencing.
(6) Areas for outdoor recreation of a size and location sufficient to
properly serve the needs of the occupants are provided.
(7) It is ascertained by the Planning Board that the use will meet a
community need without adversely affecting the character of the
neighborhood.
C. Nursery schools. Nursery schools and child-care centers may be
permitted in the R-100 and R-75 Zones, provided that:
(1) Ingress and egress to the facility is such that the safety of the
children is protected to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
(2) The building is appropriately designed and provides adequate
fenced yard space developed for recreational purposes.
(3) There are no home professional or home occupation uses carried
on in the building.
(4) The nursery school shall be licensed by the State of New Jersey
Board of Education.
(5) It is ascertained by the Planning Board that the use will meet a
community need without adversely affecting the character of the
neighborhood.
D. Gasoline service stations and repair garages, auto body garages.
(1) Such use shall not have an entrance or exit on the same side of the
street and within 200 feet of an entrance or exit to a public or
private school, public library, theater, church, public park or
playground, orphanage or children's home, nursery school or fire
station nor within 100 feet of a residential district except where
and when the property is in another block or on another street
which the lot in question does not abut. Such distance is to be
measured along a straight line between the properties involved.
(2) A description of the nature and extent of the proposed use shall be
provided to the Planning Board.
(3) No gasoline pumps shall be placed within 25 feet of any street or lot
line.
§ 350-25 WATER SPORTS § 350-25
339:1077
(4) There shall be no more than two access driveways along any one
street. The minimum distance between driveways on the site shall
be 25 feet, and access driveways shall be at least 15 feet from the
nearest lot line and at least 25 feet from the nearest street
intersection.
(5) No part of any garage shall be nearer than 25 feet to any street line
or 15 feet to any lot line.
(6) No commercial repair work, except minor repair work, shall be
conducted outdoors on the property.
(7) Such use shall be adequately buffered and screened from any
adjacent residential use as determined by the Planning Board by
fencing and vegetation of a minimum six-foot height and providing
a ten-foot-deep, heavily buffered planting area.
(8) The use of strings of pennants, flags or similar decorations, such as
whirling displays, are expressly prohibited but shall be allowed for
a period of one week to mark a grand opening.
(9) No more than three vehicles per service bay shall be stored outside
overnight on the premises, excluding vehicles owned or leased by
the proprietor(s).
E. Quasi-public nonprofit clubs and organizations, and public and private
nonprofit, educational and charitable institutions:
(1) Such use, when taken in conjunction with other existing land uses,
will not generate traffic that would result in an undue burden upon
the available access streets, resulting in a traffic movement on
adjacent streets.
(2) A statement setting forth full particulars of the operation of the use
and the total number of proposed charter members (for
membership clubs) shall be filed with the Planning Board.
(3) It is ascertained by the Planning Board that the proposed use is a
bona fide nonprofit organization operated solely for the recreation
and enjoyment of the members of said organization or for civic,
humanitarian or charitable purposes.
(4) It is ascertained by the Planning Board that the proposed use in the
proposed location shall in no way adversely affect the safe and
comfortable enjoyment of property rights in the area in which it is
located or otherwise adversely affect the value of adjacent
properties.
(5) The design of any structures erected in connection with such use
are in keeping with the general character of the area and sufficient
landscaping, including trees, shrubs and lawns, is provided to serve
as buffer between said use and adjoining residential properties.
§ 350-25 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-25
339:1078
(6) The maximum membership limit of said organization shall be fixed
at the time of application and shall be commensurate to the amount
of land to be used and the exact nature of the use. No further
expansion of said membership shall be made unless supplemental
approval is granted by the Planning Board.
(7) Off-street parking shall be provided for at least one space for each
200 square feet of floor area, plus additional spaces determined by
the Board based upon anticipated usage. Such off-street parking
area shall be suitably screened from adjoining residential lots by
appropriate landscaping and/or fencing.
F. Home occupations.
(1) The dwelling unit proposed to house such use is a single-family
unit.
(2) Such occupation shall be conducted solely by members of the
resident family.
(3) Such use shall occupy an area equivalent to not over 35% of the
floor areas of one story.
(4) There shall be no conspicuous display of goods or advertising to be
seen from outside the premises.
(5) Such use does not involve the use of any machinery or equipment
which will cause electrical or other interference with radio and
television reception in adjacent residences or which will cause
offensive noise or vibration.
(6) Such use shall in no way be objectionable or detrimental to the
well-being or to the harmonious character of the neighborhood.
G. Home professional offices.
(1) The lot meets the minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance
with respect to lot area and lot width.
(2) No structural alterations to accommodate the use of the dwelling
for office use are required.
(3) Such use shall occupy an area equivalent to not over 50% of the
floor area of one story.
(4) Such use shall not involve the sale of any goods, products or
merchandise.
(5) The dwelling unit proposed to house such use is a single-family
unit.
(6) Sufficient off-street parking space, as determined by the Planning
Board on a case-by-case basis, is provided in the rear or side yards.
§ 350-25 WATER SPORTS § 350-25
339:1079
Such parking area is to be suitably shielded from adjacent
properties by means of appropriate landscaping and/or fencing.
H. Community residences for the mentally and physically handicapped,
victims of domestic violence, terminally ill, or persons with head
injuries. Qualifying community residences for the placement of more
than six but fewer than 16 persons, exclusive of resident staff, may be
permitted in all residential zones pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66,
provided that:
(1) Sufficient off-street parking space, as determined by the Planning
Board on a case-by-case basis, is provided in the rear or side yards.
Such parking is to be suitably shielded from adjacent properties by
means of appropriate landscaping and/or fencing.
(2) The lot area for such use is equal to at least the minimum lot area
required for the zone in which the use is to be located; provided,
however, that greater lot area may be required on a case-by-case
basis depending upon the anticipated number of occupants.
(3) In order that the health and safety of the occupants not be
endangered by heavy traffic volumes, such use shall not be located
on any street other than those classified as local streets in the
Master Plan of the Borough of South River.
(4) Ingress and egress to the building is such that the safety of the
occupants is protected to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
(5) Sufficient off-street area is provided for the pickup and discharge of
occupants by vans or other vehicles servicing the handicapped.
(6) Such uses shall be subject to the same bulk requirements as a
single-family unit in the zone.
(7) Such use shall not have an entrance or exit on the same side of the
street and within 200 feet of an entrance or exit to a public or
private school, garage or service station, theater, rescue squad or
fire station, except where and when the property is in another
block or on another street which the lot in question does not abut.
I. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs. Billboards, signboards
and advertising signs may be permitted in the L-I Zone only, provided
that:
(1) No structure for this purpose shall be closer than 15 feet to any
front lot line or 10 feet to any side lot line.
(2) No such sign shall be within 500 feet of a residential district.
(3) No billboard or outdoor advertising sign shall have less than four
feet of clear space between it and the ground nor, at any point, be
higher than 16 feet above ground level.
§ 350-25 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-25
339:1080
(4) No billboard or outdoor advertising sign shall have a horizontal
dimension of more than 15 feet.
(5) All rubbish and vegetation more than six inches high shall be kept
constantly removed from a space at least five feet in all directions
around such billboards or signboards.
J. Recreational facilities, video arcades, entertainment facilities including
bowling alleys, skating rinks, indoor theaters, taverns, nightclubs shall
all be conditional uses and shall be subject to site plan review and
approval from the appropriate board, provided that:
(1) The premises shall be so arranged as to permit a clear view of each
mechanical amusement device from the exterior at all times.
(2) No operator shall knowingly permit any person convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude to be associated with him in the
ownership or management of the business or to be in his employ or
to loiter on the premises.
(3) No operator shall offer or permit to be offered any prizes or awards,
whether in cash or otherwise, as an inducement to use mechanical
amusement devices except for trophies, plaques or items of a
similar nature or nominal value.
(4) No operator shall permit any minor under the age of 16 years,
unaccompanied by a parent or guardian, to remain on the premises
after 10:00 p.m.
(5) No operator shall permit any activity which is illegal or immoral or
which creates an undue amount of noise or a danger of a breach of
the peace to occur on the premises.
(6) No operator shall permit the operation of his premises between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 9:00 a.m.
(7) There shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises in capital
letters six inches in height a notice stating:
(a) The prohibited hours of operation.
(b) The fact that no minor under the age of 16 years,
unaccompanied by a parent or adult guardian, may remain on
the premises at 10:00 p.m.
(8) Erection and installation of coin-operated or non-coin-operated
mechanical amusement devices shall comply with all local, state
and federal fire and safety regulations, statutes and codes. In
addition, for each one square foot of floor space occupied, taken up
or covered by a machine (to be measured at its widest, deepest and
longest points, whether touching the surface of the floor or not), a
minimum of three square feet of open space in order to provide an
established ratio between occupied space and space for the
§ 350-25 WATER SPORTS § 350-25
339:1081
unobstructed flow of customers. If machines are located along an
aisleway, the minimum width of aisles between the machines shall
be eight feet. In computing open space as used in this section,
any and all interior sections of the structure reserved for an office,
restroom, operation, storage or other facilities shall be deducted,
and only the actual open unobstructed floor space shall be
considered open for purposes of this calculation.
(9) During the hours of operation, the premises must be supervised at
all times by at least one responsible adult individual, who shall be
an employee of the owner or operator of the premises and who
shall be responsible for the supervision, maintenance and
operation of the premises. At least one such individual shall be
visibly present on the premises during all hours of operation.
K. Houses of worship.
(1) Such use, when taken in conjunction with other existing land uses,
will not generate traffic that would result in an undue burden upon
the available access streets, resulting in a traffic movement on
adjacent streets.
(2) A statement setting forth full particulars of the operation of the use
and the total number of proposed worshippers shall be filed with
the Planning Board.
(3) It is ascertained by the Planning Board that the proposed use is a
bona fide religious organization operated solely for the spiritual
needs of the members of its organization and for humanitarian or
charitable purposes.
(4) It is ascertained by the Planning Board that the proposed use in the
proposed location shall in no way adversely affect the safe and
comfortable enjoyment of property rights in the area in which it is
located or otherwise adversely affect the value of adjacent
properties.
(5) The design of any structures erected in connection with such use is
in keeping with the general character of the area, and sufficient
landscaping, including trees, shrubs and lawns, is provided to serve
as buffer between said use and adjoining residential properties.
(6) The maximum membership limit of said organization shall be fixed
at the time of application and shall be commensurate to the amount
of land to be used and the exact nature of the use. No further
expansion of said membership shall be made unless supplemental
approval is granted by the Planning Board.
(7) The proposed use shall comply with all off-street parking and
landscaping requirements of the ordinance.186
§ 350-25 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-25
339:1082
L. Multifamily dwellings. The following requirements shall apply to
multifamily (three units or greater) apartment buildings when proposed
in the R-75 District:
(1) The project shall be developed in an area of not less than three
acres.
(2) The development shall not exceed a gross density of 3.3 units per
acre.
(3) The area of lot coverage by buildings, other than garages and
exclusive of public ways, shall not be greater than 25%.
(4) No structure shall contain in excess of 2 1/2 habitable stories above
curb level.
(5) No structure shall be built closer than 25 feet to any property line,
nor 50 feet from the center line of any public way.
(6) Each structure shall be so designed or so located in the project site
that the distance from at least one window of every room used for
human habitation shall be not less than 60 feet from the wall of any
structure on the site, and the distance from all other windows shall
be not less than 30 feet from the wall of any structure on the site,
such distance to be measured by a line perpendicular to the plane
of the surface of said window, except that this distance may be
reduced to not less than 30 feet for one exposure where a room is a
bathroom. No separate freestanding building shall be closer than
15 feet to any other building on the site.
(7) Adequate potable water and electricity must be available, and all
waterlines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and electrical
distribution facilities shall be installed in accordance with the
Borough's Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance.187
(8) A minimum of 15% of the site shall be allocated, developed and
improved for usable recreation space or spaces, such as tot lots,
tennis courts and other similar organized activity areas, as may be
recommended by the Board. No such space shall be less than 2,500
square feet in size or less than 75 feet wide.
(9) All areas of a garden apartment development not used for the
construction of buildings, roads, accessways, parking areas or
sidewalks shall be fully landscaped or grassed.
(10)No parking shall be permitted on any road or accessway within the
garden apartment development.
(11) No parking area may be placed closer to a building than 20 feet.
186. Editor's Note: See §§ 350-27, Off-street parking requirements, and 350-28, Landscaping
and buffering.
187. Editor's Note: See Ch. 295, Part 1, Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
§ 350-25 WATER SPORTS § 350-25
339:1083
§ 350-26. Signs.
(12) There shall be only one central television antenna in each building
for use of occupants therein.
(13)No front yard shall contain service facilities for the dwellings, such
as clothes drying, storage, or the like.
(14) The development shall exert no detrimental effect upon
surrounding areas due to poor design, inadequate parking, traffic
danger or destruction of neighborhood character.
A. Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section.188
B. General provisions.
(1) Reference to zoning districts. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, no outdoor sign or other form of exterior advertising shall
be erected or maintained unless the same complies with the
requirements of this subsection and those established for the
zoning district in which such sign is located.
(2) Drop awnings attached to buildings shall extend not more than five
feet out from a building, and the curtain of the awning shall be no
closer to the ground than seven feet.
(3) Illumination. Lighted signs shall comply with the National
Electrical Code and bear the Underwriters Laboratories seal. All
externally illuminated signs shall be lighted from the bottom, with
said source of illumination so placed and screened as to prevent
direct rays of light from being cast beyond the premises.
(4) Setback. No sign permitted shall be located closer than 15 feet to
any property line. No sign permitted in a nonresidential district
shall be located closer than 25 feet to any residential zone
boundary, and further, no sign shall be located in any required
buffer area.
(5) Nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs may be continued in
use but may not be enlarged, relocated, altered or rebuilt. Failure
to keep signs painted and in good repair for a period of six
consecutive calendar months shall constitute abandonment, and
such sign may not then be replaced or reused and must be removed
by the owner upon notice, in writing, from the Construction
Official.
(6) Maintenance. The issuance of a permit shall not relieve the owner
or lessee of the premises from the duty of maintaining any such
188. Editor's Note: See now § 350-7, Definitions and word usage, especially Subsection C.
§ 350-25 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-26
339:1084
structure. Every sign constructed or maintained shall be plainly
marked with the name of the person, firm or corporation erecting
or maintaining such sign. All signs shall be painted, properly
illuminated and maintained in good repair at all times. Any sign
that is or shall become dangerous or unsafe in any manner
whatsoever shall be repaired and made safe, in conformity with
this chapter, or shall be removed by the owner, lessor, agent or
occupant of the building, property or land upon which it is placed
or to which it is attached. A written notice shall be served upon
the owner, lessor, agent, or occupant of a building, property or land
upon which a dangerous or unsafe sign is located. Said notice shall
require necessary action to be taken within 10 days from the date
of the service of the notice upon such person or within such lesser
time as shall be deemed reasonable in the case where the danger
to public health, safety and general welfare is so imminent as to
require more immediate abatement.
(7) Height. No attached sign shall be higher at any point than the
roofline of the building to which said sign is attached. Except in the
residential zones, where height limitations are more restrictive,
freestanding signs shall be permitted up to a height of 18 feet or
the height of the principal building on the lot, whichever is less.
(8) Location outside of sight triangles. All signs shall be located to
allow a clear, unobstructed sight triangle at intersections in
accordance with § 350-8G(3)(k).
(9) Two-sided signs. Two-sided signs shall be measured for area by
using the surface area of one side of the sign only. Both sides may
be used.
(10) Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall not be lighted nor
displayed more than 60 days.
(11) Posting of signs on utility poles. No foreign signs, objects, bulletins,
notices or any other matter shall be placed or posted upon the
utility poles owned by the South River Utility Department unless
written approval and/or consent has been obtained from the
Borough Council for the placement of such items upon the South
River Utility Department utility poles. The appropriate officers of
the Borough of South River are hereby directed to enforce said
policy, if said objects, signs, bulletins and/or notices have been
placed or posted upon the utility poles without having first obtained
the written approval and/or consent of the Borough of South River
for the placement of such item there.
(12)No person shall paint or cause to be painted or permit anyone in his
employ to paint any kind of advertising matter or signs on any
sidewalk.
C. Exempt signs. The following signs are exempt from the provisions of
this section:
§ 350-26 WATER SPORTS § 350-26
339:1085
(1) Residential nameplate signs and professional nameplate signs
indicating the name and profession of the occupant of a dwelling,
provided that such signs do not exceed two square feet in area and
are not lighted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(2) Temporary signs inside windows of commercial establishments,
provided that these signs shall not unreasonably obstruct light and
visibility and shall be removed within seven days after completion
of the business being advertised.
(3) Temporary signs of nonprofit or charitable organizations, provided
that such signs do not exceed 32 square feet in area. Said signs
shall be removed within seven days after completion of said event
or function.
(4) Bulletin boards not over 24 square feet in area for public,
charitable or religious institutions when the same are located on
the premises of said institutions.
(5) On-site directional and parking signs, warning signs and signs
posting property as "private property," "no-trespassing" or similar
signs not to exceed two square feet in area.
(6) Temporary signs denoting the architect, engineer or contractor
when placed upon work under construction and not exceeding 16
square feet in area. Said signs shall be removed within seven days
of issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(7) Temporary signs indicating a political preference or a political
event, provided that such signs do not exceed 32 square feet in
area on any one side in nonresidential zones and six square feet in
area in residential zones. Such sign shall be removed within 14
days after the completion of said political function.
(8) Garage sale signs located on the premises only, not exceeding two
square feet and containing the date of sale. Such sign shall be
removed within 24 hours after the last day of sale.
(9) Real estate signs temporarily advertising the sale, rental or lease of
the premises or portion thereof, provided that such signs do not
exceed nine square feet in area. Such signs shall be removed within
seven days after the purpose of the sign is fulfilled.
(10) Subdivision signs for a subdivision of more than two contiguous
lots may have one sign along each road which the tract in question
abuts. Such signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and shall
be removed within seven days after the purpose of the sign is
fulfilled.
(11) Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, erected
by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of his
§ 350-26 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-26
339:1086
public duty, such as safety signs, memorial plaques, signs of
historical interest and the like.
D. Prohibited signs.
(1) No sign shall be erected, used or maintained which in any way
simulates official, directional or warning signs erected or
maintained by the state, the county or the Borough or by any public
utility or similar agency concerned with the protection of the public
health or safety.
(2) No sign other than official traffic control or street signs shall be
erected within or encroach upon the right-of-way of any street.
(3) No sign may obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway or
opening intended to provide light or ingress and egress to or from
any building or structure except as herein provided.
(4) Animated or flashing, flickering, or LED-style signs using
mechanical or electrical devices to revolve, flash or display
movement or the illusion of movement, except for clocks or
weather information, are prohibited.
(5) Signs projecting more than one foot from the wall of a building are
prohibited.
(6) No portion of any sign shall be located within or suspended over a
public right-of-way or pedestrian walkway.
E. District regulations. The following regulations shall apply in the specific
districts to all signs other than those specifically exempted.
(1) Residential districts.
(a) Signs on churches, schools and other institutions of a public or
quasi-public nature may be erected, provided that the size of
any freestanding sign shall not exceed 20 square feet, and not
more than one such sign shall be placed on each road upon
which such use fronts. Signs attached to the facade of the
structure shall be permitted, provided that the area of the sign
shall not exceed 5% of the building facade.
(b) All signs in residential districts shall have a setback of at least
15 feet from all lot lines. No sign shall be greater than 10 feet
in height. No sign on a residential lot shall be greater than six
square feet in area, and the total area of all signs on the lot
shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(c) Identifying signs for garden apartments shall not exceed 32
square feet. The sign shall be a permanent structure and shall
not be located less then 20 feet from the lot lines.
§ 350-26 WATER SPORTS § 350-26
339:1087
(d) Permanent signs in residential districts may be lighted if such
illumination is from an external source.
(2) Signs in the Office Professional, commercial, MSR and W-R
Districts.
(a) Any sign permitted in the residential districts shall be
permitted.
(b) Signs must be accessory to the main use, advertising only
businesses conducted on the premises where the sign is
located. Such sign shall state only the name of the occupant of
the premises and, in concise form, the nature of the business or
professional activity or activities there conducted.
(c) One sign may be attached to the main building advertising the
business or businesses conducted on the premises. Such sign
shall not project more than 12 inches from the building facade
to which it is attached; however, where a sign extends more
than three inches from the face of said wall, the bottom of said
sign shall not be closer than 10 feet from the ground level of
said sign. Signs attached to a wall of a building shall not
exceed 10% of the area of wall or 50 square feet, whichever is
less.
(d) Not more than one freestanding sign per business premises
shall be permitted on any one street frontage. Such sign may
be internally or externally illuminated and shall not exceed 32
square feet in area. No freestanding sign shall be located
closer than 15 feet to a lot line.
(e) All of the foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit painted
signs lettered on windows and doors.
(3) Industrial districts.
(a) Any sign permitted in residential and Office Professional
Districts shall be permitted.
(b) Signs must be accessory to the main use, advertising only
businesses conducted on the premises where the sign is
located.
(c) One sign may be attached to the main building advertising the
business or businesses conducted on the premises. Such sign
shall not project more than 12 inches from the building facade
to which it is attached. However, where a sign extends more
than three inches from the face of said wall, the bottom of said
sign shall not be closer than 10 feet from the ground level.
Signs attached to a wall of a building shall not exceed 20% of
the area of the wall or 100 square feet, whichever is less.
§ 350-26 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-26
339:1088
(d) Not more than one freestanding sign per business premises
shall be permitted on any one street frontage. Such sign may
be internally or externally illuminated and shall not exceed 100
square feet in area. No freestanding sign shall be located
closer than 10 feet to a lot line.
(e) Billboards and outdoor advertising signs may be permitted
only in the L-I District as a conditional use with the following
conditions:
[1] No billboard shall be permitted within 1,500 feet as
measured from the base of the billboard to any residential
zone boundary in the Borough of South River.
[2] The minimum distance between billboards along the same
side of the roadway shall be 1,000 feet, measured from the
base of the billboard along the right-of-way line.
[3] The minimum front yard setback measured at the base of
the billboard shall be 15 feet.
[4] The minimum side and rear yard setback measured at the
base of the billboard shall be 10 feet.
[5] No part of the billboard, including copy extensions, may
overhang any property line or public right-of-way. The
bottom of any billboard must not be less than 20 feet above
any parking area, driveway or sidewalk on private
property.
[6] The maximum billboard height, including copy extensions,
shall not exceed 65 feet as measured from the grade at the
base of the billboard.
[7] The maximum billboard sign area facing any one direction
shall be 672 square feet. Copy extensions beyond the basic
sign are permitted, provided that they do not exceed 10%
of the basic billboard sign area. Back-to-back signs are
permitted.
[8] Lighting of any billboard shall be designated to avoid glare
and spillover and to confine the illumination primarily to
the sign face.
[9] The sign copy and sign face may not imitate or resemble
any official traffic sign, signal or device or include or
utilize flashing, intermittent or moving lights or moving
parts.
(f) Shopping centers in the B-1, B-2, MSR and W-R Zones shall be
governed by these additional regulations:
§ 350-26 WATER SPORTS § 350-26
339:1089
§ 350-27. Off-street parking requirements.
[1] A shopping center may have one freestanding, lighted sign
identifying the shopping center, along each road which the
tract in question abuts.
[2] Each individual use may also have a facade sign but may
not have a freestanding sign. However, where uses share a
common walkway, each use served by the walkway may
have one additional principal sign identifying the use,
suspended in perpendicular fashion from the roof over the
walkway.
[3] There shall be a consistent design theme among signs in a
shopping center.
A. General parking requirements.
(1) General provisions. Off-street parking, unloading, and service
requirements of this section shall apply and govern all present and
future zoning districts for permitted uses. Except as provided in
this section, no application for a building permit shall be approved
unless there is included with the plan for such building,
improvement or use a site plan showing the required space
reserved for off-street parking, unloading and service purposes. An
occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the required off-street
parking, unloading and service facilities have been provided in
accordance with those shown on the approved plan, except that
due to weather conditions paving is not possible, a permit may be
issued, provided that a statement is attached to the permit
specifying a specific period in which improvements shall be made.
Such period of time is not to exceed 120 days. If improvements are
not completed within the prescribed period of time, the permit is
automatically revoked.
(a) General location. In all nonresidential zones, off-street parking
space may be located in the front, side and rear yards;
provided, however, that no parking area shall be located nearer
than five feet to any property line or 20 feet from any pavement
line.
(b) Connection to a public right-of-way. Each off-street parking,
loading or service area shall be connected to a public street
right-of-way by means of a driveway, and each parking space
shall connect to an aisle providing access thereto.
(c) Location of driveways. At the intersection of streets, no
driveway shall be located closer than 25 feet to the intersection
of the two curblines or within five feet of any property line.
§ 350-26 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-27
339:1090
(d) Separation from walkways and streets. All off-street parking,
loading and service areas shall be separated from walkways,
sidewalks, streets, or alleys by appropriate protective devices.
(e) Curbing. Curbing shall be constructed along all parking areas
and shall be in accordance with Borough standards.
(f) Means of accommodating the handicapped. Handicappedaccessible
or barrier-free parking shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of the Americans With
Disabilities Act.
(g) Parking provided on the same lot as main building. Off-street
parking areas and appropriate access thereto shall be provided
on the same lot as the main building to be served by such
parking.
(h) Residential driveway dimensions:
[1] One-car driveway: maximum width 10 feet.
[2] Two-car driveway: maximum width 20 feet.
(i) Joint parking facilities. The off-street parking and loading
requirements for two or more neighboring uses, of the same or
different types, may be satisfied by the allocation of the
required number of spaces for each use in a common parking
facility, provided that the number of off-street parking spaces is
not less than the sum of individual requirements, and provided
further that there be compliance with all other provisions of
this chapter.
(j) Buffer required when adjoining property is residential. Where
off-street parking, loading or service areas are proposed to be
located closer than 50 feet to a lot in any residential zoning
district or to any lot upon which there exists a dwelling as a
permitted use under these regulations, except where a county
highway coincides or is located between the lot line and the
residential district, and where such parking, loading or service
areas are not entirely screened visually from such lot by an
intervening building or structure, there shall be provided along
the lot line a continuous screen of either masonry, hedging or
similar materials or combinations thereof at least four feet, but
not more than six feet, in height, so that lights of vehicles
operating within such area will not shine upon neighboring
residential properties. No such screen shall extend nearer to a
street right-of-way line than the building line of the adjoining
residential lot.
(k) Use of off-street parking spaces for repair of vehicles. No offstreet
parking or loading area shall be used for the sale, repair,
dismantling, servicing or storage of any vehicle, equipment,
§ 350-27 WATER SPORTS § 350-27
339:1091
materials or supplies, except that no more than one vehicle
which is being repaired or reconstructed may be stored on a lot
in any residential zone, provided that said vehicle is registered
in the name of a legal occupant of the premises where it is
stored.
(l) Waiver of parking requirements. If any applicant can clearly
demonstrate to the appropriate board that, because of the
nature of his operation or use, the parking requirements of this
section are unnecessary or excessive, the board shall have the
power to waive the construction of up to 50% of the required
number of spaces, provided that an area sufficient in size to
accommodate the waived parking is reserved and delineated
on the site plan as potential parking.
B. Minimum off-street parking requirements for particular uses are as
follows:
Uses
Required Number of Parking
Spaces
Automotive service stations,
repair garages and body
shops
3 for each bay, plus 1 for each fueling
position, plus 1 for each employee
Banks and savings institutions 1 for each 100 square feet of floor
area exclusive of service areas or 10
for each teller window, whichever is
greater
Houses of worship At least 1 for each 4 seats or 1 for
each 100 inches of seating space when
benches rather than seats are used
Clubs, lodges, fraternal or
service organizations/
institutions
1 for every 200 square feet of floor
area
Grocery stores, food markets
and supermarkets
1 per 100 square feet of gross floor
area
Delicatessens and bakeries 1 per 250 square feet of gross floor
area, plus 1 per employee
Barbershops and beauty
shops
3 for each beautician and barber or 1
for each 150 square feet of gross floor
area and 1 per employee, whichever is
greater
Other retail commercial or
personal service uses not
specifically listed elsewhere in
this section
1 for each 150 square feet of floor
area where the floor area does not
exceed 2,000 square feet; 1 for each
175 square feet of floor area where
the floor area shall exceed 2,000
square feet
§ 350-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-27
339:1092
Uses
Required Number of Parking
Spaces
Places of public assembly or
theaters
1 for each 2 seats, except where a
specific amount of seating is
undetermined, then 1 shall be
required for each 75 square feet of
assemblage area
Educational and training
schools (nonprofit or
commercial)
1 for each employee, plus 1 for each
seat or 1 for each 150 square feet of
classroom and laboratories used for
instructional purposes, whichever is
greater
Funeral homes and
mortuaries
1 for each 4 seats in the chapel, plus 1
for each funeral vehicle, plus those
spaces associated with residential use
of the structure if such use exists
Home professional offices
(exclusive of a dentist or
physician)
A minimum of 4 in addition to those
required for the residential use, plus
additional facilities as required by the
Planning Board on a case-by-case
basis
Laboratory and research uses 1 for each 300 square feet of gross
floor area
Manufacturing uses 1 for each employee on the maximum
shift or 1 for each 500 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is greater
Medical or dental clinics or
offices, including home
professional offices
5 for each doctor or dentist plus 1 for
each 250 square feet of gross floor
area
Motels, hotels, motor lodges
and rooming houses
1 for each room and, in addition,
compliance with the requirements for
each particular additional use located
on the property, such as restaurants,
eating and drinking establishments,
retail stores, etc.
Nursing homes 1 for each 3 beds, plus 1 for each fulltime
employee
General offices 1 for every 200 square feet of floor
area
Restaurants, eating and
drinking establishments and
catering halls
1 for each 2.5 seats provided for
patron use or 1 space for each 75
square feet of retail space exclusive of
utility rooms, whichever is greater
§ 350-27 WATER SPORTS § 350-27
339:1093
Uses
Required Number of Parking
Spaces
Shopping centers with greater
that 5,000 square feet of
retail area
6 for each 1,000 square feet of floor
area or fraction thereof
Theaters 1 for each 3 seats
Wholesale establishments,
warehouses, furniture stores
1 for each 500 square feet of floor
area
C. Minimum required number of loading/unloading berths. One loading
berth shall be provided for any nonresidential use greater than 2,500
square feet. Spaces smaller than 2,500 square feet shall be exempt
from providing a loading space. Facilities greater than 10,000 square
feet shall provide one space per 10,000 square feet.
D. Minimum design standards.
(1) Size of required parking spaces.
(a) Standard parking spaces shall be nine feet in width and 18 feet
in length.
(b) Parallel curb parking spaces shall measure eight feet in width
and 22 feet in length.
(c) All angled off-street parking spaces shall measure not less than
19 feet in length by nine feet in width; width shall be measured
perpendicular to side stall markings.
(2) Required size of loading/unloading berths. A loading berth shall
have a minimum width of 12 feet and a minimum fifteen-foot
overhead clearance. The length of the loading berth shall be such
that the horizontal distance from the front of a dock for back-in
parking to the limiting boundary of the loading and unloading area
shall be not less than twice the overall length of the longest vehicle
expected to use the facility, but not less than 40 feet in any case.
(3) General location. In all nonresidential zones, no parking or loading
area shall be located nearer than five feet to any property line.
(4) Requirements for combined uses. The number of off-street parking
spaces or loading berths required by land or buildings used for two
or more purposes shall be the sum of the requirements for the
various individual uses.
(5) Parking provided on the same lot as main building. Off-street
parking areas and appropriate access thereto shall be provided on
the same lot as the main building to be served by such parking,
except that the off-street parking requirements for two or more
nonresidential neighboring uses may be satisfied by the allocation
of the required number of spaces for each use in a common parking
§ 350-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-27
339:1094
facility, provided that the number of off-street parking spaces is not
less than the sum of individual requirements, and provided that an
easement is provided for such common usage and access.
(6) Connection to a public right-of-way. Each off-street parking, loading
or service area shall be connected to a public street right-of-way by
means of a driveway, and each parking space shall connect to an
aisle providing access thereto.
(7) Size of nonresidential driveways. All interior driveways, exclusive
of curb-return radii, shall have the following widths: 12 feet for
one-way traffic, 18 feet for two-way traffic with no parking, and 24
feet for all others.
(8) Location of curb cuts. At street intersections, curb cuts shall be set
back not less than 20 feet from the intersection of the two
curblines, or such lines extended, and shall be set back not less
than five feet from the intersection of two property lines, or such
lines extended. Between the curb returns for any two driveways
serving the same property, there shall be at least 25 feet of curb,
except that this distance may be reduced to as little as five feet
where it is demonstrated that restricted frontage makes this
necessary in order to provide adequate driveways (not more than
two) for the property.
(9) Size of aisles. The width of all aisles providing direct access to
individual parking stalls shall be in accordance with the
requirements set forth below. Only one-way traffic shall be
permitted in aisles serving parking spaces placed at an angle other
than 90°.
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Aisle Width
(feet)
0 (parallel parking) 12
30 12
45 14
60 18
90 (perpendicular parking) 24
(10) Surfacing details. All off-street parking areas and loading/
unloading areas shall be surfaced with bituminous concrete
pavement in the following thicknesses:
(a) Individual residential driveways shall be paved with 1 1/2
inches FABC-1 over four inches of quarry process stone and
bearing on a suitable subgrade.
(b) Light traffic areas and car parking stalls shall be paved with
1 1/2 inches FABC-1 over three inches bituminous stabilized
§ 350-27 WATER SPORTS § 350-27
339:1095
base course bearing on a suitable compacted subgrade
approved by the Borough Engineer.
(c) Moderate traffic areas for single-unit trucks shall be paved
with two inches FABC-1 over four inches bituminous stabilized
base course bearing on a compaction subgrade approved by
the Borough Engineer.
(d) Heavy industrial traffic areas used by large truck units shall be
paved with two inches FABC-1 over five inches bituminous
stabilized base course bearing on a suitable compacted
subgrade approved by the Borough Engineer.
(11) Grading, drainage and maintenance. Off-street parking areas shall
be suitably graded and drained with a minimum grade of 0.5% and
a maximum grade of 6%. All such areas shall at all times be
maintained at the expense of the owners thereof.
(12) Curbing shall be constructed along all parking areas and shall be in
accordance with Borough standards.
(13) Means of accommodating the handicapped shall be required in all
off-street parking areas.
(14) Lighting for night use. Adequate lighting shall be provided if the
off-street parking facilities are used at night. Lighting should
provide a minimum of two footcandles at intersections and a total
average illumination of one footcandle throughout the parking
area. Such lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to
create a hazard or nuisance to adjoining properties or the traveling
public due to reflection or glare.
(15) Pavement markings and signs. Each off-street parking space shall
be clearly marked by painted lines, being a minimum of two inches
wide, and pavement directional arrows or signs shall be provided
wherever necessary.
(16) Buffer required when adjoining property is residential. Where offstreet
parking, loading or service areas are proposed to be located
closer than 50 feet to a lot in any residential zoning district or to
any lot upon which there exists a dwelling as a permitted use under
these regulations, except where a county highway coincides or is
located between the lot line and the residential district, and where
such parking, loading or service areas are not entirely screened
visually from such lot by an intervening building or structure, there
shall be provided along the lot line a minimum five-foot continuous
screen of either masonry wall, solid woven fencing, evergreen
hedging or similar materials or combinations thereof at least four
feet, but not more than six feet, in height, so that lights of vehicles
operating within such area will not shine upon neighboring
residential properties. No such screen shall extend nearer to a
§ 350-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-27
339:1096
street right-of-way line than the building line of the adjoining
residential lot.
(17) (Reserved)
(18) Parking of the following vehicles and equipment shall not be
permitted on any street or highway within the Borough of South
River:
(a) All construction equipment.
(b) Trucks and trailers, loaded or unloaded, buses and other
commercial vehicles with linear measurements greater than
any one of the following: 20 feet in length or seven feet in
width, excluding rearview mirrors, or eight feet in height,
excluding radio antenna, and all cabs or tractors capable of
pulling a trailer and commercial low trucks. The foregoing
shall not be applicable to vehicles in the course of making
deliveries or rendering necessary services requested by an
adjacent resident or vehicles utilized for maintenance or repair
of public utilities or other construction within the public rightof-
way. Trailers intended or used for dwelling space, offices,
storage or any other residential, commercial or industrial
purposes are also prohibited, except that nothing herein
contained is intended to prohibit the use of trailers for
transportation or as construction offices or for storage of
materials and supplies on a job site during the period of
construction.
(c) Trailers, boat trailers, camp cars, campers or equivalent
vehicles, whether self-propelled or otherwise, used or intended
for use as a conveyance upon public streets or highways and
whether or not designed, constructed or reconstructed or
added to by means of accessories, sheds or tents in such
manner as to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling or
sleeping place for one or more persons or having no foundation
other than wheels, jacks or skirtings so arranged as to be
integral with or portable by said trailer, boat trailer, camp car,
camper or equivalent vehicle, for a period in excess of 12
hours. Nothing contained herein is intended to prohibit the
parking of vehicles commonly known as pickup trucks, with or
without caps.
E. PEP Program. [Added 9-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-20]
(1) Establishment of Payment in Exchange for Parking (PEP) Program.
When the proposed construction, occupancy, enlargement or
rehabilitation of any new or existing building or use results in a
practical difficulty or undue hardship in complying with the offstreet
parking requirements of the Borough of South River, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, upon finding(s)
§ 350-27 WATER SPORTS § 350-27
339:1097
that such practical difficulty or undue hardship exists, may permit
the property owner or developer to contribute to a trust fund
administered by the Borough of South River in lieu of providing
on-site parking in accordance with Borough of South River Code
and requirements. This shall be known, and is hereby established
as, the Payment in Exchange for Parking (PEP) Program, and the
contribution fee shall be known as the "PEP contribution."
(2) Purpose and Council findings.
(a) The Borough desires to have sufficient and conveniently
located parking to serve all residents and businesses in the
vicinity of the Main Street corridor.
(b) The Borough desires that on-site parking requirements not be
an inhibitor to economic development or the revitalization of
existing properties and buildings.
(c) The Borough recognizes that many parcels in the vicinity of the
Main Street corridor are narrow or irregular in shape and
contain existing buildings or pavement, which cover most of
the lot area of the property.
(d) The Borough recognizes that some irregular parcels are
unlikely to be developed or redeveloped because of the space
requirements for on-site parking, including access aisles,
street connections, and driveways, and such properties could
become more practical for redevelopment if parking could be
relocated off of these sites and into one or more central
parking facilities.
(e) Development applications which do not have sufficient on-site
parking have historically relied on shared parking
arrangements, which have created scattered parking lots
throughout the area, or have relied on the purchase of a finite
number of parking permits from the municipal parking utility,
which will one day reach maximum capacity.
(f) The Borough has a number of municipal parking areas which
are in need of capital improvement, reorganization and
consideration for expansion.
(g) The capital costs of constructing new parking facilities,
including land acquisition, will represent a substantial
financial cost to the Borough in the future.
(h) In lieu of requiring the construction of parking spaces on site,
both developers and the Borough would benefit from a
mechanism wherein required parking spaces could, in
appropriate locations, be provided via a contribution to a
capital fund, and wherein such contributions would be
§ 350-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-27
339:1098
combined to pay the costs of constructing municipal parking
facilities under the coordination of the Borough of South River.
(i) Construction of additional off-street parking utilities by the
Borough of South River Parking Utility will serve new and
existing residents, businesses, and future developers seeking
parking variances.
(j) The parking industry standard of 400 square feet is the
minimum land area needed for each nine-foot by eighteen-foot
parking stall, including drive aisles and other common areas
associated with the development of a parking lot or parking
garage.
(3) Establishment of trust fund for deposit of PEP contribution. The
Borough of South River shall apply to the State of New Jersey,
Department of Community Affairs, Local Finance Board, pursuant
to administrative rule, for approval and establishment of a
dedicated and restricted trust fund for deposit of all PEP
contribution monies collected pursuant to this subsection. The fund
shall be known as the "Parking Improvement Plan Trust Fund." The
Chief Municipal Finance Officer of the Borough of South River shall
be the financial administrator of this fund. Administration of all
accounts and/or subaccounts shall abide by all applicable
budgetary rules and regulations of the Borough of South River and
the State of New Jersey.
(4) Eligible properties. The following properties will be eligible to
participate in the PEP Program:
(a) All properties located within the Main Street Rehabilitation
(MSR) Zoning and Waterfront Revitalization (WR) Districts.
(b) All properties located within any designated area in need of
redevelopment or designated area in need of rehabilitation
adopted by the Borough of South River pursuant to the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law.189
(c) Properties located within 500 feet of any portion of any of the
above-designated areas shall also be eligible for a payment in
exchange for parking (PEP).
(5) Application requirements.
(a) For purposes of application procedure, requests for payment in
exchange for parking (PEP) shall be considered an application
for development.
(b) A proposal for a payment in exchange for parking (PEP) shall
be considered an element of site plan application and shall be
189. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
§ 350-27 WATER SPORTS § 350-27
339:1099
reviewed by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
(c) When a payment in exchange for parking (PEP) is proposed as
an element of a site plan application for the development of a
building, use, structure, or property, there shall be no
additional development application fee required beyond the
land development fees found in Chapter 155, Fees, of the
Municipal Code of the Borough of South River.
(d) In the event that a developer or property owner proposes a
payment in exchange for parking (PEP) without an
accompanying application for development of a building or
property, a bulk variance application or waiver of site plan
application shall be required to be submitted to the Borough as
a mechanism for the matter to be heard by the South River
Planning Board. Application and escrow fees found in Chapter
155, Fees, of the Municipal Code of the Borough of South River
for waiver of site plan shall be required.
(6) Calculating number of parking spaces.
(a) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, when
reviewing a development application which proposes a PEP
contribution, shall 1) determine the total number of off-street
parking spaces required for the application to conform to the
parking ordinance requirements of the Borough, 2) shall
determine the total number of spaces provided on site, and 3)
shall then establish the number of outstanding parking spaces
required by the development application.
(b) Development applications shall receive full credit for all
compliant parking spaces provided on site.
(c) When on-site parking has been maximized at a particular
location, or when the layout of on-site parking would result in
an undue hardship or practical difficulty in developing a
property, a developer or property owner may provide those
outstanding parking spaces via a PEP contribution. The total
PEP contribution required shall be the whole number sum of all
outstanding parking spaces, multiplied by the fee amount
established hereinbelow in § 350-27E(8). Such findings and
details shall be memorialized by resolution.
(d) If, during the review of the parking elements of a development
application, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
finds, by way of resolution, that the physical conditions on the
property would result in a practical difficulty or undue
hardship in developing the property, or that the provision of
parking in a central, coordinated, municipal parking
facility(ies) represents a better zoning alternative than the
strict enforcement of on-site parking regulations, the Board
§ 350-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-27
339:1100
may permit all required parking spaces to be provided via
a PEP contribution. Such findings and details shall be
memorialized by resolution.
(e) Nothing contained herein shall relieve a developer from
compliance with the provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act,190 which may require on-site, barrier-free
parking, in accordance with adopted Borough, county, state
and federal regulations. Applicability of these provisions shall
be determined by the Borough of South River Construction
Official.
(7) Voluntary PEP contribution and credit recording.
(a) Nothing contained herein shall prohibit an eligible property
owner who is currently maintaining on-site or off-site parking
from converting that parking obligation into a PEP
contribution.
(b) When a developer or property owner has provided a PEP
contribution to the Borough of South River, each contribution
shall be credited against the parking requirements of the
property for which it has been submitted. If, via future
expansion, additional parking requirements are generated on a
site which had previously provided a PEP contribution,
additional PEP contributions shall be permitted and shall be
calculated based on the increased parking requirement. Once
a PEP contribution has been provided for a particular property,
said property shall be allocated perpetual credit for such
contributions and shall not be required to provide subsequent
PEP contributions for spaces already provided via a
contribution.
(c) Once a PEP contribution has been provided for a specific
property, the Borough of South River shall consider that
property as if parking were provided on site on that property.
(d) If the parking requirement of a development decreases after a
PEP contribution has been provided, said property shall be
allocated perpetual credit for the previous PEP contribution;
however, PEP contributions shall not be refundable or
reversible.
(e) The Borough of South River shall maintain an accounting of all
PEP contributions in the office of the Chief Municipal Finance
Officer, which shall be listed by property address, block and
lot.
(8) PEP contribution calculation.
190. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C.A. § 12101 et seq.
§ 350-27 WATER SPORTS § 350-27
339:1101
(a) The PEP contribution fee for each parking space for which the
applicant seeks to receive credit shall be calculated as follows:
[1] One through 10 parking spaces: $3,600 per space.
[2] Eleven or more parking spaces: $4,000 per space.
(9) Collection of PEP contribution. Payment by the applicant of the PEP
fee shall be imposed as follows:
(a) The PEP contribution shall be collected by the Borough of
South River Chief Municipal Finance Officer for deposit into
the Borough of South River's Parking Improvement Plan Trust
Fund.
(b) The full PEP contribution shall be provided to the Borough of
South River at the time the property owner, developer, or his/
her successor submits an application to the Borough of South
River for a certificate of occupancy for the development which
was the subject of the PEP contribution. If by Borough
procedure or ordinance, no certificate of occupancy is
necessary or customary for a particular instance, the full PEP
contribution shall be provided to the Borough of South River at
the time of building permit application.
(c) If, in the event the PEP contribution exceeds $50,000, the
Borough Council shall have the discretion to authorize, by
resolution, a payment plan for the collection of the PEP
contribution. The payment term shall not be in excess of five
years, payable in yearly installments, with legal interest. To
secure payment of a developer's obligation to the Parking
Improvement Plan Trust Fund, a municipal assessment for a
local improvement pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq. shall be
placed upon applicant's real estate, by the Municipal Tax
Assessor's office, in a manner proscribed by statute, which was
the subject of the PEP contribution. The provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:56-1 et seq. shall apply in the event of a default or late
payment.
(10) Expenditure of PEP contribution fees from Parking Improvement
Plan Trust Fund.
(a) The PEP contribution fees collected and deposited into the
Parking Improvement Plan Trust Fund shall be dedicated to
provide for the capital costs of buying, building and
maintaining parking infrastructure, including, but not limited
to: parking lot engineering and design; parking and feasibility
studies; land acquisition through purchase or condemnation;
construction or erection of off-street parking structures;
installation of parking equipment, lighting, drainage,
landscaping, parking utilities, or communications or security
equipment; closing costs resulting from property acquisition;
§ 350-27 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-27
339:1102
§ 350-28. Landscaping and buffering.
and similar capital project development costs directly
associated with the development of municipal parking
infrastructure. The expenditure of such funds for said purposes
shall be authorized by the Borough Administrator or his/her
designee at the time and in the manner determined by the
Borough Council to be in the best interests of the Borough
of South River in furtherance of the operation of an efficient
parking utility.
(b) Proposed expenditures from the Parking Improvement Plan
Trust Fund shall be designed to advance the goals of Master
Plan of the Borough of South River, and shall follow the referral
procedures provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31 for a capital
improvement review.
A. Purpose. The intention of these requirements is to enhance the
aesthetic and environmental appeal and character of buildings and
sites being developed within the municipality by ensuring the
compatibility of uses, thereby maintaining the health, safety and
general welfare of the community while preserving property values.
B. General regulations for all zones.
(1) Landscaped areas. All areas in a development not used for
construction of buildings, roads, accessways, parking or sidewalks
shall be fully landscaped in accordance with these regulations.
(2) Site considerations. Natural site features, such as existing trees,
streams, rock outcroppings, etc., shall be preserved wherever
possible. Whenever such natural features are absent or insufficient
or have been destroyed during the development of the site,
additional new plantings of a sufficient size as determined by the
municipal agency shall be established to provide environmental
protection to beautify the buildings and grounds and to provide
privacy, shade and the screening out of objectionable features
created on the site.
(3) Design. Landscape plans shall be required, except for existing
single- and two-family homes, where no plan is required. A
foundation planting on three sides of the dwelling shall be required
for all new construction.
(4) Labeling. All landscape plans shall have a schedule of the Latin and
common name, the quantity, the size, spacing and method of
planting of each plant material.
C. Buffer regulations for non-single-family zones.
(1) A minimum landscaped area of five feet in width shall be provided
along all property lines, unless otherwise restricted.
§ 350-27 WATER SPORTS § 350-28
339:1103
(2) All buffers and landscaped areas shall be protected from adjacent
parking areas by curbs or concrete, metal or wood bumpers at least
six inches in height and securely anchored into the ground.
(3) Retaining walls shall not be permitted within buffer areas unless
approved as part of the site plan approval.
(4) In all zones where non-single-family zone lines abut an R-75 or
R-100 single-family residential zone or use, a buffer shall be
established in the above non-single-family zone as follows:
Zoning District
Buffer Zone
(feet)
B-1 10
B-2 10
O-P 10
E-I 10
L-I 25
MSR 10
W-R 25
CEM 25
PR 25
(5) In all zones where a multifamily use abuts an existing commercial
zone or use, a twenty-five-foot buffer must be established and
maintained by the multifamily developer, unless such buffer is
already established along the common boundary of that zone or
use.
(6) In all zones where a commercial zone line abuts a multifamily
residential use, a twenty-five-foot buffer must be established and
maintained unless such buffer is already established and
maintained along the common boundary of that use.
(7) In all zones where a multifamily use abuts an office or industrial
zone or use, a fifteen-foot buffer shall be established and
maintained unless a greater buffer is already established and
maintained along the common boundary of that zone or use.
D. Landscape coverage. Minimum landscape coverage limits for
structures shall be as follows:
Zoning District
Minimum Landscape Coverage
Limit
R-100 and R-75 50%
O-P 20%
B 20%
§ 350-28 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-28
339:1104
Zoning District
Minimum Landscape Coverage
Limit
MSR 0%
W-R 30%
L-I 30%
CEM and PR 80%
E-I 50%
E. Street and parking lot shade trees.
(1) In addition to the trees required to be replaced by this chapter,
street trees shall be required for all streets and there shall be
planted one shade tree for every 50 feet of frontage on proposed
right-of-way. All street trees and on-site deciduous shade trees shall
not be less than 2 1/2 inches in diameter, measured one foot above
the root crown and planted in accordance with the Tree Removal
and Woodlands Management Ordinance.191
(2) The types and locations of shade trees to be planted shall be shown
in the plans submitted to the approving board in conjunction with
the application for development.
F. Parking lot landscaping.
(1) For parking lots with 10 spaces or more, parking lot landscaping
shall be provided and consist of:
(a) A solid row of minimum thirty-six-inch-high evergreen shrub
species surrounding all exposed sides of the parking lot.
(b) Shade trees, provided on fifty-foot centers around the
perimeter of the parking lot, planted in accordance with the
specifications above and the Tree Removal and Woodlands
Management Ordinance.
(c) Interior parking lot shade trees, planted within landscape
islands and providing one shade tree per 10 spaces.
G. Tree removal and woodlands management.
(1) All applications for development shall be subject to compliance
with the Tree Removal and Woodlands Management Ordinance.192
This chapter shall be in effect when an application has been made
for site plan or subdivision approval.
(2) The following tree replacement formula shall apply:
191. Editor's Note: See Ch. 319, Tree Removal and Woodlands Management.
192. Editor's Note: See Ch. 319, Tree Removal and Woodlands Management.
§ 350-28 WATER SPORTS § 350-28
339:1105
(a) For trees with a dbh equal to or greater than four inches and
less than 16 inches, replacement shall be based upon the total
number of caliper inches removed. Tree replacement for said
trees shall be one-inch caliper replacement for every one-inch
caliper removed.
(b) For trees with a dbh equal to or greater than 16 inches, the
removed tree shall be replaced based upon the following
schedule:
Size of Existing Tree
(inches) Number of Replacement Trees
18 or less 3
21 or less 4
24 or less 5
27 or less 6
29 or less 7
31 or less 8
33 or less 9
35 or less 10
37 or less 11
39 or less 12
(3) The species or type of replacement tree and the mix of replacement
tree types (deciduous, coniferous) shall be selected from the
species removed from the tract under consideration or from the
recommended tree species list. Deciduous trees shall be a
minimum of 2.5 inches caliper dbh at the time of planting.
Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet to eight feet high at
the time of planting. If Arborvitae species are proposed, minimum
tree height shall be 10 feet at the time of planting.
(4) On parcels to be developed where less than 10% of the site is
wooded area, in addition to any trees that must be replaced or
provided under this chapter, there shall be required the addition of
one tree for every 1,000 square feet of new or reconstructed
impervious coverage. Trees incorporated in a landscaping plan or
required for rights-of-way may not be credited toward this
requirement.
(5) The applicant may provide replacement trees on site or via a
voluntary contribution to the Borough of South River Tree
Replacement Fund at a rate of $450 per tree. [Amended
10-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-21]
H. Utility equipment, dumpster, collection bin screening and landscaping.
Ground level utilities, HVAC equipment, transformers, dumpster
§ 350-28 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-28
339:1106
§ 350-29. Wireless communications.
enclosures, donation bin enclosures and similar utilitarian compounds
shall be screened with a minimum six-foot-high solid fence and shall
be surrounded with a five-foot-deep landscape buffer area. Such area
shall be heavily planted with a mix of all-season screening plantings,
minimum four feet high.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide zoning conditions,
standards and limitations for the location, approval and operation of
wireless communications facilities within the Borough that recognize
the need to safeguard the public good, health, safety and welfare and
preserve the intent and the purposes of the South River Master Plan.
B. Definitions. See § 350-7 of this chapter.
C. Statement of findings.
(1) The Borough recognizes that the federal government, through the
FTA and FCC, regulates wireless communications and issues
licenses for wireless communications and that the FCC requires the
license holders to provide coverage within the areas so licensed.
(2) The FTA expressly preserves the zoning authority of the Borough to
regulate the placement, construction and modification of personal
wireless service facilities subject to the provisions noted at Section
332(c)(7)(B) of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996.193
(3) The FTA does not abrogate local zoning authority in favor of the
commercial desire to offer optimal service to all current and
potential customers, and the providers of the personal wireless
services must bear the burden of proving that any proposed service
facility is the least intrusive means of filling a significant gap in
wireless communications services in the area.
(4) It is in the public interest to minimize the number of wireless
communications towers within the Borough and to preserve the
nature and character of the local community.
(5) It is in the public interest that, to the extent possible, any new
facilities for wireless communications be placed on existing towers
without the construction of new towers.
(6) It is in the public interest that wireless communications carriers colocate
their facilities with each other.
(7) The overall objective of this section is to allow the provision of
wireless communications services while, at the same time, limiting
the number of antennas and supporting towers to the fewest
possible and only in those locations which do not negatively impact
193. Editor's Note: See 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B).
§ 350-28 WATER SPORTS § 350-29
339:1107
the prevailing character of the Borough and the quality of life
enjoyed by the residents.
D. Specific goals:
(1) To minimize the total number of wireless communications towers
within the Borough;
(2) To limit the impact of wireless communications antennas, towers
and related facilities upon the residences and the streetscapes
throughout the Borough;
(3) To safeguard the prevailing and visual landscapes, character and
development throughout the Borough, with particular emphasis on
maintaining the prevailing character of the residential zoning
districts and neighborhood areas;
(4) To discourage the construction of new towers;
(5) To encourage the location of antennas upon or within existing
structures, including existing towers, buildings and tanks;
(6) To encourage the co-location of antennas and facilities on the
fewest number of existing structures within the Borough;
(7) To encourage the communications carriers to configure their
facilities in a manner that minimizes and mitigates any adverse
impacts upon affected properties, streetscapes and viewsheds
through careful design, landscape screening and innovative
camouflaging techniques;
(8) To encourage the use of alternative technologies which do not
require the use of towers or require towers at relatively lesser
heights;
(9) To enhance the ability of wireless communications carriers who
adhere to the letter and intent of the provisions of this section to
provide such services quickly, effectively and efficiently;
(10) To comply with the mandate of the FTA, 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7),
which preserves local government authority to enforce zoning
requirements that protect public safety, public and private property
and community aesthetics; and
(11) To ensure that the location and positioning of towers protects the
public from damage or injury and protects the public health, safety
and welfare from adverse impacts related to the construction and
operation of towers and other wireless communications facilities.
E. Exemptions of amateur radio services. This section shall not apply to
any tower or the installation of any antenna that is under 70 feet high
and is owned and operated only by a federally licensed amateur radio
station operator or is used exclusively to receive transmissions or any
§ 350-29 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-29
339:1108
municipal, state, federal emergency service agency operating a
communications tower for the sole purpose of emergency
communications.
F. Location of wireless communications antennas. Wireless
communications antennas may be located only as set forth in the two
prioritized locations below, based on the policy recommendations of the
Wireless Communications Facilities Plan found in the South River
Master Plan:
(1) Priority locations. The first priority locations for wireless
communications antennas shall be on the existing towers and tanks
within the Borough. Antennas so located shall be permitted uses
and require site plan approval. No height variance shall be
required.
(2) Nonpriority locations. All proposed wireless communications
facilities not located at a priority location shall be considered as a
nonpriority location. Antennas so located are not a permitted use
and will require use variance approval as well as site plan approval.
G. Requirements for priority locations.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of the Land Development Ordinance
provisions of the Borough to the contrary, location and height of
antenna(s) on or within any of the existing structures within the
Borough and any accessory shelters enclosing the related
electronic equipment shall be considered permitted uses in the
subject zoning district and, therefore, shall require site plan
approval in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 of the Municipal
Land Use Law.
(2) The location and height of the antenna(s) on or within any of the
existing structures within the Borough and any accessory shelter(s)
enclosing the related electronic equipment shall require site plan
approval.
(3) The height of any proposed antenna extending above any existing
structure shall not exceed 10 feet, and all antennas shall be flushmounted,
panel or dish antennas totaling no more than 12 in
number per carrier.
(4) The total number of antennas per tower, inclusive of all carriers,
shall not exceed 60 antennas.
(5) Any and all facilities constructed shall maximize the use of
materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure
to which it may be affixed and to blend with, to the extent
practicable, the surrounding buildings and area.
§ 350-29 WATER SPORTS § 350-29
339:1109
H. Requirements for nonpriority locations. The following information shall
be submitted for site plan approval, and in order to be deemed
complete, the following documentation shall be included:
(1) An overall comprehensive plan in accordance with Subsection I
below;
(2) An indication of conformance with the conditions set forth in
Subsections J, K and L, below;
(3) Crane or balloon test. During the public hearing process, the
applicant shall schedule the time for a crane or balloon test in order
to provide the members of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, and the general public the
opportunity to view a crane or balloon at the location and height of
the proposed tower. Thereafter, a visual sight distance analysis
shall be prepared by the applicant and presented to the Board,
including photographic reproductions of the crane or balloon test
graphically simulating the appearance of the proposed tower with
at least three antenna arrays attached thereto and from at least 10
locations around and within one mile of any proposed tower where
the tower will be most visible.
I. Overall comprehensive plan required for nonpriority locations.
(1) In order to effectuate the purposes, objectives and goals of the
provisions of this section, any applicant for approval to erect a new
supporting tower for wireless communications antennas shall
provide threshold evidence that the proposed location of the tower
and antennas has been planned to result in the fewest number of
towers within the Borough at the time full service is provided by
the applicant.
(2) The applicant shall provide an overall comprehensive plan
indicating how it intends to provide full service within and around
the Borough and, to the greatest extent possible, shall indicate how
its plan specifically relates to and is coordinated with the needs of
all other providers of wireless communications services within and
around the Borough.
(3) The overall comprehensive plan shall indicate the following, and
this information shall be provided at the time of the initial
submission of the application:
(a) The mapped location and written description of all existing and
approved supporting towers for all providers of wireless
communications services within one mile of the subject site,
both within and outside the Borough;
(b) The mapped location and written description of all existing or
approved water towers or water standpipes and existing power
§ 350-29 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-29
339:1110
line stanchions within one mile of the subject site both within
and outside the Borough;
(c) Why proposed existing antennas could not be located on any of
the structures either within or outside the Borough;
(d) How the proposed location of the proposed antennas
specifically relates to the anticipated need for additional
antennas and supporting structures within and near the
Borough by the applicant and by other providers of wireless
communications services within the Borough, including the
number of additional wireless communications carriers that
would be permitted to co-locate on the proposed facilities;
(e) How the proposed location of the proposed antennas
specifically relates to the objective of co-locating the antennas
of many different providers of wireless communications
services on a single supporting structure; and
(f) How the proposed location of the proposed antennas
specifically relates to the overall objective of providing
adequate communications services within the Borough while,
at the same time, limiting the number of towers to the fewest
possible, including alternate technologies which do not require
the use of towers or require towers at a lesser height.
J. Area and setback requirements for nonpriority locations.
(1) The proposed tower, antennas and ancillary related electronic
equipment shall be located on a land area of no less than 15,000
square feet;
(2) The minimum required land area shall either be a separate
undeveloped lot or a leased portion of an existing undeveloped or
developed lot;
(3) The proposed tower, antennas and related equipment, any
approved building housing the electronic equipment and any
approved camouflaging of the tower shall be the only land uses
located on the subject land area, whether said land area is a
separate lot or a leased portion of a lot; and
(4) Except for any access driveway into the property, required
landscaping and any underground utility line reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
appropriate, no building, tower, other structure and/or disturbance
of land shall be permitted within 200 feet of any street line and
within 500 feet of any lot line of any adjacent property, provided
that, in any case, no building, tower, other structure and/or land
disturbance shall be located within 750 feet of any historic
residential or school site as duly designated by the Borough, the
State of New Jersey and/or by the federal government.
§ 350-29 WATER SPORTS § 350-29
339:1111
K. Design requirements for nonpriority locations.
(1) All towers shall be a monopole design.
(2) All towers shall be camouflaged (e.g., housed in a silo, bell tower,
etc., or made to look like a tree or non-oversized flagpole) as may
be appropriate in the context of the visibility of the tower from
different vantage points throughout the Borough and the existing
land uses and vegetation in the vicinity of the subject site.
(3) The height of any proposed new tower and the antennas attached
thereto shall not exceed 125 feet from the existing ground level
beneath the tower.
(4) No signage is permitted except for such information signs deemed
necessary for safety purposes by the Board.
(5) Minimal off-street parking shall be permitted as needed and as
specifically approved by the Board.
(6) No lighting is permitted on a tower, except lighting that is
specifically required by the FCC and FAA, and any such required
lighting shall be focused and shielded to the greatest extent
possible so as not to project towards adjacent and nearby
properties. The applicant shall provide the Board all applicable
FCC and FAA standards regarding lighting that apply to a proposed
tower, including, but not limited to, the lighting color, elevation of
lighting and whether the lighting is to be continuous or strobe
lighting.
(7) Individual shelters for the required electronic equipment related to
the wireless communications antenna(s) shall be permitted in
accordance with the following design criteria:
(a) Any proposed shelter enclosing required electronic equipment
shall not be more than 15 feet in height nor more than 250
square feet in area, and only one such shelter shall be
permitted for each provider of wireless communications
services located on the site;
(b) No electronic equipment shall interfere with any public safety
communications;
(c) All of the electronic equipment shall be automated so that the
need for on-site maintenance and the commensurate need for
vehicular trips to and from the site will be minimized;
(d) All of the required electronic equipment for all anticipated
communications carriers to be located on the subject site shall
be housed within a building of 1 1/2 stories, which building
shall not exceed 1,000 gross square feet in area and 15 feet in
height and which shall be designated with a single-ridge,
pitched roof with a residential or barnlike appearance; and
§ 350-29 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-29
339:1112
(e) The building may have one light at the entrance to the
building, provided that the light is attached to the building, is
focused downward and is switched so that the light is turned
on only when workers are at the building.
(8) Between the location of the tower and the building enclosing
related electronic equipment and any public street or residential
dwelling unit or residential zoning district within view of the tower
and the building, landscaping shall be provided in accordance with
the following:
(a) The landscaping shall consist of a combination of existing and/
or newly planted evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs of
sufficient density to screen the view of the tower, particularly
as its base, to the maximum extent reasonably possible and to
enhance the appearance of the building from the surrounding
residential properties and any public street;
(b) The landscaping plan shall be prepared by a licensed
landscape architect, who shall present testimony to the Board
regarding the adequacy of the plan to screen the tower from
view and to enhance the appearance of the building; and
(c) Any newly planted evergreen trees shall be at least eight feet
high at time of planting, and any newly planted deciduous trees
shall be a minimum caliper of three inches at the time of
planting.
L. Additional conditions for nonpriority locations:
(1) Documentation by a qualified expert that any proposed tower will
have sufficient structural integrity to support the proposed
antennas and the anticipated future co-located antennas and that
the structural standards developed for antennas by the Electronic
Industries Association (EIA) and/or the Telecommunications
Industry Association (TIA) have been met;
(2) Co-location. A statement by the applicant that the owner of the
tower and the operator of the wireless communications facilities,
and his or her successors in interest, shall negotiate on good faith
for the shared use of the proposed tower by other wireless
communications service providers in the future and shall
reasonably respond to requests for information regarding potential
co-location by other wireless communications carriers and shall
permit such co-location upon reasonable terms and conditions; and
(3) The applicant (and the landowner in the instance of a leased
property) shall provide a performance bond and/or other assurance
satisfactory to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, in a form approved by the Borough Attorney,
that will cause the antennas, any supporting tower, the electric
equipment cabinets, any building enclosing the electronic
§ 350-29 WATER SPORTS § 350-29
339:1113
§ 350-30. Solar or photovoltaic energy facilities.
equipment shelters, and all of the other related improvements to
the land to be removed, at no cost to the Borough, when the
antennas are no longer operative. Any wireless communications
facility not used for its intended and approved purpose for a period
of six months shall be considered no longer operative and shall be
removed by the responsible party within 60 days thereof.
M. Locational preferences for new towers. The following are not
conditions, standards and limitations for the location of wireless
communications towers but represent the preferences of the Borough:
(1) To the greatest extent possible, no tower shall be located to be
visible from any historic site as duly designated by the Borough, by
the State of New Jersey and/or by the federal government.
(2) To the greatest extent possible, no tower shall be located to be
visible from any public street.
(3) To the greatest extent possible, any tower shall be located behind
existing buildings and/or natural topographical elevations in order
to screen the tower from view from adjacent properties and from
any street right-of-way.
N. All other applicable requirements of this section not contrary to the
conditions, standards and limitations specified herein shall be met, but
waivers and/or variances of such other applicable requirements may be
granted by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide zoning conditions,
standards and limitations for the location, approval and operation of
solar panels, arrays, rooftop facilities and array facilities within the
Borough that recognize the need to safeguard the public good, health,
safety and welfare and preserve the intent and the purposes of the
South River Master Plan.
B. Definitions. See § 350-7 of this chapter.
C. Statement of findings.
(1) Solar energy production is a use which is universally considered of
value to the community because it fundamentally serves the public
good and promotes the general welfare.
(2) The Borough recognizes that production of renewable sources of
energy serves as an important part of the green economy.
(3) It is in the public interest that solar energy production facilities will
locate or co-locate their facilities on existing developed areas.
§ 350-29 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-30
339:1114
(4) It is in the public interest that, to the extent possible, any new
facilities for solar production be located on existing rooftops and
open areas.
(5) It is in the public interest to minimize the visual impact of solar
energy production facilities in the Borough and to preserve the
nature and character of the local community.
D. Panel regulations.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.11 of the Municipal Land Use Law,
such renewable energy facilities on a parcel or parcels of land
comprising 20 or more contiguous acres that are owned by the
same person or entity shall be a permitted principal use within
every industrial district in the Borough.
(2) All solar panels themselves shall be exempt from zoning limitations
on impervious cover; however, the base or foundation of a solar
panel may still be regulated as impervious cover.
(3) Solar or photovoltaic energy facilities or structures in all zoning
districts of the Borough shall be considered inherently beneficial
uses as defined by the Municipal Land Use Law.
(4) When installed at a location with an existing principal use, solar
facilities shall be considered as an accessory use and shall be a
permitted accessory use in all nonresidential zones of the Borough.
Such solar facilities shall be maintained as an accessory.
E. Site plan requirement.
(1) Solar panels proposed on single- and two-family residential
dwellings shall be exempt from site plan review; however, no such
solar panel shall be erected without the approval the Construction
Official.
(2) Proposed solar panels on all other rooftops, ground arrays,
carports or similar facilities shall require site plan approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 of the Municipal Land Use Law.
F. Bulk requirements. Notwithstanding any provision of the Land
Development Ordinance provisions of the Borough to the contrary, the
following location and height restrictions on shall apply to all panels
and equipment:
(1) The height of any roof-mounted panels shall be no greater than
three feet above the highest point of the roof.
(2) The height of any ground-mounted antenna shall not exceed five
feet in height to the top of the panel when the panels are positioned
at their maximum angle.
§ 350-30 WATER SPORTS § 350-30
339:1115
§ 350-31. Performance standards and procedures.
(3) The height of any carport structure shall not exceed 12 feet in
height to the top of the structure.
(4) No panel or equipment structure shall be located in any required
front, side or rear yard setback area.
G. Screening requirements. To the greatest extent possible, all solar
panels and ground-mounted equipment or utility cabinets shall be fully
screened from the public right-of-way with a combination of solid
fencing and landscaping.
H. Maintenance plan requirement. Upon application to the appropriate
board, the applicant shall submit a maintenance plan for any proposed
solar facility, indicating the details of regular maintenance, operation,
safety details and the lifespan of the facility.
A. Performance standards.
(1) General intent. As a condition to an approval or the continuance of
any building, process, installation, construction, production or
other use in any zone, the applicant shall supply evidence,
satisfactory to the Planning Board, that the proposed use will
conform fully with all the applicable performance standards stated
herein. As evidence of compliance, the Board may require
certification of tests by appropriate government agencies or by
recognized testing laboratories, with any cost thereof to be borne
by the applicant. The Planning Board may require the specified
types of equipment, machinery, or devices be installed and that
specific operating procedures or methods be followed, if
government agencies or testing laboratories determine that the use
requires such in order to assure compliance with applicable
performance standards.
(2) Standard requirements.
(a) Smoke control.
[1] No smoke shall be emitted from any chimney or other
source as visible gray greater than No. 1 on the
Ringlemann Smoke Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau
of Mines.
[2] Smoke of a shade not darker than No. 1 on the Ringlemann
Smoke Chart may be emitted for not more than four
minutes in any 30 minutes.
[3] These provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke, shall
also apply to visible smoke of a different color but with an
equivalent apparent opacity.
(b) Control of dust and dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors and gases.
§ 350-30 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-31
339:1116
[1] No emission shall be made which can cause any danger to
health, to animals or vegetation or to other forms of
property or which can cause excessive soiling at any point.
[2] No emission of liquid or solid particles from any chimney
or device shall exceed 0.3 grains per cubic foot of the
covering gas at any point.
[3] For measurement of the amount of particles in gases
resulting from combustion, standards correction shall be
applied to a stack temperature of five-hundred-percent
excess air.
(c) Control of odors. There shall be no emission of odorous matter
in such quantities as to be offensive. Any process which may
involve the creation or emission of any odors shall be provided
with a secondary safeguard system so that control will be
maintained. As a guide in determining offensive odors, Table II
(Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5, "Air Pollution Abatement
Manual," copyrighted 1951 by Manufacturing Chemists
Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., shall be used.
(d) Electricity. Electronic equipment shall be shielded so there is
no interference with any radio or television reception beyond
the operator's property as the result of the operation of such
equipment.
(e) Heat. Sources of heat, including but not limited to steam,
gases, vapors, products of combustion or chemical reaction,
shall not discharge onto or directly contact structures, plant
life or animal life on neighboring uses or impair the function or
operation of a neighboring use. No use, occupation, activity,
operation or device shall cause an increase in ambient
temperature as measured on the boundary between
neighboring uses.
(f) Radioactivity. No use, activity, operation or device concerned
with the utilization or storage of radioactive materials shall be
established, modified, constructed or used without having first
obtained valid permits and certificates from the Office of
Radiation Protection, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection. Proof of compliance with this
requirement shall be the submission of duplicate copies of said
permits and certificates.
(g) Glare. Any process producing intense glare or the flashing of
lights shall be performed within a completely enclosed building
in such manner that no discomforting glare shall be
disseminated beyond the building. Parking and loading and
unloading areas that are in use after dark shall be so situated
as to provide maximum shielding and concealment of lighting
from adjoining properties. Lighting of any sign, building
§ 350-31 WATER SPORTS § 350-31
339:1117
exterior, fountain or decorative fixture shall be placed in such
a manner that it is directed toward the object to be lighted and
does not disseminate glare. This section shall not be construed
to prohibit lighting required by police or other enforcement
agencies for the safety and protection of employees and of the
general public.
(h) Noise and vibration. All uses and activities shall comply with
noise and vibration standards promulgated by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection. Further, no use shall
cause an increased vibration beyond the limits of the property
on which located nor increase the ambient noise levels present
at boundaries of the site nor cause intermittent or point
audible noise or noise vibration to adversely impact adjoining
property.
[1] Standard. Ground-transmitted vibrations shall be
measured with a seismograph or complement of
instruments capable of recording vibration displacement
and frequency in the three mutually perpendicular
directions simultaneously.
[2] Vibration level restrictions. Vibration levels shall not
exceed a particular velocity of 0.05 inch per second in any
district. During the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. in
residential districts, vibration levels shall not exceed a
particle velocity of 0.02 inch per second. Measurements
shall be made at the points of maximum vibration intensity
and on or beyond adjacent lot lines or neighboring uses,
whichever is more restrictive.
(i) Airborne emissions. In all districts, no use, activity, operation
or device shall be established, modified, constructed or used
without having first obtained valid permits and certificates
from the Bureau of Air Pollution Control, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:27-8. Specifically, no use, activity, operation or device shall
be established, modified or constructed without a valid permit
to construct. No use, activity, operation or device shall be
operated, occupied or used without a valid certificate to
operate control apparatus or equipment. Proof of compliance
with this requirement shall be the submission of duplicate
copies of the permit to construct and certificate to operate.
(j) Noise emissions. The noise standards as adopted, amended
and enforced by Middlesex County, which are adopted herein
by reference and included in their entirety in this chapter.
(k) Industrial waste. No industrial waste shall be discharged into
the public sewage collection and disposal system unless the
appropriate officials of the Borough of South River shall have
§ 350-31 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-31
339:1118
first investigated the character and volume of such waste and
shall have certified that it will accept the discharge of the
waste material into the system. The applicant shall comply
with any requirements of the Borough, including the
pretreating of such wastes, control of pH and other methods
of improving such wastes prior to discharge, as a condition of
acceptance by the Borough.
(l) Outdoor storage and waste disposal.
[1] In all districts permitting an operation, use or any activity
involving the manufacture, utilization or storage of
flammable, combustible and/or explosive materials, such
operation shall be conducted in accordance with the
regulations promulgated by the Department of Labor and
Industry of New Jersey or the Fire Code of the National
Fire Protection Association, whichever is more restrictive.
[2] All flammable, explosive and/or combustible material shall
be stored in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code of the
State of New Jersey and UCC of the State of New Jersey,
whichever is more restricted.194
[3] All outdoor storage facilities for fuel, raw materials and
products stored outdoors, wherever permitted, shall be
enclosed by a conforming safety fence and visual screen
and shall conform to all yard requirements imposed upon
the principal building in the district and storage
regulations of the National Fire Protection Association.
[4] No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in
such form or manner that they may be transferred off the
lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall any substance
which can contaminate a stream or watercourse or
otherwise render such stream or watercourse undesirable
as a source of water supply or recreation, or which will
destroy aquatic life, be allowed to enter any stream or
watercourse.
[5] All material or wastes which may cause fumes or dust or
which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or
otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored
outdoors only in closed containers.
[6] No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be
stored in bulk above the ground; however, tanks or drums
of fuel directly connecting with energy devices, heating
devices, or appliances located on the same lot as tanks or
drums of fuel are excluded from this provision.
194. Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq. and 5:23-1.1 et seq., respectively.
§ 350-31 WATER SPORTS § 350-31
339:1119
(m) Fire protection.
[1] Provision shall be made for fire hydrants along streets,
together with standpipe and sprinkler connections on the
outside walls of nonresidential structures as approved by
the Municipal Fire Department and Municipal Engineer in
accordance with Insurance Services Office standards.
[2] Fire lanes 18 feet in width shall be required across the
front and rear of all new residential, institutional,
commercial and industrial uses with gross floor area in
excess of 10,000 square feet. Similar fire lanes are
recommended for design along the sides of all new
commercial and industrial uses. Parking shall be strictly
prohibited in all fire lane areas.
[3] Hydrant spacing shall not exceed 400 feet between any
hydrants and any building when measured along the street
right-of-way.
(n) Public utilities. All public services shall be connected to
approved public utilities systems where they exist.
[1] The developer shall arrange with the servicing utility for
all underground installation of the utility's distribution
supply lines and service connections in accordance with
the provisions of the applicable standard terms and
conditions incorporated as a part of its tariff as the same
are then on file with the State of New Jersey Board of
Public Utility Commissioners.
[2] The developer shall submit to the approving authority,
prior to the granting of final approval, a written
instrument from each serving utility which shall evidence
full compliance or intended full compliance with the
provisions of this section; provided, however, that lots
which abut existing streets where overhead electric or
telephone distribution supply lines and service
connections have heretofore been installed may be
supplied with electric and telephone service from those
overhead lines, but the service connections from the
utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground. In
the case of existing overhead utilities, should a road
widening or an extension of service or other such condition
occur as a result of the development and necessitate the
replacement, relocation or extension of such utilities, such
replacement, relocation or extension shall be
underground.
[3] Where natural foliage is not sufficient to provide yearround
screening or any utility apparatus appearing above
the surface of the ground, other than utility poles, the
§ 350-31 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-31
339:1120
§ 350-32. Plats, permits and certificates.
applicant shall provide sufficient live screening to conceal
such apparatus year round.
[4] Any installation under this section to be performed by a
servicing utility shall be exempt from the requirement of
performance guarantees but shall be subject to inspection
and certification by the Municipal Engineer, unless
specifically and documentably exempt by operation of
state law.
(o) Public utility installations.
[1] Cellular communications towers. No cellular
communications tower shall be located within a minimum
distance of 1,000 feet of a residential structure, public
park or school.
[2] Exemptions. Notwithstanding the above, communications
towers used for the following purposes are hereby
specifically exempted in the requirements of this chapter:
[a] Citizens band operation;
[b] Amateur operation;
[c] Public safety, including but not limited to
communications for the federal, state, county or
municipal government.
(p) Additional standards and references. In order to satisfy itself
that the applicant will comply fully with all of the applicable
performance standards, the Planning Board or its designated
representative may examine and refer to any or all of the
available standards, codes, regulations and requirements of
the federal, state, County or local government and recognized
professional organizations, associated and societies.
(q) Testing Procedures and Technical Assistance. In all cases
where the Planning Board shall deem that it is advisable to
determine whether or not the facility will be in conformance
with applicable performance standards, the Planning Board or
its designated representatives shall require adequate testing
procedures and shall utilize expert assistance at the expense of
the applicant.
A. Plats. No construction of any building, dwelling or structure shall be
commenced before an application for a building permit under this
chapter shall be made to the Construction Official. The application shall
be accompanied by a plat or plan of the site, in duplicate, drawn to
scale, showing the following: the dimensions of the lot to be built upon,
§ 350-31 WATER SPORTS § 350-32
339:1121
the location of and accurate dimension of the proposed building and all
existing structures of the site, the intended use of the proposed building
and all existing structures, the number of stories in the building, the
number of families the building is designed to accommodate,
dimensions of yards, the established building lines within the block,
proposed improvements to the lot, such as sidewalks and curbs,
existing road and lot elevation, proposed finished floor elevation of
the lowest floor, the proposed location of water and sewer services
and such other information as may be required by the office of the
Construction Official to provide for the enforcement of this chapter.
B. Permits.
(1) No land shall be occupied or used and no building shall be
hereafter erected, extended, moved or altered until a building
permit shall have been issued by the Construction Official.
Applications for building permits shall be made to the office of the
Construction Official.
(2) It shall constitute a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or
corporation, either owner or agent, to erect or move any building
for which a building permit is required under the provisions of this
section or to commence any excavation for any such building
without first having obtained said building permit. Any such
building permit issued upon a false statement of any fact which is
material to the issuance thereof shall be void. Whenever the fact of
such false statement shall be established to the satisfaction of said
Construction Official, he shall forthwith revoke the permit by
notice, in writing, to be delivered by him to the owner or, if such
holder not be found there, by posting said notice of revocation in
some conspicuous place upon said premises. Any person who shall
proceed thereafter with such work or use without having obtained
a new permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a violation thereof.
(3) Work shall be initiated and diligently pursued toward completion
within a year from the date of issuance of any permit for the
construction of any structure. Upon failure to do so, the permit
shall become void one year after date of issuance.
C. Certificates of occupancy.
(1) It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or permit the use of any
building or premises or part thereof hereafter created, located,
erected, changed, converted or enlarged wholly or partly until the
Construction Official has issued a certificate of occupancy for that
premises certifying that the structure or use complies with the
provisions of this chapter. A new certificate of occupancy shall be
required for any change in use.
(2) A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or part of a building,
shall be applied for at the same time as the application for a
§ 350-32 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-32
339:1122
§ 350-33. Fee schedule.
See Chapter 155, Fees, in this Code.
§ 350-34. Repealer; continuation of provisions; severability; filing
with state; when effective.
building permit and shall be issued immediately after the erection
or alteration of such building shall have been completed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and in conformity
with the provisions of all other applicable ordinances.
(3) In case the Construction Official shall decline to issue a certificate
of occupancy, his reasons for doing so shall be so stated on one
copy of the application, and that copy shall be returned to the
applicant.
(4) Upon written request from an owner or tenant, the Construction
Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy for any building or use
of land existing at the time of enactment of this chapter, certifying,
after inspection, the extent and kind of use made of the building
and whether such use conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
Such a certificate shall be issued without charge within six months
of the enactment of this chapter for any nonconforming use or
building.
(5) The Construction Official may issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy for use of land or building which is related to the
development of the property for its permitted use. Such permits
may be issued for a six-month period, and no more than one sixmonth
extension may be granted.
A. Repealer. All sections of any other ordinance of the Borough of South
River which contain provisions contrary to the provisions of this
chapter shall be and are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
B. Provisions continued. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-90b,
the substantive provisions of the existing Land Subdivision Ordinance,
Zoning Ordinance and Site Plan Review Ordinance of the Borough of
South River and the development regulations set forth therein are
hereby specifically readopted as interim ordinances and shall continue
in full force and effect until such time that the ordinance provisions
contained herein shall take effect according to law.
C. Severability. If any section, subsection or paragraph of this chapter
shall be declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative in whole
or in part by a court of competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection
or paragraph shall to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative remain in full force and effect, and no such determination
shall be deemed to invalidate the remaining sections, subsections or
§ 350-32 WATER SPORTS § 350-34
339:1123
§ 350-35. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
paragraphs of this chapter. To this end, the provisions of each section,
subsection, or paragraph of this chapter are hereby declared to be
severable.
D. Filing of development regulations.
(1) Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall
file a copy of this chapter, including the Official Zoning Map of the
Borough, all other relevant development regulations relating to
land use, and any amendments or revisions thereto, with the
County Planning Board as required by law.
(2) Copies of all development regulations and revisions or amendments
thereto shall be filed and maintained in the office of the Borough
Clerk.
E. Effective date. This chapter shall take effect 20 days subsequent to
passage and publication according to law.
A. Administration and enforcement.
(1) Enforcement official. The provisions of this chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the Zoning Officer/Construction
Official/Bureau of Code Enforcement (Official). That official may be
provided with the assistance of such other persons as the
governing body may direct.
(a) This chapter shall be enforced by the above officer, who is
empowered to cause any building, structure, place or premises
to be inspected and examined and to order the abatement or
correction of any condition or threat found to exist therein in
violation of any provisions of these regulations. The owner or
agent of a building or premises where a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall have been committed or shall
exist or the lessee or tenant of any part of the building or
premises in which such a violation shall have been committed
or shall exist or the agent, architect, building contractor or any
other person who shall commit, take part in or assist in any
such violation or shall maintain any building or premises in
which any violation of this chapter shall exist shall be guilty of
a violation of this chapter. Upon discovery of any violation, the
Compliance Officer of the Bureau of Code Enforcement is
empowered to issue a summons concerning such.
(b) The Official shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land,
buildings, or structure; removal of illegal buildings or
structures or of additions, alterations or structural changes
thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall
take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure
§ 350-34 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-35
339:1124
compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions,
pursuant to applicable enabling statues.
(c) The Official shall have the right to enter any building or
premises during the daytime in the course of his duties and
shall notify in writing the person responsible for such
violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering in
writing the remedying of any conditions found to exist in
violation of any provision of this chapter, or in the alternative,
order prosecution of any violation as provided for by this
chapter. The stated violation shall then be corrected by action
of the violating party, and a second inspection and approval
shall be accomplished within 30 days.
(d) Records. It shall be the duty of the Official to keep a record of
all applications for zoning permits, a record of all permits
issued, and a record of all building permits and certificates of
occupancy, together with a notation of all special conditions
involved and record all of complaints and actions taken. He
shall file and safely keep copies of all plans submitted, and the
same shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be
available for the use of the governing body and of other
officials of the Borough. The Official shall prepare a monthly
report for the governing body summarizing for the period since
his last previous report all zoning permits and certificates
issued by him. A copy of each such report shall be filed with the
Tax Assessor at the time it is filed with the governing body.
(e) In no case shall a permit be granted for construction, alteration
or use thereof that would be in violation of any provision in this
chapter.
B. Compliance.
(1) Minimum requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be held
to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Whenever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements
of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed
restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the
higher standards shall govern.
(2) Compliance required.
(a) All zoning requirements shall be met at the time of any
erection, enlargement, moving or change in use. If a new
structure is added to an existing complex of structures or if an
existing structure has an addition, the site plan provisions of
this chapter shall apply to the enlargement or new structure.
(b) All developments resulting from subdivisions and site plan
approvals shall comply with all design and performance
§ 350-35 WATER SPORTS § 350-35
339:1125
standards, including conditions imposed by the approving
authority, as shown on the approved plat and/or included in the
resolution adopted by the approving Board.
(c) Construction and use is to be as provided in applications,
plans, permits and certificates of zoning compliance. Building
permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis
of plans and applications approved by the Official authorize
only the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such
approval plans and applications and no other use, arrangement
or construction. Use, arrangement or construction at variance
with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
(d) When an applicant fails to comply or deviates significantly from
any approved plans filed with the approving board, the Official
shall have jurisdiction to review the aforementioned deviation.
If the Official is of the determination that the deviation is minor
and insignificant and provided the deviation does not change
the intent of the approved use, plans and resolution, the
Construction Official may approve the deviation. If the Official
is of the determination that the deviation will result in a
substantial change to the approved use, plans and resolution,
the applicant shall be required to submit plans showing all
proposed revisions to the original approving board. The Official
shall make and file a report with the approving board noting all
deviations and reasons for the Official's decision.
C. Permits and approvals.
(1) Conformity required. No zoning permit, building permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel of land or
structure which was sold on which improvements were undertaken
in violation of the provisions of this chapter or for the use of a lot
which was created by subdivision after the affective date of, and
not in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter. No site
improvements, such as but not limited to excavation or
construction, shall commence unless in conformity with this
chapter and in accordance with plat approvals and the issuance of
required permits.
(2) Zoning permit.
(a) For any development application, it shall be unlawful to use or
occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or
premises, or both, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in
its use or structure, until a certificate of zoning compliance
shall have been issued therefor by the Zoning Officer/Official,
stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms
§ 350-35 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-35
339:1126
to the requirements of this chapter and adequate planning
standards.
(b) The certificate of zoning compliance shall be issued by the
Official, stating that the proposed use of the building or land
conforms to the requirements of this chapter and adequate
planning standards.
(c) No certificates of zoning compliance shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer/Official unless the application for the said
certificate is in conformity with all the provisions of this
chapter or has been duly exempted by variance.
(d) A zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer/Official
before the issuance of either of a certificate of occupancy to a
new occupant of an existing building or portion of an existing
building or a building permit.
(e) Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a
violation of this chapter.
(3) Building permit.
(a) No permit for erection, construction, alteration, extension,
enlargement, movement, remodeling, conversion, destruction
or repair of any building shall be issued unless in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. No construction permits
shall be issued until all required approvals from all agencies
with jurisdiction have been secured and submitted to the
Borough.
(b) Expiration of building permit.
[1] If the work described in any building permit has not
commenced within 90 days from the date of issuance
thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the
Construction Official, and written notice thereof shall be
given to the persons affected.
[2] If the work described in any building permit has not been
substantially completed within two years of the date of
issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled
by the Official, and written notice thereof shall be given to
the persons affected, together with notice that further
work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed
unless and until a new building permit has been obtained.
[3] If any such permit has been authorized and not lifted from
the office of the Official and executed by the applicant
within a period of six months from the date of
authorization, then such authorization shall be null and
void, and no permit shall be issued thereunder.
§ 350-35 WATER SPORTS § 350-35
339:1127
(4) Certificate of occupancy.
(a) It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any building or
part thereof hereafter created, changed, converted, altered or
enlarged wholly or in part, until a certificate of occupancy shall
have been issued by the Official.
(b) No certificate shall be issued unless: the land, building and use
thereof comply with the provisions of this chapter; all matters
incorporated on the approved subdivision or site plan have
been completed and certified by the Borough Engineer; and
the Building and Health Codes are complied with.
(c) In cases involving the new use of an existing structure, no
certificate of occupancy for the new tenant be issued until a
zoning permit has been issued.
(d) On the serving of notice by the Official to the owner of any
violation of any of the provisions or requirements with respect
to any building or use thereof or of land, as specified in this
chapter, the certificate of occupancy for such use shall be
deemed to be in violation of this chapter and subject to the
penalties hereinafter prescribed. A new certificate shall be
required for any further use of such building or land.
(e) Each nonresidential change of use shall secure a mercantile
license pursuant to other applicable codes of the Borough.
D. Violations and penalties.
(1) Complaints of violation. Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs
or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis
thereof be filed with the Official. The Official shall record properly
such complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as
provided by this chapter.
(2) Violation.
(a) In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used, in violation of this chapter or of any
other ordinance or regulation made under authority conferred
hereby, the proper local authorities of the Borough or an
interested party, in addition to other remedies, may institute
any appropriate legal action or proceedings to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or
abate such violation, to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises.
§ 350-35 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-35
339:1128
§ 350-36. Zoning Officer position created; salary; duties.
(b) Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, each and
every day in which a violation of any provision of this chapter
exists shall constitute a separate violation.
(3) Penalties.
(a) Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with
any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
no less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500 or be imprisoned for
a period of not exceeding 30 days, or both, for each and every
violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case.
(b) If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any
person transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except
pursuant to an agreement expressly conditional on final
subdivision approval, as owner or agent, any land which forms
a part of a subdivision for which municipal approval is required
by ordinance pursuant to this chapter, such person shall be
subject to a penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot
disposition so made may be deemed a separate violation as per
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55.
(c) Any site clearance, site preparation or site construction
commenced prior to receipt of all required Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment approvals and/or prior to the
issuance of a certificate of resolution compliance from the
approving board secretary shall be subject to a penalty not to
exceed $1,000, for each and every violation, and in additional
shall pay all costs and expenses of the Borough involved in the
case. Each and every day in which a violation of this provision
exists shall constitute a separate violation.
(d) In addition to the foregoing, the Borough may institute and
maintain a civil action for injunctive relief and to set aside and
invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of
sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38. In any such action, the
transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien
upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was
made that remains in the possession of the developer or his
assigns or successors, to secure the return of any deposits
made or purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search fee,
survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such
action must be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of
said land; within six years, if unrecorded.
§ 350-35 WATER SPORTS § 350-36
339:1129
Part III, Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 354
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
A. There is hereby created the position of Zoning Officer within the
Borough of South River. Said Zoning Officer shall be paid an annual
salary as set forth in the salary ordinances of the Borough of South
River.
B. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be as follows:
(1) To interact with the public with respect to any zoning issues and/or
concerns raised by individuals from the public.
(2) To work closely with the land use boards of the Borough of South
River.
(3) Enforce all state, county and local zoning ordinances, rules and
regulations.
(4) Review and report to the appropriate land use boards with respect
to all land use applications which may come before the Borough of
South River.
(5) Review, approve and/or disapprove any and all building permit
applications based on zoning guidelines.
(6) Review and resolve any and all other zoning questions and
concerns within the Borough of South River.
(7) Inspect properties in the municipality for violations or, upon being
advised of the existence of a violation, issue orders to the owners of
the property to cease and desist from such violations and, where
such means shall fail, file a complaint in the Municipal Court for
said violation.
C. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Borough.
§ 350-36 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 350-36
354:1130
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
[Adopted 10-26-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-1]
§ 354-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the Board of Health ordinances of the Borough
of South River of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of
Health of the Borough of South River, as revised, codified and consolidated
into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting
of Chapters 354 through 394, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as Part III of the "Code of the Borough of South River," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 354-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1977 Code and all other
general and permanent Board of Health ordinances enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly
saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 354-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 354-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and/or Board of Health Secretary and shall remain there
for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on this
ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be
certified to by the Secretary of the Board of Health of the Borough of South
River or the Borough Clerk, as provided by law, and such certified copy shall
remain on file in the office of the Secretary of the Borough or the Borough
Clerk, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during
all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 354-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to Part III of the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board
of Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into Part III of such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough
of South River" shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 354-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 354-6
354:1131
§ 354-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of South River or the Secretary of the Board
of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause this Adopting Ordinance to be
published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the
office of the Clerk or Secretary for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting
Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 354-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk or Secretary to keep up-to-date the certified copy of
the book containing the Code required to be filed in his or her office for
the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as
supplements to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be
inserted therein.
§ 354-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
to be set by the governing body. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures
for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 354-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
South River to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of
this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5
nor more than $500.
§ 354-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of Part III of the Code and every part of each section is an
independent section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or
a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall
not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections
or parts thereof.
§ 354-6 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 354-11
354:1132
§ 354-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 354-12. Repealer.
All Board of Health ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and
permanent nature adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of
this ordinance which are inconsistent with the ordinances in the Code are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency as of the effective date
of this Adopting Ordinance.
§ 354-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 354-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 5-19-2005.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 354-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 354-13
354:1133
§ 354-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for Board of Health employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth below in
Schedule A195 attached hereto and made a part hereof are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
195. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 354-14B, the chapters, articles and sections which
were added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the
Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 354, General Provisions, Board of Health, Article
I. During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or
deletions will be replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted)
10-26-2006 by BOH Ord. No. 2006-1." Schedule A, which contains a complete description
of all changes, is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 354-13 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 354-14
354:1134
Chapter 363
FOOD AND BEVERAGE SERVICE
§ 354-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 354-14
354:1135

ARTICLE I
State Standards; Penalties
§ 363-1. Applicability of state standards.
The provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. pertaining to retail food
establishments and food and beverage vending machines shall be enforced
in the Borough of South River.
§ 363-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under this
chapter or N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable
to a penalty of not less than $2 nor more than $500 for each violation. Each
day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 363-3. Interstate commerce.
No provision of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 363-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 363-3
354:1137

ARTICLE II
Licensing of Retail and Wholesale Food Establishments
§ 363-4. License and compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a retail
food establishment as defined in and governed by N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.
first having procured a license from the local Board of Health so to do or
without complying with any or all of the provisions concerning operation
and maintenance of the same as contained in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.
§ 363-5. Fees.
The fees for licenses for retail and wholesale food establishments, such
licenses to be effective from January 1 until December 31 of the current
year, are hereby amended as follows:
§ 363-6. Suspension or revocation of license; hearing; renewal.
A. Retail and wholesale food establishments, permanent locale: $100.
B. Any retail food establishment engaged in the sale of packaged food
products: $50.
C. Temporary retail food establishment: $25 for a one-day permit and $10
additional for each consecutive day thereafter. [Amended 5-17-2007
by Ord. No. 2007-1]
D. Late fee of $20 after January 31 of the current year for retail and
wholesale food establishments.
E. Late fee of $10 after January 31 of current year for sale of packaged
food products.
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this article may be
suspended or revoked by the Board of Health of this municipality for the
violation by the licensee of any provision of this article or N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.1 et seq. or whenever it shall appear that the business, trade,
calling, profession or occupation of the person, firm or corporation to
whom such license was issued is conducted in a disorderly or improper
manner or in violation of any law of the United States, the State of New
Jersey or any ordinance of this municipality, or that the person or
persons conducting the retail food establishment is or are of an unfit
character to conduct the same, or that the purpose for which the license
has been issued is being abused to the detriment of the public or that
such license is being used for a purpose foreign to that for which the
license was issued.
B. A license issued under the terms and provisions of this article shall not
be revoked, canceled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have
been had by the Board of Health. Written notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior
§ 363-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 363-6
354:1139
to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief
statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, canceling
or suspending such license. Notice may be given either by personal
delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by depositing said
notice in the United States post office in a sealed envelope, postage
prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at the business address
appearing upon said license. At the hearing before the Board of Health,
the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may
thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by
the Board of Health, the complaint may be dismissed; or if the Board
of Health concludes that the charges have been sustained and
substantiated, it may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the
licensee.
C. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
another license to carry on the same business within the Borough
unless the application for such license shall be approved by the Board
of Health.
§ 363-6 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 363-6
354:1140
ARTICLE III
Licensing of Vending Machines
§ 363-7. Permits and licenses required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or agent, Clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person or for any body corporate,
or as an officer of any corporation or otherwise, to:
§ 363-8. Fees; expiration.
§ 363-9. Application for and issuance of permits and licenses.
Application for and issuance of the permits and licenses referred to in
§ 363-7 above shall be made in conformity with the provisions of N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.1 et seq. Such permits and licenses are not transferable.
A. Engage in the operation of one or more machines or devices offered for
public use which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by other
means, dispense unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or
package, without the necessity of replenishing the devices between
each vending operation, without first having applied for and procured a
permit from the Board of Health of this municipality so to do, or without
complying with any and all of the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.
B. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in this
municipality one or more machines or devices offered for public use
which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by other means,
dispense unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package,
without the necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending
operation, without first having applied for and procured a license for
each such machine or device from the Board of Health of this
municipality, or without complying with any and all of the provisions of
N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq.
A. The fees for permits and licenses as required by § 363-7 above, for the
purpose of raising revenue, for regulation and control, to be paid
annually to this municipality, are hereby fixed as follows:
(1) Permit fee: $25 per year.
(2) License fee: $25 per machine per year.
B. All permits and licenses issued under authority of this article shall
expire on the 31st day of December each year.
C. Permit and license fees shall be paid to the Board of Health.
§ 363-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 363-10
354:1141
§ 363-10. Suspension, revocation or reinstatement of permits and
licenses.
Permits and licenses issued under authority of this article may be
suspended, revoked or reinstated by the Board of Health of this municipality
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 8.24-1.1 et seq.
§ 363-10 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 363-10
354:1142
ARTICLE IV
Mobile Retail Food Establishments
[Added by the Mayor and Council 12-14-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-48]
§ 363-11. Definitions. [Amended 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A vehicle, normally a van,
truck, towed trailer or pushcart, from which food and beverages are sold.
MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT ONE-DAY EVENT PERMIT — A
twenty-four-hour permit provided to any mobile retail food establishment,
which services are made available to the public in a stationary location in
connection with an event held within the Borough.
MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT SALES EMPLOYEE — Any
employee who works in or with the mobile retail food establishment from
which services are available to the general public and who has direct
contact with the general public providing the aforementioned services.
OPERATOR — Any person who operates a mobile retail food establishment,
which services are made available to the general public.
OWNER — Any person, firm or corporation which owns a mobile retail food
establishment.
§ 363-12. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct, engage in
or carry on a mobile retail food establishment within the Borough of South
River, New Jersey, without having first complied with the provisions of this
article and obtained a license therefor as herein provided.
§ 363-13. Application for license; criminal background check.
[Amended 3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
A. Applications for all licenses and permits required by this article shall be
made in writing to the Borough Clerk. Each application shall contain
the following information in the suggested format and include the
application and permit fees required by § 363-25 hereinafter:
(1) The name under which business is to be conducted;
(2) The name of the applicant/owner. If a corporation, give the names
and addresses of the president and secretary. If a partnership, give
the names and addresses of all partners;
(3) The name and address of all operators and mobile food
establishment employees as defined in § 363-11;
(4) The present residence address and the address of the business, if
different;
§ 363-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 363-13
354:1143
(5) The location or route within the Borough where the business is to
be conducted;
(6) The addresses and municipalities in which the business has
operated for the past five years;
(7) The nature of the business;
(8) The residence of the applicant during the past five years (if an
individual);
(9) Whether the applicant has ever had a license to conduct the
business herein described denied or revoked, except as noted;
(10) The business telephone number of the applicant;
(11) The name and address of the attorney, if applicable;
(12) The name and the address of the registered agent if the applicant is
a corporation or limited-liability company; and
(13)New Jersey motor vehicle registration plate number of the vehicle
sought to be licensed.
(14) A certification that the applicant makes the statements above to
induce the Borough of South River to issue the license herein
applied for and agrees to comply with all laws and ordinances of
the Borough and State of new Jersey applicable to the subject
matter thereof.
B. All owners, operators and mobile retail food establishment sales
employees, as defined in § 363-11, shall obtain a criminal background
check at a private agency approved by the Borough and shall submit the
same. The results of the criminal background check shall be forwarded
by the approved agency directly to the Borough Clerk. The cost of the
criminal background check shall be borne by the applicant. All
operators shall also obtain a driver's abstract and shall submit the same
to the Borough if the mobile retail establishment is considered a motor
vehicle. All mobile retail food establishment one-day event permits, as
defined in § 363-11, are exempt from this requirement.
(1) For the duration of the license, the owner has a continuing duty to
provide the Borough with criminal background checks and driver's
abstracts for any new operators and mobile retail food sales
establishment employees engaged or hired after the issuance of
this license.
(2) The Borough must individually approve, pursuant to § 363-17, each
new operator and mobile retail food sales establishment employee
prior to the employee operating or selling within the Borough.
§ 363-13 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 363-14
354:1144
§ 363-14. Applicability.
Whenever in this article a license is required for the conduct of a business
or establishment or for doing business or engaging in any activity or
occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to these
requirements if, by himself/herself or through an agent, employee or
partner, he/she holds himself/herself forth as being engaged in the business
or occupation or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively, or
performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or occupation in
the Borough of South River, New Jersey.
§ 363-15. Preparation and filing of forms.
Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the Borough Clerk.
§ 363-16. Required signature.
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the Borough Clerk
in the absence of any provision to the contrary.
§ 363-17. Investigations and inspections. [Amended 3-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-6]
A. Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, the Borough
Clerk shall refer such application to the following departments for the
purpose of making an investigation or inspection, and said departments
shall make a report thereon, favorably or otherwise, within seven
business days after receiving the application or a copy thereof:
(1) Health Department (with respect to such licenses in connection
with the care and handling of food and the prevention of nuisances
and spread of disease and the requirements of this article).
(2) Zoning Officer (to determine solely whether the proposed business
conforms to the zone in which the property is located and the
requirements of this article). All mobile retail food establishment
one-day event permits, as defined in § 363-11, are exempt from this
requirement.
(3) Fire Prevention Department (to determine whether or not the
vehicle to be utilized under the requirements of this article
complies with the fire safety codes and the requirements of this
article).
B. Upon receipt of the criminal background check and driver's abstract,
the Borough Clerk shall forward the complete application, including the
background investigation, to be reviewed by the Chief of Police, who
shall cause such investigation of the criminal background and business
and moral character to be made as they deem necessary for the
protection of the public good. Said investigation, prior to the issuance
of a license hereunder, shall be mandatory. If the result of said
§ 363-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 363-17
354:1145
§ 363-18. Approval or denial of license; time limit.
Within five business days of receipt of the investigations or inspections as
set forth, the Borough Clerk shall issue a written approval or denial of the
license. An approval shall be issued if all investigations or inspections are
favorable. In the event that any investigation or inspection is not favorable,
the Borough Clerk shall issue a denial of such application and forward a
copy of the report or reports denying the license. The written denial and
accompanying reports shall be forwarded via certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the applicant within the five-business-day time period.
§ 363-19. Appeals upon denial of license.
§ 363-20. Disposition of fees; multiple establishments.
investigation is that the application is satisfactory, same shall be
approved by the Chief of Police. If, as a result of such investigation, the
applicant's background reveals a prior history involving crimes of moral
turpitude within the past 10 years or if the operator's driving records,
character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the
application may be recommended to be denied. If the application is
recommended to be denied, the reasons for said denial must be
indicated in writing by the Chief. All mobile retail food establishment
one-day event permits, as defined in § 363-11, are exempt from this
requirement.
C. In the event that any department's investigation or inspection indicates
some unfavorable comment, that department shall set forth specifically
the facts for such comment in writing.
A. In the event that a license is denied by the Borough Clerk, the applicant
shall have 10 days from receipt of the denial to file an appeal of said
decision directly with the Borough Council. The applicant must file the
appeal by forwarding a written notice to the Borough Clerk advising
that the applicant wishes to appeal the denial of the license and setting
forth the specific reasons for the appeal and attaching copies of any and
all reports produced by the investigations and inspections upon which
the denial was issued.
B. The Borough Council shall have 45 days from receipt of the appeal to
review the same and determine whether said applicant is entitled to
receive a license.
A. In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application
therefor is made to the Borough Clerk. Except as otherwise provided,
all license fees shall be deposited in the general Borough treasury upon
approval of an application by the Borough Clerk.
§ 363-17 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 363-20
354:1146
§ 363-21. Expiration of fees; termination of license. [Amended
3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
§ 363-22. Change of location; transfer of license. [Amended
3-23-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-6]
§ 363-23. Revocation of license; notice of hearing; right to counsel.
B. Where the licensee seeks a license for more than one mobile retail food
establishment, said licensee shall be required to pay that fee which
would be charged for each such establishment.
A. The fees for licenses for mobile retail food establishments shall be
effective for the period January 1 to December 31 of any given year or
for any part thereof and shall be renewed annually.
B. All licenses shall terminate when the licensee ceases to operate within
the Borough of South River.
C. All mobile retail food establishment one-day event permits, as defined
in § 363-11, shall terminate as provided in the permit; however, no oneday
permit shall be effective for more than 24 hours.
A. The location of any licensed mobile retail food establishment may be
changed, or a license may be transferred to another cart or vehicle,
provided that 10 days' notice thereof is given to the Borough Clerk,
approval is granted by the governing body, the requirements of all
Borough ordinances are complied with and payment of a license
transfer fee is made in accordance with this article and Chapter 155 of
this Code.
B. This provision shall not be applicable to mobile retail food
establishment one-day event permits, as defined in § 363-11. The
mobile retail food establishment licensed under a one-day event permit
shall remain stationary in the location provided for in the original
application while serving the public and shall not change its location to
serve the public in any other location within the Borough.
A. The Board of Health shall have the right to revoke any license whenever
the holder thereof or any of the licensee's agents or servants violate any
provision of this article, the laws of the State of New Jersey or any rules
or regulations promulgated as herein provided.
B. Prior to the revocation of a license, a notice of the contemplated action
of the Board of Health shall be served upon said licensee, setting forth
such charges as may be the reason for said proposed revocation and the
place, date and hour when the Board of Health will hear the matter. The
licensee may be represented by counsel at such hearing. Such notice
shall also contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for
revoking, canceling, or suspending such license. Notice may be given
either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by
§ 363-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 363-23
354:1147
§ 363-24. Posting of license and decal. [Amended 3-23-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-6]
§ 363-25. Fees.
The license fees to be paid, as hereinbefore provided, to the Borough of
South River for conducting or engaging in business, trades or activities
at the place designated in the license certificate shall be as provided in
Chapter 155, Fees.
§ 363-26. Relationship of fees to municipal costs.
The fees herein imposed for mobile retail food establishment licenses are
not revenue-producing in nature, but said fees are used primarily in an
attempt to cover the cost of inspections of such businesses and to ensure
compliance with the laws of the state and the ordinances of this
municipality. It is the legislative intent of this article to ensure that all
businesses licensed under this article and wheresoever located in this
Borough shall be inspected periodically to ensure compliance with the laws
as aforesaid. In certain instances, there are those businesses which warrant
police surveillance and inspection or attract unusual amounts of vehicular
traffic, necessitating additional regulation and enforcement. The fees herein
set forth provide a reasonable relationship to the costs of the regulation of
these businesses and the administration of this article.
depositing said notice in the United States Post Office in a sealed
envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at
the business address appearing upon said license.
C. At the hearing before the Board of Health, the person aggrieved shall
have the opportunity to answer and may thereafter be heard, and upon
due consideration and deliberation by the Board of Health, the
complaint may be dismissed. If the Board of Health concludes that the
charges have been sustained and substantiated, it may revoke, cancel
or suspend the license held by the licensee.
A. Licenses issued under this article shall be posted at the mobile
establishment in a conspicuous place. Said license shall remain posted
for the duration of the licensing year when issued and so long as the
licensed business is in operation.
B. A Borough-issued decal shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the
outside of the mobile retail establishment. If the establishment is a
motor vehicle, the decal shall be placed on the rear of the vehicle. Said
decal shall remain posted for the duration of the licensing year and so
long as the licensed business is in operation. This section is inapplicable
to all one-day event mobile retail food establishment permits as defined
in § 363-11.
§ 363-23 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 363-27
354:1148
§ 363-27. Enforcement.
The proper enforcement of the provisions of this article dealing with mobile
retail food establishment licenses shall be within the jurisdiction of the
Health Officer and the Police Department of the Borough, as well as within
the jurisdiction of those officers charged with inspections and regulations of
such establishments.
§ 363-28. Health, sanitation and public safety requirements.
A. Vendors dispensing food and beverages from mobile retail food
establishments shall comply with the inspection provisions and
standards of the ordinances of the Borough. The equipment used in
such vending of food and beverages shall be inspected upon application
for registration and shall receive a certificate of inspection upon
compliance with all applicable Borough ordinances, as well as state
statutes and codes. Each food and beverage vending unit shall be
inspected at least twice a year.
B. In addition to any other health and sanitation requirements, the
following regulations must be followed:
(1) All vending units shall be stored in an enclosed area when not in
use. The area shall have an impervious floor and shall have
adequate floor drains to allow for cleaning and washing of the
vending unit.
(2) The location of the food storage, food preparation and vehicle or
cart storage shall be subject to the applicable provisions of the New
Jersey State Sanitary Code, N.J.A.C. 8:21 through 8:24.
(3) All food product storage and preparation areas shall be separated
from any cart storage or non-food-preparation-related operations.
In the event that the mobile cart base is the same as an individual's
residence, the commercial food storage and preparation shall be
separate from the residential portion of the premises.
(4) Public safety requirements. No vending unit or vehicle shall park or
be located within a public right-of-way or sight triangle area
(except for a vehicle such as an ice cream truck that continually
travels in or through the Borough making only intermittent stops)
unless approval for such a location shall be granted by the Mayor
and Borough Council.
C. Safety requirements for vending units. All vending units, whether in
motor vehicles or not, in or from which food is prepared or sold shall
comply with the following requirements:
(1) All equipment installed in any part of the vending unit shall be
secured in order to prevent movement during transit and prevent
detachment in the event of a collision or overturn.
§ 363-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 363-28
354:1149
§ 363-29. Appeals upon action or nonaction of municipal officials.
In the event any person feels aggrieved by an action or nonaction of
a municipal official in the implementation of this article, said action or
nonaction may be appealed to the Business Administrator in writing within
10 days of said action or nonaction. Upon request of said appeal, the
Business Administrator shall, upon proper notice, conduct a hearing and
make such determination as he deems appropriate.
§ 363-30. Issuance of summons; towing of vending unit.
§ 363-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction in Municipal Court, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000
or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both. Vendors who do not
comply with the lawful directions of the Borough's law enforcement officers
may have their vending units confiscated upon order of a court of competent
jurisdiction. Every day that a violation of this article exists shall constitute
a separate offense. For the purposes of this article, the person committing
the violation, the vendor utilizing the unit where the violation occurred and
the owner of the vending unit, in the event any or all of them are not the
same, shall be individually, severally, jointly or in the alternative liable and
shall be construed as the person(s) violating the provisions of this article.
(2) All utensils shall be stored in order to prevent their being hurled
about in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn. A safety
knife holder shall be provided to avoid loose storage of knives.
(3) Compressors, auxiliary engines, generators, batteries, battery
chargers, gas-fueled water heaters and similar equipment shall be
installed so as to be accessible only from the outside of the units.
A. Where it is determined that a violation of this article exists, an
appropriate summons shall be given to the violator involved or shall be
affixed to the vending unit if he/she is not present. Upon the issuance of
the summons, all vending must cease until the alleged violation has
been adjudicated.
B. In the event of any violation, a vending unit may be subject to towing
pursuant to an order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 363-28 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 363-31
354:1150
Chapter 373
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 188.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 258.
Weed control — See Ch. 394.
§ 373-1. State standards adopted.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts,
and each of them, as a nuisance; prohibiting certain noises or sounds;
requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings; prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks; authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances; and prescribing penalties for
violations, is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950. A
copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the
inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 373-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953)."
§ 373-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)
have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of
Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there
for use and examination by the public.
§ 373-4. Violations and penalties.196
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $50 nor more
than $1,000 for each violation.
196. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 354, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 363-31 NUISANCES § 373-4
373:1151
Chapter 379
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer and water connections — See Ch. 275,
Art. I.
Water supply — See Ch. 390.
§ 379-1. State standards adopted.
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems and the
issuance of permits to locate, construct, empty or clean said systems, and
fixing penalties for the violation thereof, is hereby adopted pursuant to
Chapter 188, P.L. 1950 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 3-69.6). A copy of said code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof
herein.
§ 379-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1963)."
§ 379-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1963) have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this
Board of Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file
in said office for use and examination by the public.
§ 379-4. Permit requirements.
§ 379-5. Certificate of compliance required.
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage
disposal system until a permit for the location, construction or
alteration of said sewage disposal system shall have been issued by the
Board of Health.
B. The Board of Health may issue a permit if an application for the same is
accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in New Jersey, stating that the design of the
individual sewage disposal system as proposed is in compliance with
the code.
A. New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in operation, nor
shall new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or
occupied which must rely on such a system for sewage disposal, until
§ 373-4 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 379-5
379:1152
§ 379-6. Emptying septic tanks, cesspools.
§ 379-7. Denial; hearing.
In case any license, permit or certification required by this chapter is denied
by the Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board
within 15 days after request therefor is made by the applicant, and upon
such hearing the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous
determination and take action accordingly within 15 days after the date of
such hearing.
§ 379-8. Stop work orders.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system which is being erected or installed in violation of
the code to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy such violation, and, thereafter, the work continued without any
violation of any of the provisions of the code, and after issuance of any such
order and the service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with
or working in and about the erection or installation of any such disposal
system or any part thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except as
aforesaid.
§ 379-9. Fees. [Amended 12-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-2]
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
the Board of Health shall have issued a certificate indicating that said
disposal system has been located and constructed in compliance with
the terms of the permit issued and the requirements of the aforesaid
code. Issuance of such certificate shall not be required for alterations
to an existing individual sewage disposal system.
B. The Board of Health may issue such a certificate if an engineer licensed
to practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a statement
in writing, signed by him, to the Board of Health that the said disposal
system has been located and constructed in accordance with the terms
of the permit issued and the requirements of the aforesaid code.
A. Persons shall not engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic
tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the reception or storage
of human excrement who do not hold a license to engage in such
business issued by the Board of Health. Such licenses shall be valid for
a period of one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed by
the Board of Health. Said license may be revoked for failure of the
licensee to comply with the provisions of the code or any rule or
ordinance of the Board of Health.
B. The contents of any septic tank, cesspool, privy or other receptacle
containing human excrement shall not be removed until a permit for
such removal has been obtained from the Board of Health.
§ 379-5 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 379-9
379:1153
§ 379-10. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 385
SWIMMING POOLS, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 246. Private swimming pools — See Ch. 300.
§ 385-1. Enforcement of state standards.197
The provisions of N.J.A.C. 8:26-1 et seq., setting standards for public
recreational bathing, shall be enforced in the Borough of South River.
A. For the filing of an application and plans to locate and construct an
individual sewage disposal system: $200.
B. For the filing of an application and plans for permit to alter an existing
individual sewage disposal system: $200.
C. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct or alter on
individual sewage disposal system: $200.
D. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system or part
thereof caused by the failure of the permittee to locate and construct or
alter the same in accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the
terms of the aforesaid code, an inspection fee shall be charged: $100.
E. For the issuance of renewal of a license to a person or corporation
engaged in the business of cleaning or emptying receptacles for the
reception and storage of human excrement or other putrescible matter,
for each vehicle or conveyance: $100.
F. For the issuance of a permit to clean or empty any receptacle used for
the reception or storage of human excrement or other putrescible
matter: $50.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of or any order promulgated under this chapter or the
Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey (1963) made a
part hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than
$5 nor more than $500 for each violation.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
197. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 354, General Provisions,
Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 379-9 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 385-2
385:1154
§ 385-2. Permit required.
No person shall locate and construct, alter or operate a swimming pool until
a permit therefor shall have been issued by this Board of Health.
§ 385-3. Fees.
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
§ 385-4. Expiration date.
Permits issued for the operation of a swimming pool shall expire annually
on December 31 of each year, and application for renewal thereof shall be
submitted, together with the required fee, prior to December 31 of each
year.
§ 385-5. Denial or suspension; hearing.
§ 385-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 388
VITAL STATISTICS
§ 388-1. Board of Health responsibilities.
The South River Board of Health is hereby responsible for the filing, storage
and archiving of various records including marriage, civil union, domestic
A. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct a swimming pool:
$250.
B. For the issuance of a permit to alter a swimming pool: $150.
C. For the issuance or renewal of a permit to operate a swimming pool:
$100.)
A. Permits required by this chapter or code may be denied or suspended
by this Board of Health for failure to comply with this chapter.
B. This Board of Health shall afford the person whose permit to locate and
construct, alter or operate has been denied or suspended an
opportunity to be heard in public hearing, and, following this, to be
informed of the Board's decision .
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter or N.J.A.C. 8:26-1 et seq. made a part hereof
shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $5 nor
more than $500 for each violation.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 385-2 VITAL STATISTICS § 388-1
388:1155
partnership, birth and death records and for making corrections and
relaying said corrections to the State of New Jersey for said marriage, civil
union, domestic partnership, birth and death records.
§ 388-2. Title.
The within chapter shall be commonly known as "Vital Statistics."
§ 388-3. Fees.
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
Chapter 390
WATER SUPPLY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer and water connections — See Ch. 275,
Art. I.
Emergency water restrictions — See Ch. 333,
Art. II.
§ 390-1. State standards adopted.
A code regulating the location, construction, alteration, use and supervision
of individual and semipublic water supplies; requiring certain permits;
providing for the inspection of such supplies and the fixing of fees; and
prescribing penalties for violations, is hereby adopted pursuant to Chapter
188, P.L. 1950 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 3-69.6). A copy of said code is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 390-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Individual and Semipublic Water Supply Code of
New Jersey (1966)."
§ 390-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said Individual and Semipublic Water Supply Code of
New Jersey (1966) have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of
this Board of Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain
on file in said office for use and examination by the public.
§ 390-4. Permit required; application.
A. Certified copies of marriage, civil union, domestic partnership and birth
and death records (each): $15.
B. Corrections to state for marriage, civil union, domestic partnership,
birth and/or death (each): $25.
§ 388-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 390-4
390:1156
§ 390-5. Certificate of compliance required.
§ 390-6. Denial; hearing.
In case any permit or certification required by this chapter is denied by the
Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board within 15
days after request therefor is made by the applicant, and upon such hearing
the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous determination
and take action accordingly within 15 days after the date of such hearing.
§ 390-7. Stop-work order.
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any water
supply which is being erected or installed in violation of the code to be
stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary to remedy such
violation, and, thereafter, the work continued without any violation of any
of the provisions of the code, and after issuance of any such order and the
service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with or working in
and about the erection or installation of any such water supply or any part
thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except as aforesaid.
§ 390-8. Fees. [Amended 12-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-2]
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any water supply until a
permit for the location, construction or alteration of said water supply
shall have been issued by the Board of Health.
B. The Board of Health may issue a permit if an application for the same is
accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in New Jersey, stating that the design of the
water supply as proposed is in compliance with the code.
A. New water supplies shall not be placed in operation, nor shall new
dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied which
must rely on such a supply for water, until the Board of Health shall
have issued a certificate indicating that the said water supply has been
located and constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit
issued and the requirements of the aforesaid code. Issuance of such
certificate shall not be required for alterations to an existing water
supply.
B. The Board of Health may issue such a certificate if an engineer licensed
to practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a statement
in writing, signed by him, to the Board of Health that the said water
supply has been located and constructed in accordance with the terms
of the permit and the requirements of the aforesaid code.
A. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct a water supply: $150.
§ 390-4 WATER SUPPLY § 390-8
390:1157
§ 390-9. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 394
WEED CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 258. Nuisances — See Ch. 373.
§ 394-1. State standards adopted.
A code declaring ragweed and poison ivy to be a nuisance, providing for
removal or abatement thereof and recovery of expenses incurred by the
Board of Health in removing or abating such nuisance, and prescribing
penalties for violations is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws
of 1950. A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 394-2. Title.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the "Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 394-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953) have been
placed on file in the office of the Secretary of this local Board of Health upon
the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there for use and
examination by the public so long as said chapter is in effect.
B. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an existing
water supply: $150.
C. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct or alter a water
supply: $150.
D. For each reinspection of a water supply or part thereof caused by the
failure of the permittee to locate and construct or alter the same in
accordance with the terms of the aforesaid code, an inspection fee shall
be charged: $150.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of or any order promulgated under this chapter or Individual
and Semipublic Water Supply Code of New Jersey (1966) made a part
hereof shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $5
nor more than $500 for each violation.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 390-8 SOUTH RIVER CODE § 394-4
394:1158
§ 394-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or fails or neglects to comply with any provision
of this chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 nor
more than $500 for each violation.
Appendix
Chapter A401
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable Television Advisory Board — See Ch. 22,
Art. X.
§ A401-1. Purpose.
The Borough hereby grants to Comcast Cablevision of New Jersey, Inc.,
renewal of its nonexclusive municipal consent to place in, upon, across,
above, over and under highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements,
public ways and public places in the Borough poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors, fixtures,
apparatus and equipment as may be necessary for the construction,
operation and maintenance in the Borough of a cable television and
communications system.
§ A401-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) rules and regulations, 47 CFR 76.1 et
seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in
no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal and state
definitions:
MUNICIPALITY or BOROUGH — The Borough of South River, County of
Middlesex, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and is known as
"Comcast Cablevision of New Jersey, Inc."
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
§ 394-4 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A401-2
A401:1159
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
§ A401-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the Borough, concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company, were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully opened to the public, and the Borough, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the Borough hereby finds that
the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial
and other qualifications and that the company's operating and construction
arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A401-4. Duration of franchise.
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15
years from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval
issued by the Board. Said consent is subject to an automatic renewal of
term of 10 years in accordance with the procedures set forth in N.J.S.A.
48:5A-19 and N.J.A.C. 14:18-3.6 et seq.
B. The performance of Comcast Cablevision of New Jersey shall be
reviewable by the Borough by the end of the fifth, 10th, and 15th years
of the initial consent term and the fifth year of the automatic renewal.
During the periods beginning on the fourth, ninth, and 14th
anniversaries of the initial consent, and the fourth anniversary of the
automatic renewal, the company shall write to the Borough advising the
Borough of its rights to review the company's performance under this
ordinance, shall present such reasonable and pertinent information as
the Borough may request and shall appear upon request before a
meeting of the Borough Council to answer questions about the
operations of the company and its performance. Any review process
shall be completed within six months of the initiating letter sent by
Comcast. Upon expiration of the six-month period without a
determination that the municipal consent be revoked, the consent shall
continue in full force and effect.
C. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV for
appropriate action, including modification and/or termination of the
certificate of approval; provided, however, that the municipality shall
first have given the company written notice of all alleged instances of
noncompliance and an opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that
notification. Any such finding shall contain a full statement of the
§ A401-2 SOUTH RIVER CODE § A401-4
A401:1160
§ A401-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Borough 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the nature
of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television reception
service in the Borough or any higher amount permitted by the Act or
otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ A401-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the Borough and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ A401-7. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service along any public rightof-
way to any person's residence or business located in all areas of the
franchise territory as described herein, at tariffed rates for standard and
nonstandard installations.
§ A401-8. System upgrade.
§ A401-9. Construction requirements.
reasons for revocation and shall be forwarded to the State Office of
Cable Television for proceedings in accordance with state law.
A. The company has completed an upgrade of the cable television
distribution system serving the Borough. The upgraded system is a
hybrid fiber optic/coaxial cable system following a "fiber to the node"
architecture. The upgraded system provides improved picture quality,
enhanced signal reliability and increased channel capacity.
B. The upgrade has been completed following the company's engineering
guidelines for hybrid fiber/coaxial (HFC) plant design, which meets or
exceed all applicable state and federal regulations as well as voluntary
cable television industry standards and follows commonly accepted
industry practices.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
in the natural topography, the company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If, at any time during the period of this consent, the
municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the company, upon reasonable notice by the municipality,
§ A401-4 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A401-9
A401:1161
§ A401-10. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the community upon written request of
the Borough Administrator or Clerk.
shall remove, relay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
company.
C. Temporary removal of cables. The company shall, upon request of the
municipality at the company's expense, temporarily raise, lower, or
remove its lines in order to facilitate the moving of buildings or
machinery or in other like circumstances. Whenever the request is
made by, for, or on behalf of private parties, the cost will be borne by
those same parties.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other
public places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such
trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company.
Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the company's wires and cables.
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credits for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The company shall use every effort to meet or exceed voluntary
standards for telephone accessibility developed by the National Cable
Television Association (NCTA). Those standards shall include, but not
be limited to, the goal of answering 90% of incoming telephone calls
within 30 seconds.
D. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the complaint officer, or impair the right of the
complaint officer to take any action that is appropriate under law.
E. The company is permitted, but is not required, to charge a late fee
consistent with applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
§ A401-9 SOUTH RIVER CODE § A401-11
A401:1162
§ A401-11. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by Borough customers from the OCTV.
§ A401-12. Local office.
§ A401-13. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ A401-14. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ A401-15. Public, educational and governmental access.
A. During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the
company shall maintain a local business or agent within the Borough
limits for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions
and similar matters. Such local business office shall be open during
normal business hours. Telephone response for such purposes as
mentioned herein will be provided by the company's employees,
representatives or agents 24 hours per day.
B. The telephone number and address of the local office shall be listed in
applicable telephone directories and in correspondence from the
company to the customer. The telephone number for the local office
shall utilize an exchange that is a nontoll call for Borough residents.
A. The company shall continue to provide residents with system-wide
public access opportunities on a channel maintained by the company.
Qualified individuals and organizations may utilize public access for the
purpose of cablecasting noncommercial access programming in
conformance with the company's published public access rules.
B. The company shall continue to provide system-wide leased or
commercial access channel opportunities on a channel maintained by
the company for the purpose of cablecasting commercial access
programming in conformance with the company's guidelines and
applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
C. The company shall continue to provide three dedicated public,
educational, and government access channels as set forth in its
§ A401-11 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A401-15
A401:1163
§ A401-16. Commitments by company.
application. The company agrees to a total of two relocations of the
wiring and modulator for these channels on request of and at no cost
to the Borough, provided such relocation can be accomplished without
significant cost or technical difficulty.
D. The company shall take any steps that are necessary to ensure that the
signals originated on the access channels are carried without material
degradation, and with a signal whose quality is equal to that of the
other channels that the company transmits.
E. The company agrees to respond to public, educational and
governmental access channel problems within 48 hours of notification
of the problem, provided that there are no other simultaneous system
problems of a higher priority.
A. Company representatives shall appear at least once annually, upon
reasonable written request of the Borough, at a public hearing of the
governing body or before the Borough's Cable Television Advisory
Committee, to discuss matters pertaining to the provision of cable
service to residents of the Borough and other related issues as the
Borough and company may see fit.
B. The company shall make every effort to deploy new or advanced
technology and/or services in the Borough that are commercially
available, economically practicable, and technically feasible. That
technology shall include but not be limited to video-on-demand; digital
video compression; advanced or high-definition television, digital audio
services; digital television, high-speed Internet service via cable
modem; and interactive program guides.
C. Pole rental and electricity charges. The company agrees to a base 10%
increase in pole rental and electricity charges, and in rental of space on
the water tower, on January 1 of the first calendar year after issuance of
a certificate of approval (COA) by the Board of Public Utilities, with
subsequent annual increases on January first for the length of the
franchise tied to the consumer price index (with a cap of 5% in any one
year), as long as the Borough remains the owner of the poles and
provider of electricity within its borders.
D. The company will provide a one-time access support grant in the
amount of $60,000 no later than 12 months of the issuance of a
certificate of approval by the Board of Public Utilities. In addition, the
company will provide a camera and equipment package worth $25,000
or its equivalent no later than 12 months of the issuance of a certificate
of approval by the Board of Public Utilities.
E. The company will videotape up to two events per year upon request of
the Borough and provide the tape to the Borough for use on its access
§ A401-15 SOUTH RIVER CODE § A401-16
A401:1164
§ A401-17. Two-way services and interconnection.
In the event that the Borough determines that it is necessary and feasible
for it to contract with the company for the purpose of providing two-way
or interconnection services, the company shall be required to apply to the
BPU for approval to enter into and establish the terms and conditions of
such contract. All costs for such application to the BPU shall be borne by
the Borough.
§ A401-18. Emergency uses.
§ A401-19. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damage or other liability arising
channels. The Borough will give the company at least four weeks' notice
in advance of the events to be taped.
F. The company shall continue to provide a free standard installation and
free monthly basic service to one location in each municipal building,
including the Borough Hall; all libraries, fire, first aid, and police
departments; public works buildings; and municipally owned
community and senior centers. The company does hereby realize that
the South River Municipal Building is currently being renovated and
the company does hereby agree at no cost to the Borough to provide the
necessary free cable installations and transfer with respect to said
building.
G. The company shall continue to provide a free standard installation and
free monthly basic service to each public and private elementary,
middle, and secondary school in the Borough.
H. The company shall continue to provide one high-speed Internet
connection to a nonnetworked computer in a public or institutional area
to each library and school in the Borough that is able to receive cable
television service according to Subsections F and G.
I. Residents of the Borough wishing to subscribe to Internet service
offered through the company shall not be required to purchase cable TV
service in order to do so.
A. The company shall be required to fully comply with all applicable
federal and state statutes, rules and regulations governing the
implementation, operation and testing of the Emergency Alert System
(EAS).
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any
reason the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television
system as contemplated herein.
§ A401-16 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A401-19
A401:1165
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $3,000,000.
§ A401-20. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and
any amendment thereto submitted in writing to the municipality by the
company, except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms
and conditions of this municipal consent. The application and any other
relevant writings submitted by the company shall be considered a part of
this ordinance and made a part hereof by reference as long as it does not
conflict with state or federal law. All ordinances or parts of ordinances
or other agreements between the Borough and the company that are in
conflict with the provisions of this agreement are hereby declared invalid
and superseded.
§ A401-21. Competitive equity.
Should the Borough grant a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a
cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity on terms
materially less burdensome or more favorable that the terms contained
herein, the company may substitute such language that is more favorable
or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this ordinance subject
to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A401-22. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this ordinance.
§ A401-23. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval from the BPU.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ A401-19 SOUTH RIVER CODE § DL-1
DT:1166
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-16 6-19-2006 Interconnection with
self-generating electric
systems
Ch. 147, Art. III
2006-17 6-19-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
2006-18 Bond Defeated
2006-19 8-7-2006 Bond NCM
2006-20 8-28-2006 Bond NCM
2006-21 8-7-2006 Yard waste collection
and disposal
Ch. 287, Art. II
2006-22 8-7-2006 Illicit discharges to
storm sewers
Ch. 275, Art. III
2006-23 8-7-2006 Litter control Ch. 214, Art. II
2006-24 8-7-2006 Disposal of pet waste Ch. 108, Art. V
2006-25 8-7-2006 Illicit connections to
storm sewers
Ch. 275, Art. IV
2006-26 8-7-2006 Feeding of wildlife Ch. 108, Art. VI
2006-27 8-7-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2006-28 8-28-2006 Bond NCM
2006-29 8-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2006-30 9-18-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 72, Arts. IV -- IX
2006-31 9-18-2006 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. II
2006-32 9-18-2006 Fees Ch. 155
BOH Ord.
No. 2006-1
10-26-2006 Adoption of Part III of
the Code
Ch. 354, Art. I
2006-33 11-27-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
2006-34 12-18-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Pending DOT approval
2006-35 12-18-2006 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. III
2006-36 12-18-2006 Salaries NCM
2006-37 12-18-2006 Department of Finance
amendment (Deputy Tax
Collector; Team Leader)
Ch. 45
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1167
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-38 12-18-2006 Personnel regulations
amendment (pay-to-play
reform)
Ch. 68
2006-39 12-18-2006 Bond NCM
2006-40 12-18-2006 Bond NCM
2006-41 12-18-2006 Bond NCM
2006-42 12-18-2006 Bond NCM
2006-43 12-18-2006 Bond NCM
2006-44 12-28-2006 Salaries NCM
2006-45 12-28-2006 Feral cats Ch. 108, Art. VI
2006-46 12-28-2006 Municipal Ambulance
Division
Repealed by Ord. No.
2009-14
2007-1 2-12-2007 Salaries amendment NCM
2007-2 2-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2007-3 3-5-2007 Purchase of property NCM
2007-4 3-26-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2007-5 2-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2007-6 2-12-2007 Office of Administrator:
receptionist amendment
Ch. 13, Art. V
2007-7 5-7-2007 Land use procedures
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
2008-40
2007-8 5-7-2007 Salaries NCM
2007-9 5-7-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
2014-2
2007-10 5-7-2007 Alcoholic beverages:
purchases by persons
under legal age
amendment
Ch. 103, Art. II
BOH Ord.
No. 2007-1
5-17-2007 Food and beverage
service amendment
Ch. 363
2007-11 7-2-2007 Borough Appointed
Positions: open
application and public
directory
Ch. 23
2007-12 6-11-2007 Bond amendment NCM
§ DL-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § DL-1
DT:1168
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2007-13 6-11-2007 Bond amendment NCM
2007-14 7-2-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2007-15 7-23-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2007-16 7-23-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2007-17 8-13-2007 Stormwater
management
Ch. 295, Part 2
2007-18 8-13-2007 Salaries NCM
2007-19 9-10-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2007-20 Bond Not adopted
2007-21 8-27-2007 Bond NCM
2007-22 8-27-2007 Bond NCM
2007-23 8-27-2007 Bond NCM
2007-24 9-10-2007 Bond NCM
2007-25 Bond Not adopted
2007-26 Bond Died
2007-27 12-17-2007 Solid waste amendment Ch. 287
2007-28 11-26-2007 Circuses and carnivals
amendment
Ch. 124
2007-29 12-17-2007 Property maintenance
code amendment
Ch. 258, Art. VI
2007-30 12-17-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 155
BOH Ord.
No. 2007-2
12-20-2007 Individual sewage
disposal systems
amendment; vital
statistics; water supply
amendment
Chs. 379; 388; 390
2008-1 2-11-2008 Mayor amendment Ch. 59, Art. II
2008-2 2-11-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2008-3 2-11-2008 Advisory Council on
Aging
Ch. 22, Art. XV
2008-4 2-11-2008 Exceed budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
2008-5 2-11-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1169
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-6 2-11-2008 Advisory Committee on
Housing and Community
Development Block
Grant Programs
Ch. 22, Art. XVI
2008-7 2-25-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2008-8 2-25-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2008-9 2-25-2008 Recreation Advisory
Board amendment
Ch. 22, Art. XIII
2008-10 2-25-2008 Advisory Committee on
Persons With Special
Needs amendment
Ch. 22, Art. VI
2008-11 Not adopted
2008-12 3-10-2008 Street vacation NCM
2008-13 3-10-2008 Street vacation NCM
2008-14 3-10-2008 Bond NCM
2008-15 Not adopted
2008-16 3-24-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2008-17 3-24-2008 Outdoor cafes and
restaurants amendment
Superseded by Ord. No.
2017-12
2008-18 Not adopted
2008-19 4-28-2008 Bond NCM
2008-20 4-28-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2008-21 4-28-2008 Noise Repealed by Ord. No.
2008-34
2008-22 Not adopted
2008-23 5-12-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2008-24 5-12-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2008-25 Bond NCM
2008-26 Bond NCM
2008-27 Bond NCM
2008-28 Bond NCM
2008-29 8-11-2008 Defined contribution
retirement program
Ch. 63, Art. II
2008-30 8-11-2008 Unfit buildings Ch. 258, Art. II
§ DL-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § DL-1
DT:1170
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2008-31 Appropriation NCM
2008-32 Land acceptance NCM
2008-33 11-10-2008 Sound control Ch. 288
2008-34 11-10-2008 Noise repealer Ch. 220 (reference
only)
2008-35 11-10-2008 Flood Control
Commission amendment
Ch. 22, Art. XIV
2008-36 11-10-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2008-37 12-23-2008 Wreckers amendment Ch. 344
2008-38 12-23-2008 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2008-39 11-24-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
2008-40 11-24-2008 Land use procedures Ch. 50
2008-41 11-24-2008 Subdivision and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 295, Part 1
2008-42 12-8-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2008-43 Land lease bid NCM
2008-44 Land lease bid NCM
2008-45 12-23-2008 Board of Health
amendment
Ch. 22, Art. I
2008-46 Bond amendment NCM
2008-47 Bond amendment NCM
2008-48 Bond amendment NCM
2008-49 Bond amendment NCM
2008-50 Bond NCM
2008-51 Bond amendment NCM
2008-52 12-23-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2009-1 1-26-2009 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 253
2009-2 1-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2009-3 1-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2009-4 2-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1171
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-5 2-23-2009 Claims approval
amendment
Ch. 31
2009-6 4-13-2009 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2009-7 4-13-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2009-8 4-27-2009 Advisory Council on
Aging amendment
Ch. 22, Art. XV
2009-9 5-11-2009 Electricity demand
response regulation
Ch. 147, Art. IV
2009-10 Not adopted
2009-11 5-11-2009 Taxicabs and limousines
amendment; fees
amendment
Chs. 310; 155
2009-12 5-11-2009 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. III
2009-13 5-11-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2009-14 5-11-2009 Municipal Ambulance
Division repealer; fees
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. XV; Ch. 155
2009-15 Not adopted
2009-16 5-26-2009 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 99
2009-17 5-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2009-18 5-26-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2009-19 6-8-2009 Capital grant program NCM
2009-20 6-8-2009 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 103, Arts. II and III
2009-21 6-8-2009 Electric Utility identity
theft policy
Ch. 147, Art. V
2009-22 6-22-2009 Sale of property NCM
2009-23 6-22-2009 Council amendment Ch. 59, Art. III
2009-24 6-22-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2009-25 6-22-2009 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 253
2009-26 6-22-2009 Precious metals and
gems; fees amendment
Chs. 257; 155
§ DL-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § DL-1
DT:1172
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-27 7-13-2009 Unfit buildings
amendment
Ch. 258
2009-28 NCM
2009-29 NCM
2009-30 NCM
2009-31 NCM
2009-32 NCM
2009-33 NCM
2009-34 NCM
2009-35 8-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2009-36 9-14-2009 Circuses and carnivals
amendment
Ch. 124
2009-37 9-14-2009 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 255
2009-38 9-14-2009 Animals: feral cats
amendment
Ch. 108, Art. VII
2009-39 NCM
2009-40 NCM
2009-41 NCM
2009-42 10-26-2009 Outdoor cafes and
restaurants amendment
Superseded by Ord. No.
2017-12
2009-43 10-13-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2009-44 10-13-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2009-45 10-26-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2009-46 10-26-2009 Donation bins; fees
amendment
Chs. 136; 155
2009-47 11-9-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2009-48 12-14-2009 Food and beverage
service amendment
Ch. 363
2009-49 12-14-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2009-50 12-14-2009 Property Maintenance
Code amendment
Ch. 258, Art. VI
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1173
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-51 12-14-2009 Cat licensing and
control
Ch. 108, Art. VIII
2009-52 12-14-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2009-53 12-14-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2009-54 12-28-2009 Capital improvement NCM
2009-55 12-28-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2009-56 12-28-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2010-1 1-25-2010 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2010-2 2-22-2010 Municipal Alliance
Committee for
Prevention of
Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse
Ch. 22, Art. XVII
2010-3 3-8-2010 Appointive officers
amendment; Borough
Attorney repealer
Ch. 59, Art. IV and V
(footnote only)
2010-4 3-8-2010 Professional
appointments
Ch. 23, Art. II
2010-5 3-8-2010 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and regulation
amendment
Ch. 103, Art. I
2010-6 3-8-2010 Refunding bond NCM
2010-7 3-22-2010 Capital improvement NCM
2010-8 4-12-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2010-9 4-26-2010 Bond NCM
2010-10 4-26-2010 Bond NCM
2010-11 4-26-2010 Flood damage
prevention
Repealed by Ord. No.
2013-8
2010-12 5-10-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2010-13 5-10-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2010-14 5-10-2010 Recreational vehicles:
bicycles
Ch. 324, Art. II
§ DL-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § DL-1
DT:1174
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-15 5-24-2010 Tree removal and
woodlands management
amendment
Ch. 319
2010-16 5-24-2010 Circuses and carnivals
amendment
Ch. 124
2010-17 7-12-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
2010-18 7-12-2010 Bond NCM
2010-19 7-12-2010 Municipal Cultural Arts
and Heritage
Commission amendment
Ch. 22, Art. V
2010-20 7-12-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2010-21 7-12-2010 Roll-off dumpsters and
refuse containers:
refuse containers/
dumpsters
Ch. 263, Art. II
2010-22 7-12-2010 Water use amendment Ch. 333, Art. I
2010-23 7-12-2010 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 110
2010-24 Tabled
2010-25 7-12-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2010-26 8-23-2010 Municipal Cultural Arts
and Heritage
Commission amendment
Ch. 22, Art. V
2010-27 9-13-2010 Lease NCM
2010-28 10-12-2010 Special events Ch. 288A
2010-29 10-12-2010 Vacation of property NCM
2010-30 10-12-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2010-31 10-12-2010 Capital improvement NCM
2010-32 10-25-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2010-33 11-22-2010 Easement NCM
2010-34 12-27-2010 Administrator
amendment
Ch. 13, Art. I
2011-1 1-24-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2011-2 2-14-2011 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. III
2011-3 3-14-2011 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1175
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-4 3-14-2011 Acquisition of property NCM
2011-5 3-14-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2011-6 3-14-2011 Cleanliness of sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 289, Art. II
2011-7 3-28-2011 Personnel regulations
amendment
Ch. 68
2011-8 3-28-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2011-9 3-28-2011 Recreation Advisory
Board amendment
Ch. 22, Art. XIII
2011-10 NCM
2011-11 4-25-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2011-12 4-11-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
2011-13 4-11-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2011-14 3-28-2011 Electrical connections:
regulations and rates
amendment
Ch. 147
2011-15 4-11-2011 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 255
2011-16 6-27-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2011-17 4-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2011-18 6-13-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
2011-19 6-13-2011 Subdivision and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 295, Part 1
2011-20 6-13-2011 Bond NCM
2011-21 6-13-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2011-22 6-27-2011 Solid waste amendment Ch. 287
2011-23 6-27-2011 Salaries amendment NCM
2011-24 7-11-2011 Department of Public
Safety: Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. II
2011-25 7-11-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2011-26 8-8-2011 Bond NCM
2011-27 8-8-2011 Parking Authority
termination
NCM
2011-28 Bond Not adopted
§ DL-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § DL-1
DT:1176
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011-29 9-28-2011 Department of Public
Safety: Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. II
2011-30 9-28-2011 Lease agreement NCM
2011-31 10-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2011-32 10-11-2011 Bond NCM
2011-33 10-11-2011 Department of Finance
amendment
Ch. 45
2011-34 10-11-2011 Salaries amendment NCM
2011-35 10-11-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2011-36 10-24-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2011-37 10-24-2011 Department of Public
Safety: Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. II
2011-38 12-27-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
2011-39 12-27-2011 Subdivision and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 295, Part 1
2011-40 12-27-2011 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 50
2011-41 12-27-2011 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2012-1 1-23-2012 Advisory Committee on
Persons With Special
Needs amendment
Ch. 22, Art. VI
2012-2 Authorization of federal
housing and community
development grant
improvements and
equipment
NCM
2012-3 2-13-2012 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 310, Art. I
2012-4 2-13-2012 Department of
Administration: Borough
Clerk; Deputy Borough
Clerk amendment
Ch. 9, Art. II
2012-5 2-13-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2012-6 2-27-2012 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2012-7 3-26-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1177
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-8 4-23-2012 Municipal Alliance
Committee for
Prevention of
Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse amendment
Ch. 22, Art. XVII
2012-9 5-14-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2012-10 5-29-2012 Easement NCM
2012-11 6-11-2012 Advisory Committee for
Persons with Disabilities
amendment
Ch. 22, Art. VI
2012-12 6-11-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2012-13 6-11-2012 Authorization of
advertisement of bids to
purchase public lands
NCM
2012-14 7-9-2012 Street vacation NCM
2012-15 7-9-2012 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 310, Art. I
2012-16 7-9-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2012-17 7-23-2012 Bond NCM
2012-18 Not adopted
2012-19 Not adopted
2012-20 7-23-2012 Capital ordinance NCM
2012-21 7-23-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2012-22 8-27-2012 Bond NCM
2012-23 8-27-2012 Bond NCM
2012-24 9-10-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2012-25 9-10-2012 Electrical connections:
regulations and rates
amendment
Ch. 147, Art. I
2012-26 9-10-2012 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2012-27 10-22-2012 Bond NCM
2012-28 10-22-2012 Bond NCM
2012-29 11-5-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2012-30 12-17-2012 Bond NCM
2012-31 12-17-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
§ DL-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § DL-1
DT:1178
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-32 Fees amendment Not adopted
2013-1 2-11-2013 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2013-2 2-25-2013 Municipal Alliance
Committee for
Prevention of
Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse amendment
Ch. 22, Art. XVII
2013-3 3-11-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2013-4 3-11-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2013-5 3-11-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2013-6 Appropriation NCM
2013-7 3-25-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2013-8 3-25-2013 Flood damage
prevention
Ch. 174
2013-9 4-22-2013 Bond NCM
2013-10 6-10-2013 Acquisition of property NCM
2013-11 6-10-2013 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 253
2013-12 7-8-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2013-13 8-12-2013 Salaries NCM
2013-14 8-26-2013 Bond NCM
2013-15 9-23-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
2013-16 9-9-2013 Lease of property NCM
2013-17 10-15-2013 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 255
2013-18 10-28-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2013-19 10-28-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2013-20 Not adopted
2013-21 11-12-2013 Capital ordinance NCM
2013-22 11-12-2013 Bond NCM
2013-23 11-12-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2013-24 11-25-2013 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 310, Art. I
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1179
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013-25 11-25-2013 Electrical connections:
regulations and rates
amendment
Ch. 147, Art. I
2013-26 11-25-2013 Water use amendment Ch. 333, Art. I
2013-27 11-25-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2013-28 12-16-2013 Special events
amendment
Ch. 288A
2013-29 12-16-2013 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2014-1 1-27-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2014-2 1-27-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2014-3 1-27-2014 Department of Public
Safety: Police
Department amendment
Ch. 72, Art. III
2014-4 2-24-2014 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2014-5 3-10-2014 Appropriation NCM
2014-6 3-10-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2014-7 3-24-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2014-8 3-24-2014 Bond NCM
2014-9 4-28-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2014-10 5-12-2014 Precious metals and
gems amendment
Ch. 257
2014-11 5-27-2014 Taxicabs amendment;
limousines and livery
services amendment
Ch. 310, Art. I; Ch. 310,
Art. II
2014-12 Bond Pulled
2014-13 5-27-2014 Bond NCM
2014-14 5-27-2014 Bond NCM
2014-15 Pulled
2014-16 6-9-2014 Bond NCM
2014-17 6-9-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2014-18 6-23-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
§ DL-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § DL-1
DT:1180
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-19 7-14-2014 Department of Public
Safety: Police
Department amendment
Ch. 72, Art. III
2014-20 7-28-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2014-21 Withdrawn
2014-22 Withdrawn
2014-23 7-28-2014 Use of various streets by
Verizon NJ
NCM
2014-24 8-11-2014 Municipal Alliance
Committee for
Prevention of
Alcoholism and Drug
Abuse amendment
Ch. 22, Art. XVII
2014-25 8-11-2014 Bond NCM
2014-26 8-11-2014 Bond NCM
2014-27 8-11-2014 Street vacation NCM
2014-28 8-25-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
2014-29 9-8-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2014-30 9-22-2014 Bond NCM
2014-31 9-22-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2014-32 10-27-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2015-1 2-9-2015 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2015-2 2-9-2015 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and regulation
amendment
Ch. 103, Art. I
2015-3 3-9-2015 Bond NCM
2015-4 3-9-2015 Cable Television
Advisory Board
amendment
Ch. 22, Art. X
2015-5 3-23-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
2015-6 3-23-2015 Food and beverage
service amendment
Ch. 363
2015-7 3-23-2015 Extension of tax
abatement
NCM
2015-8 3-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1181
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-9 4-13-2015 Easement NCM
2015-10 4-27-2015 Bond NCM
2015-11 4-27-2015 Refunding bond NCM
2015-12 4-27-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2015-13 4-27-2015 Lease NCM
2015-14 5-26-2015 Easement NCM
2015-15 6-8-2015 Salaries NCM
2015-16 6-8-2015 Bond NCM
2015-17 6-22-2015 Lease amendment NCM
2015-18 8-10-2015 Bond NCM
2015-19 8-10-2015 Bond NCM
2015-20 9-14-2015 Environmental
Commission/Shade Tree
Advisory Board
Ch. 22, Art. IV
2015-21 9-28-2015 Personnel regulations
amendment
Ch. 68
2015-22 9-28-2015 Vacation of property NCM
2015-23 9-28-2015 Department of Public
Safety: Police
Department amendment
Ch. 72, Art. III
2015-24 9-28-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2015-25 11-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2015-26 11-23-2015 Housing and Community
Development Grant
funds
NCM
2015-27 12-14-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2016-1 1-25-2016 Municipal Cultural Arts
and Heritage
Commission amendment
Ch. 22, Art. V
2016-2 1-25-2016 Environmental
Commission/Shade Tree
Advisory Board
amendment
Ch. 22, Art. IV
2016-3 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2016-4 Conveyance of property NCM
2016-5 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § DL-1
DT:1182
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-6 Bond NCM
2016-7 Bond NCM
2016-8 Not adopted
2016-9 Not adopted
2016-10 8-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2016-11 Bond NCM
2016-12 Bond NCM
2016-13 Intermunicipal
agreement
NCM
2016-14 9-12-2016 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 310, Art. I
2016-15 Bond NCM
2016-16 Bond NCM
2016-17 10-11-2016 Adoption of Lower Main
Street Redevelopment
Plan
NCM
2016-18 Not adopted
2016-19 Emergency
appropriation
NCM
2016-20 10-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2016-21 11-28-2016 Department of Public
Safety: Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. II
2016-22 11-28-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2017-1 1-23-2017 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
2017-2 3-13-2017 Grant improvements NCM
2017-3 3-27-2017 Bond NCM
2017-4 3-27-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2017-5 3-27-2017 Green Team Ch. 22, Art. XVIII
2017-6 5-8-2017 Fire prevention Ch. 169
2017-7 Not adopted
2017-8 4-10-2017 Commemorative Bench
and Tree Program
Ch. 127
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1183
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-9 4-10-2017 Alarm systems
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 99; Ch. 155
2017-10 5-22-2017 Bond NCM
2017-11 6-12-2017 Alarm systems
amendment
Ch. 99
2017-12 7-17-2017 Outdoor cafes and
restaurants
Ch. 241
2017-13 7-17-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
2017-14 6-26-2017 Department of Public
Safety: Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 72, Art. II
2017-15 6-26-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2017-16 8-14-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2017-17 9-11-2017 Property maintenance:
vacant properties; fees
amendment
Ch. 258, Art. III; Ch.
155
2017-18 9-25-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2017-19 10-10-2017 Bond NCM
2017-20 Not adopted
2017-21 10-23-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
2017-22 10-23-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 155
2017-23 10-10-2017 Tree removal and
woodlands management
amendment
Ch. 319
2017-24 10-10-2017 Tree removal and
woodlands management
amendment
Ch. 319
2017-25 10-23-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2017-26 10-23-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2017-27 10-23-2017 Boards, commissions
and authorities: Task
Force for Safe Streets
Repealed by Ord. No.
2020-07
2017-28 11-13-2017 Fees amendment Ch. 155
§ DL-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § DL-1
DT:1184
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017-29 12-11-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 193
2017-30 12-11-2017 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 255
2017-31 Not adopted
2017-32 12-11-2017 Sidewalk construction
and maintenance
amendment
Ch. 289, Art. III
2017-33 12-11-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 350
2018-1 1-22-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 193
2018-2 Not Adopted
2018-3 Not Adopted
2018-4 Vetoed by Mayor
2018-5 2-12-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2018-6 2-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 193
2018-7 2-12-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 193
2018-8 2-26-2018 Housing and Community
Development Grant
Improvements and
Equipment
NCM
2018-9 2-26-2018 Boards, Commissions
and Authorities: Green
Team Amendment
Ch. 22, Art. XVIII
2018-10 3-12-2018 Property Maintenance:
Property Maintenance
Code Amendment
Ch. 258, Art. VI
2018-11 3-12-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 155
2018-12 3-12-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 155
2018-13 3-26-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 155
2018-14 3-26-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 193
2018-15 3-26-2018 Boards, Commissions
and Authorities: Parks
and Recreation Advisory
Board Amendment
Ch. 22, Art. XIII
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1185
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-16 5-14-2018 Bond NCM
2018-17 5-14-2018 Subdivision and Site
Plan Review
Amendment
Ch. 295, Part 1
2018-18 5-29-2018 Boards, Commissions
and Authorities: Human
Relations Commission
Amendment
Ch. 22, Art. VIII
2018-19 5-29-2018 Department of Public
Safety: Police
Department Amendment
Ch. 72, Art. III
2018-20 9-10-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 350
2018-21 6-25-2018 Granting Renewal of
Municipal Consent to
Comcast
See Ch. A401
2018-22 7-16-2018 Bond NCM
2018-23 7-16-2018 Bond NCM
2018-24 7-16-2018 Bond NCM
2018-25 9-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 193
2018-26 9-10-2018 Bond NCM
2018-27 9-24-2018 Alarm Systems
Amendment
Ch. 99
2018-28 12-10-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 193
2018-29 11-19-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 155
2018-30 12-10-2018 Conveyance of Property NCM
2018-31 Not adopted
2018-32 12-10-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 155
2019-01 2-11-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
2019-02 2-11-2019 Grant NCM
2019-03 2-15-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 155
2019-04 3-25-2019 Boards, Commissions
and Authorities:
Environmental
Commission/Shade Tree
Advisory Board
Amendment
Ch. 22, Art. IV
§ DL-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § DL-1
DT:1186
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2019-06 4-22-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 155
2019-07 5-13-2019 Boards, Commissions
and Authorities: Parks
and Recreation Advisory
Board Amendment
Ch. 22, Art. XIII
2019-08 Salaries NCM
2019-09 Bond NCM
2019-10 Bond NCM
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
2019-11 6-24-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 193 45
2019-12 8-19-2019 Sewers: Sewer
Use Charges and
Connections
Amendment
Ch. 275, Art. II 45
2019-13 8-19-2019 Water: Water Use
Amendment
Ch. 333, Art. I 45
2019-14 8-19-2019 Electrical
Connections:
Regulations and
Rates
Amendment
Ch. 147, Art. I 45
2019-15 8-19-2019 Bond NCM 46
2019-16 8-19-2019 Bond NCM 46
2019-17 9-9-2019 Administrator,
Office of:
Administrator
Amendment
Ch. 13, Art. I 46
2019-18 9-23-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 193 46
2019-19 9-23-2019 Streets and
Sidewalks:
Sidewalk
Construction and
Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 289, Art.
III
46
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1187
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
2019-20 10-21-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 193 46
2019-21 11-18-2019 Acquisition of
Property
NCM 47
2019-22 11-18-2019 Sale of Property NCM 47
2019-23 12-16-2019 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 193 47
2019-24 12-16-2019 Community
Garden Lease
Agreement
NCM 47
2020-01 1-27-2020 Dedication of
Right-of-Way
NCM 47
2020-02 1-27-2020 Public Safety,
Department of:
Rescue Squad
Repealer; Rescue
Squad Cadet
Program
Repealer
Ch. 72, Art.
XIII; Ch. 72,
Art. XIV
47
2020-03 2-10-2020 Exceed Budget;
Cap Bank
NCM 47
2020-04 2-24-2020 Fees Amendment;
Property
Maintenance:
Vacant Properties
Amendment
Ch. 155; Ch.
258
2020-05 2-24-2020 Authorization of
Grant
Improvements
NCM 47
2020-06 3-9-2020 Fees Amendment Ch. 155 47
§ DL-1 SOUTH RIVER CODE § DL-1
DT:1188
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp No.
2020-07 3-9-2020 Boards,
Commissions and
Authorities:
Parking Authority
Repealer;
Housing
Authority
Repealer;
Advisory
Committee on
Illegal Housing
Repealer; Grant
Search
Committee
Repealer; Task
Force for Safe
Streets Repealer
Ch. 22, Art. II;
Ch. 22, Art. III;
Ch. 22, Art.
VII; Ch. 22,
Art. XII; Ch.
22, Art. XIX
47
2020-08 3-9-2020 Solid Waste
Amendment
Ch. 287 47
2020-09 3-9-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 193 47
2020-10 4-6-2020 Vehicles and
Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 193 47
§ DL-1 DERIVATION TABLE § DL-1
DT:1189

ZONING
350 Attachment 1
Borough of South River
Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements

Zone
Minimum Lot Area
Lot Width
Lot Depth
Front Yard
Side Yard 
Side Yard
Rear Yard
Side Yard
Rear Yard
Yard
Total
Both
Side
Yards
Rear
Yards
Side
Yard
Rear
Yard
Maximum Lot Coverage
Stories Feet 
Maximum Impervious Coverage
Maximum Density
R-100 10,000 100 90 25 5 15 25 5 5 40% 2 1/2 35 50% 4
R-75 7,500 75 90 25 5 15 25 5 5 40% 2 1/2 35 50% 5.8
O-P 7,500 75 90 25 5 15 25 5 5 40% 2 1/2 35 80% N/A
B-1 5,000 50 90 25 5 10 20 5 5 40% 2 1/2 35 80% N/A
MSR 2,500 25 100 0 0 - 20 5 5 70% 3 40 95% N/A
PR 10,000 100 90 25 5 15 25 5 5 40% 2 1/2 35 50% N/A
W-R 20,000 100 100 25 10 25 20 5 5 40% 3 40 70% N/A
L-I 20,000 100 100 25 10 25 20 5 5 40% 3 40 70% N/A
CEM 2 acres 100 100 25 5 15 25 5 5 40% 2 1/2 35 50% N/A
E-I 2 acres 100 100 25 5 15 25 5 5 40% 2 1/2 35 50% N/A
NOTES:
1 Building height shall be the story or the feet requirement, whichever is the lesser.
2 Front setback in the MSR District shall be zero feet with a tolerance of five feet.
3 Side setback in the MSR District shall be 15 feet when abutting a residential district.
350 Attachment 1:1 03 - 01 - 2012
XXXXX CODE
350 Attachment 1:2 00 - 00 - 0000