Part I, Administrative Legislation
:1

Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as § 3-2 of the 1973 Code]
§ 1-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, and in the interpretation and application of all other
ordinances and resolutions heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context may
otherwise require, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CLERK or BOROUGH CLERK—The Municipal Clerk duly appointed pursuant to law
or ordinance.
COUNCIL — The local legislative body of the Borough, constituted and elected
pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit or group of organizational units of the
municipal government, established or designated by or pursuant to the Administrative
Code as a "department."
GOVERNING BODY — The Municipal Council as constituted by law.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Shrewsbury in the County of Monmouth, State of
New Jersey, and any corporate successor thereof.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted so long as
it remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON—Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or other entity
as well as an individual.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3

ARTICLE II
Construction of Terminology
[Adopted 8-12-1991 by Ord. No. 628 (§ 1-18 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 1-2. Rules of construction established.
The following rules of construction shall be applicable to all chapters of the Code of
the Borough of Shrewsbury heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context may
otherwise require:
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the
present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
C. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
D. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first
and including the last day, and, if the last day is a Sunday, a legal holiday or a day
on which the offices of the Borough are closed, that day shall be excluded.
F. "Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other mode of
communication using paper or similar material which is in general use, as well as
legible handwriting.
G. Whenever a specific time is used in this revision, it shall mean the prevailing and
established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in any year.
H. Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this revision shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or not such
designation is included in the citation.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:5

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code by Mayor and Council
[Adopted 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
§ 1-3. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Shrewsbury of a general
and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury,
as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 250, together with an Appendix,
are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of
Shrewsbury," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-4. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede the 1973 Code, adopted September 27,
1973 by Ord. No. 346, and all general and permanent ordinances enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication according to
law.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the Borough Clerk
and shall remain there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken on
this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by
the Clerk of the Borough of Shrewsbury by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough,
as provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when passed and
adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing body to make them a
part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so that reference to the
"Code of the Borough of Shrewsbury" shall be understood and intended to include such
additions and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to
the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and supplements
thereto.
§ 1-8. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Shrewsbury, pursuant to law, shall cause this Adopting
Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:7
Clerk for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment
and publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the
Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and
legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by the Clerk to keep
up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code required to be filed in his or
her office for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted
subsequent to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from the Clerk, or
an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to be set by the Mayor and
Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of
the Code.
§ 1-11. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions,
any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of Shrewsbury to be misrepresented
thereby. Anyone violating this section or any part of this ordinance shall be subject,
upon conviction, to one or more of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding
90 days, in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent section or part
of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void
or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality
of any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of any section
or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-14. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted and
in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which are inconsistent with any
provision in the Code are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency as of the
effective date of this Adopting Ordinance.
§ 1-8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 1-15
1:8
§ 1-15. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-14 of this
ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-16. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to May 1, 2006.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative
provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding
brought for the enforcement of such right or liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in
violation of any legislative provision or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which
may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance brought pursuant to
any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating,
straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public
place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of any
bond or other instruments or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or any
lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval of the
municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of payment of
salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for
municipal employees.
N. Any ordinance amending Chapter 94, Zoning and Land Development.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as part of the
Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical changes and other minor
changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
Mayor and Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature changes: Throughout the Code the following nomenclature changes
have been made:
(1) Department of Environmental Protection and Energy (DEPE) to Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP).
(2) Board of Adjustment or Zoning Board to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(3) Borough Treasurer or Assistant Treasurer to Chief Financial Officer.
(4) Fire Official to Fire Marshal in Chapter 118.
(5) Court Clerk to Court Administrator.
(6) Magistrate to Judge.
C. Throughout the Code, statutory references have been updated or revised to the
current citation. Consolidated (N.J.S.A.) references have been added to
unconsolidated (P.L.) where appropriate.
D. Sections 63-9, 67-16, 67-27, 77-5, 110-5, 118-15, 122-8B, 122-19B, 126-8A,
132-11, 136-5, 139-3, 141-3, 152-24, 157-8, 163-5A, 170-5, 174-15, 183-11A,
188-6, 198-5B, 202-3, 210-28, 215-7, 215-13, 215-18, 215-23, 215-29, 215-34,
226-13, 236-28, 250-11 and 281-4 are amended or added, in whole or in part, to
provide as follows: "Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter [article] shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof."
E. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in Schedule A1
attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective upon
the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to
the ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-16E, the chapters, parts and sections which were added, amended, adopted or
deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article III. During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced
with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871." Schedule A, which contains a
complete description of all changes, is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 1-16 SHREWSBURY CODE § 1-16
1:10
ARTICLE IV
Codification of Zoning and Land Development
[Adopted 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
§ 1-17. Adoption of revised and renumbered legislation.
The Zoning and Land Development Ordinance of the Borough of Shrewsbury, adopted
May 11, 1987, by Ordinance No. 555, as amended (Chapter 94 of the 1973 Borough
Code), is hereby adopted as Chapter 94 of the 2006 Code of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
The provisions of said Chapter 94 of the 2006 Code, insofar as they are substantively the
same as those provisions in force immediately prior to enactment by this ordinance, are
intended as a continuation of said ordinances and not as new enactments.
§ 1-18. Changes to planning and development legislation.
§ 1-19. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are repealed to the
extent of such inconsistencies.
§ 1-20. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for any reason held
to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of
this article.
§ 1-21. Copies available to public.
Copies of Chapter 94, Zoning and Land Development, shall be placed on file for public
A. In compiling and preparing the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance for
adoption and revision as part of the 2006 Code of the Borough of Shrewsbury
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in said legislation. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all
such changes be adopted as part of the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance
as if the legislation so changed had been previously formally amended to read as
such.
B. Nomenclature changes: Throughout this Chapter 94, the following nomenclature
changes have been made:
(1) “Board of Adjustment” and “Zoning Board” are changed to “Zoning Board of
Adjustment.”
(2) “Department of Environmental Protection and Energy (DEPE)” is changed to
“Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).”
C. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in Schedule A
attached hereto2 and made a part hereof are made herewith, to become effective
upon the effective date of this article.
2. Editor's Note: Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all such changes, is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:11
examination at the Borough Clerk's office during regular business hours, and, upon final
passage of the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance, copies shall be made available
to the public.
§ 1-22. Sale of planning and development regulations code book.
Copies of Chapter 94, Zoning and Land Development, may be purchased from the
Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee authorized by the
Borough. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation
of the Code.
§ 1-23. Notice; publication.
The Clerk of the Borough of Shrewsbury shall cause notice of the passage of this
ordinance to be given in the manner required by law.
§ 1-24. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication according to law.
§ 1-21 SHREWSBURY CODE § 1-24
1:12
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See Chs. 9, 21 and
29.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 17.
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
Police Department — See Ch. 39.
Public access to records — See Ch. 42.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 45.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 94.
§ 1-24 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 1-24
5:1

ARTICLE I
Joint Municipal Tax Assessor with Little Silver
[Adopted 11-12-1970 by Ord. No. 297 (Ch. 3, Art. IX, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 5-1. Establishment of office.
The office of Joint Municipal Tax Assessor is hereby established and shall be maintained
by and for the boroughs of Shrewsbury and Little Silver, both in the County of
Monmouth, to assess real and personal property for taxation within each of said
municipalities, all as authorized under and by virtue of the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:48B-14 through N.J.S.A. 40:48B-21, inclusive.
§ 5-2. Method of appointment; apportionment of costs and expenses.
The governing bodies of both of said boroughs shall, by agreement, provide for the
appointment of a Joint Municipal Tax Assessor and such other personnel as may be
necessary for the apportionment of the costs and expenses of the operation of such office
between said participating boroughs and for such other terms and conditions as may be
necessary and convenient for the establishment and maintenance of the office.
§ 5-3. Personnel; term of office of Assessor.
Such office of Joint Municipal Tax Assessor shall consist of a Tax Assessor and such
subordinate personnel as may, by the governing bodies of said boroughs, be deemed
necessary and proper to perform the assessment function in each of said boroughs in
accordance with law. Any person who may hereafter be appointed to office as Joint
Municipal Assessor for said boroughs shall hold such office for a term of four years, as
shall be provided for by agreement of the governing bodies of said boroughs, provided
that any such person reappointed as Joint Municipal Tax Assessor after serving for
four years in that capacity shall thereafter hold his position during good behavior and
efficiency notwithstanding that such reappointment was for a fixed term of years, and he
shall not be removed therefrom for political reasons but only for good cause shown and
after a proper hearing before the Director of the Division of Taxation of the State of New
Jersey or his designee.
§ 5-4. Personnel deemed employees of municipality having largest valuation.
All employees in the office of the Joint Municipal Tax Assessor shall be deemed
to be the employees of the municipality having the largest apportionment valuation
determined under N.J.S.A. 54:4-49 on July 27, 1967.
§ 5-5. Separate maintenance of records.
The assessment function of the Joint Municipal Tax Assessor shall be exercised in the
same manner and to the same extent as though it was exercised in each municipality
separately, and the tax list and duplicate, property record cards and all other records for
each of the said boroughs shall be maintained separately and shall be available for public
inspection pursuant to law.
§ 5-1 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-6
5:3
§ 5-6. Method of termination of agreement.
The joint agreement may be terminated upon the adoption of a resolution to that effect by
the governing body of either of the aforesaid boroughs. Except by unanimous agreement,
such termination shall not be made effective earlier than June 30 next succeeding the
expiration of 12 full calendar months following the adoption of such resolution.
§ 5-6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 5-6
5:4
ARTICLE II
Code Enforcement Officer
[Adopted 5-16-1973 by Ord. No. 343 (Ch. 3, Art. XXIV, of the 1973 Code);
amended in its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. III)]
§ 5-7. Appointment; reporting requirements.
§ 5-8. Term of office; compensation; schedule.
§ 5-9. Functions and duties.
A. There is hereby created the position of Code Enforcement Officer, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer shall file an annual report of all activities of his
office with the Administrator of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall report to the Administrator of the Borough of
Shrewsbury for administrative and budgetary purposes.
A. Term of office. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of Council, for a term of one year, or until his successor
is appointed and qualified.
B. Compensation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall receive as compensation such
sum as may be set forth in the Salary Resolution of the Borough of Shrewsbury.3
The working hours and the schedule of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be fixed
by the Borough Council.
A. Responsibilities. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the
enforcement of regulatory ordinances (Part II, General Legislation, of the Borough
Code), excluding ordinances subject to police investigation and/or enforcement and
the Uniform Construction Code, and assist the Zoning Officer in the enforcement
of the land use and zoning ordinances (Chapter 94 of the Borough Code).
B. Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct field inspections to
ensure compliance with various Borough ordinances, and enforce rules and
regulations in relation to enforcement of ordinances.
C. Reports. The Code Enforcement Officer shall make and record acts and
observations, maintain records thereon, as well as records of any inspections and
investigations, create and adopt clear, concise and actual forms for reports and
applications and seek advice of municipal counsel for guidance and interpretation
of the Code and rules and regulations. Said Officer shall render a written report
monthly or as requested to the Borough Administrator.
D. Records. All records kept by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be open to
inspection by the Borough Council and the general public at all reasonable times,
whether such records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 5-7 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-9
5:5
§ 5-10. Enforcement authority; report of violations; enforcement procedures.
§ 5-11. Right of entry.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to make or cause to be made an
entry into any building or premises wherein an alleged violation may exist.
§ 5-12. Oath required.
Every Code Enforcement Officer shall, before entering upon his duties, take the oath
prescribed by law.
E. Public documents. Every Code Enforcement Officer, on the expiration of his term
for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his successor all books and records which
may be the property of the Borough, and if no successor has been appointed within
one week after the termination of such office, such property shall be delivered to
the Borough Administrator.
A. Enforcement authority. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to
make or cause to be made an entry into any building or premises wherein an alleged
violation may exist and to serve violation notices, make and process complaints for
Code violations and make court appearances, both municipal and otherwise, as
necessary in connection therewith.
B. Report of violation. Upon observation of a violation of any of the aforesaid
ordinances or any other ordinance of the Borough of Shrewsbury, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall make a record of the same, in writing. A copy of each
violation shall be submitted to the Borough Administrator. If the violation falls
within the purview of the Zoning Officer, Construction Official or Police
Department, the Code Enforcement Officer shall discuss the violation with the
appropriate official for action.
C. Violation enforcement. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
issue violation notices and/or summons and appear in Municipal Court, as
necessary. All violation notices shall be complied with as follows:
(1) Within 24 hours if the safety and/or health of the public is endangered.
(2) No later than the hours or days specified in the ordinance referenced in the
notice of violation. If time for compliance is not specified, the violation notices
shall be complied with no later than five business days after receipt of said
notice.
(3) Depending on the nature of the violation and the means required to correct the
violation, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a notice of violation
stipulating a reasonable number of days for compliance.
D. Issuance of summons. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to
issue a summons in the name of the Borough for a violation of any ordinances
pertaining to land use, zoning or other regulatory ordinances and shall testify on
behalf of the Borough in litigated matters as requested by the Borough
Administrator.
§ 5-9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 5-12
5:6
ARTICLE III
Borough Clerk
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as Ch. 3, Art. II, of the 1973 Code]
§ 5-13. Appointment; tenure; qualifications; compensation.4
§ 5-14. Powers and duties. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871; 12-5-2011 by
Ord. No. 974]
The Borough Clerk shall:
A. Appointment.
(1) Registered Municipal Clerk. The Mayor with the advice and consent of
Council shall appoint a person holding a registered municipal clerk certificate
as Borough Clerk for a three-year term. In the event of a vacancy in the office
of Municipal Clerk, an appointment shall be made for a new term and not for
the unexpired term.
(2) Acting Municipal Clerk. Within 90 days of the occurrence of a vacancy in the
office of Municipal Clerk by reason of the departure of a registered Municipal
Clerk, the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council may appoint a person
who does not hold a registered municipal clerk certificate to serve as Acting
Municipal Clerk for a period not to exceed one year and commencing on the
date of the vacancy. Any person so appointed may, with the approval of the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, be appointed as Acting
Municipal Clerk for a maximum of two subsequent one-year terms following
the termination of the temporary appointment. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133c)
B. Tenure.
(1) Registered Municipal Clerk. Tenure of a registered Municipal Clerk shall
begin as of the actual date upon which the person serving as Municipal Clerk
is appointed. Reappointment of an incumbent Municipal Clerk made within 60
days following the expiration of the prior term shall not be considered to be a
new appointment.
(2) Acting Municipal Clerk. Time served as Acting Municipal Clerk may be not
be credited as time served as Municipal Clerk for the purpose of acquiring
tenure pursuant to statute. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.7)
C. Qualifications. Prior to the appointment of a Borough Clerk, he shall have been
qualified by training and experience to perform the duties of this office and shall
hold a registered municipal clerk's certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133a.
D. Compensation. The compensation of the Borough Clerk shall be as set forth in the
Salary Resolution.5
A. Keep the minutes and records of the proceedings of the Council, and publish,
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
5. Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 5-13 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-14
5:7
§ 5-15. Insurance; surety bonds; contracts.
The Clerk shall be the depositary and custodian of all official surety bonds furnished by
or on account of any Borough office, officer or employee, except his own bond, which
shall be placed in the custody of the Borough Chief Financial Officer; all insurance
policies upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the Borough or to protect
it against any claims, demands or liability whatsoever; and all formal contracts for work,
labor, services, supplies, equipment and materials to which the Borough may be a party.
The Clerk shall also have custody of all leases of property owned or leased by the
Borough. The Clerk shall be the depositary for and have custody of all performance
bonds running to the Borough as obligee, and other forms of noncash security given by
any contractor, subdivision developer or other persons on account of work done or to be
maintain and compile its ordinances and resolutions as required by law.
B. Keep the minutes and records of any Council committee, upon request of the
chairman of the committee.
C. Provide secretarial and clerical services for the Mayor and members of Council in
the discharge of their official duties.
D. Have custody of the Borough Seal and affix it to such books, papers and documents
as may be authorized pursuant to law.
E. Have and take custody of all official books, papers and documents of the Borough
for which no other depository is provided by law or ordinance, and preserve and
keep them safely.
F. Perform such functions as are vested in the Clerk by the licensing provisions of
state law or ordinance.
G. Issue and deliver, with the assistance of the Police Department, if needed, as in case
of emergency, all notices of meetings required to be given to the Council.
H. Promptly inform Council members of action taken by the Mayor with respect to any
ordinance.
I. Receive and transmit all communications to or on behalf of the Council.
J. Charge and receive for the use of the Borough such fees for transcripts or
certificates as shall be authorized by the Council.
K. Perform all of the functions required of municipal clerks by the General Election
Law and any other law or ordinance, and receive for municipal use the fees
prescribed therefor.
L. Perform such functions as are vested in municipal clerks by state law or ordinances
relating to bingo and raffle licenses.
M. Approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses as the issuing authority pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1.
N. Perform such other, different and additional powers, functions and duties as may be
prescribed by law or ordinance.
§ 5-14 SHREWSBURY CODE § 5-15
5:8
done in or for the Borough.
§ 5-16. Work priority determined by Borough Administrator. [Amended
1-24-2002 by Ord. No. 792]
Questions concerning priority of Council business to be performed by the Borough
Clerk, as provided by law or ordinance, shall be determined by the Borough
Administrator.
§ 5-17. Employees in office of Clerk. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
The number and type of employees in the office of the Borough Clerk shall be
determined by the Borough Administrator with the consent of the governing body.
§ 5-15 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-17
5:9

ARTICLE IV
Deputy Borough Clerk
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as Ch. 3, Art. III, of the 1973 Code]
§ 5-18. Creation of office; term; salary.
The Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council shall appoint a Deputy Borough
Clerk, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council. His salary shall be as
determined by formal action of the Council.
§ 5-19. Powers and duties.
The Deputy Borough Clerk shall be under the immediate supervision of the Borough
Clerk and shall have all the powers and perform all of the duties of the Borough
Clerk during such times and for such specific periods as the Borough Clerk shall be
absent, together with any other duties assigned by the Borough Clerk or required by any
ordinance of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 5-20. Bond required.
Before entering office, the Deputy Borough Clerk shall execute a bond in such amount
as provided by law, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties.
§ 5-21. Signing of documents.
The Deputy Borough Clerk shall, in the absence of the Borough Clerk, have the right
and power to execute all documents required by law or ordinance to be executed by the
Borough Clerk and affix the Seal of the Borough thereto whenever required. In signing
any documents, the Deputy Borough Clerk should sign the name of the Borough Clerk
followed by the word "By" and the Deputy Borough Clerk's own name and the words
"Deputy Borough Clerk," and shall have the right, in connection with such documents,
to affix the Seal of the Borough.
§ 5-22. Filling of vacancies.
In the event that the office of the Deputy Borough Clerk shall become vacant during the
term, the same shall be filled by the appointment by the Mayor of such successor, with
the advice and consent of the Borough Council.
§ 5-18 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-22
5:11

ARTICLE V
Borough Attorney
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as §§ 3-14 to 3-17 of the 1973 Code]
§ 5-23. Creation of office; term; retainer.
The Borough Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council, but need not serve full time and shall be subject to such retainer as shall be
approved by the Council. He shall serve for a term of one year as provided by N.J.S.A.
40A:9-139.
§ 5-24. Qualifications.
The Borough Attorney shall be an attorney at law in the State of New Jersey in good
standing and be admitted to the practice of law in the courts of New Jersey.
§ 5-25. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Attorney or his representative to attend all meetings
of the Council. He shall advise the Council, the Mayor and the officers of the Borough in
matters which may be submitted to him for his opinion. He shall draw such ordinances
and resolutions as may be required of him by the Council. He shall prepare all legal
instruments relating to the business of the Borough. He shall prosecute and defend as
Attorney and Counsel for the Borough all actions which may be brought by or against it
or any Borough officer, or in which the Borough is interested, in any court of the state.
§ 5-26. Special Counsel.
Special Counsel shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council, or by the Council, as may be required.
§ 5-23 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-26
5:13

ARTICLE VI
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as Ch. 3, Art. V, of the 1973 Code; amended
in its entirety 10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 800]
§ 5-27. Position created; term; salary.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Council. The term of office shall be four years, which shall run from
January 1 in the year in which the Chief Financial Officer is appointed. The
compensation for the Chief Financial Officer shall be as set forth in the annual Salary
Resolution.6 The Chief Financial Officer may, but need not, be a person who is also
employed by the Borough in another capacity.
§ 5-28. Functions, powers and duties.
The Chief Financial Officer shall serve as Municipal Comptroller and Treasurer
responsible for the proper financial administration of the Borough pursuant to New
Jersey statutes, as well as such rules and regulations promulgated by the Division of
Local Government Services, the Local Finance Board or any other state agency as may
pertain to the financial administration of the Borough.
§ 5-29. Tenure.
§ 5-30. Municipal finance officer certificate.
No person shall be appointed or reappointed as a Chief Financial Officer unless he holds
a municipal finance officer certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1971, c.
413 (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.).
§ 5-31. Vacancy in office; temporary appointment.
A. Any person who shall serve as the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough for four
consecutive years and who is reappointed as the Borough's Chief Financial Officer
shall be granted tenure of office upon filing with the Clerk of the Borough of
Shrewsbury and with the Division of Local Government Services in the Department
of Community Affairs a notification evidencing compliance with the section.
B. Thereafter, a person shall continue to hold office during good behavior and
efficiency, and shall not be removed therefrom except for just cause and then only
after a public hearing upon a written complaint setting forth the charge or charges
against him pursuant to Section 3 of P.L. 1977, c. 39, or upon expiration or
revocation of certification by the Director pursuant to Section 7 of P.L. 1988, c.
110.
A. When a vacancy occurs in the office of Chief Financial Officer following the
appointment of a certified municipal finance officer to that office, the governing
body may appoint, for a period not to exceed one year and commencing on the date
of the vacancy, a person who does not hold a municipal finance officer certificate
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 5-27 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-31
5:15
to serve as a temporary Chief Financial Officer.
B. Any person so appointed may, with the approval of the Director of the Division of
Local Government Services, be reappointed as Chief Financial Officer following
the termination of the temporary appointment for one additional year. A temporary
Chief Financial Officer shall not serve more than two consecutive years.
§ 5-31 SHREWSBURY CODE § 5-31
5:16
ARTICLE VII
Collector of Taxes; Assistant to Collector of Taxes
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as Ch. 3, Art. VI, of the 1973 Code; amended
in its entirety 6-22-1989 by Ord. No. 591]
§ 5-32. Position of Collector of Taxes created; term; salary; tenure.
A Collector of Taxes shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent
of the Council. He shall hold office for a term of four years, as provided by N.J.S.A.
40A:9-142. The salary of the Collector of Taxes shall be as set forth in the annual Salary
Resolution.7 The Collector of Taxes may, after serving in office for a continuous period
of not less than five years or being reappointed upon the completion of one full term of
four years, upon filing a certificate evidencing satisfactory completion of an approved
course of instruction in the functions and duties of tax collectors, acquire tenure in
office as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145. The Mayor and Council may also grant tenure
in office to any person who shall have held the office of Collector of Taxes for 10
consecutive years, as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-144.
§ 5-33. Powers and duties of Collector of Taxes.
The Collector of Taxes shall collect all taxes, whether current or delinquent,
assessments, water rents, license fees and all other moneys due to the Borough and
perform and discharge all other functions, powers and duties as prescribed by law for
municipal collectors of taxes.
§ 5-34. Bond of Collector of Taxes.
The Collector of Taxes shall enter into a bond in favor of the Borough of Shrewsbury
in such amount as shall be prescribed by the Mayor and Council, which bond shall be
approved as to form and surety by the Borough Attorney and shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk.
§ 5-35. Position of Assistant to Collector of Taxes created; term; salary.
An Assistant to the Collector of Taxes shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council. He shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council. The
salary of the Assistant to the Collector of Taxes shall be as set forth in the annual Salary
Resolution.8
§ 5-36. Powers and duties of Assistant to Collector of Taxes.
The Assistant to the Collector of Taxes shall be subordinate to the Collector of Taxes and
shall perform such duties which may be required of him by the Collector of Taxes within
the confines of the duties required in such office. He shall have the power to do all and
every act or acts which it may be lawful for the Collector of Taxes to do in connection
with the duties of his office.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Salaries and Compensation.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 5-32 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-37
5:17
§ 5-37. Bond of Assistant to Collector of Taxes.
The Assistant to the Collector of Taxes shall enter into a bond in favor of the Borough
of Shrewsbury in such amount as shall be prescribed by the Mayor and Council, which
bond shall be approved as to form and surety by the Borough Attorney and shall be filed
with the Borough Clerk.
§ 5-37 SHREWSBURY CODE § 5-37
5:18
ARTICLE VIII
Borough Administrator
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as Ch. 3, Art. VII, of the 1973 Code; amended
in its entirety 9-6-2001 by Ord. No. 788]
§ 5-38. Position created.
A Borough Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent
of the Council. The Borough Administrator shall hold office at the pleasure of the
Council. The Borough Administrator may but need not be a person who is also employed
by the Borough in another capacity.
§ 5-39. Powers and duties.
The Borough Administrator shall serve as chief agent of the governing body in the
administration of municipal affairs and in the integration and coordination of activities
of the various offices of the Borough. The Borough Administrator shall be responsible
for the coordination of personnel and financial administration and general oversight of
Borough operations.
§ 5-40. Salary.
The salary of the Borough Administrator shall be as sat forth in the annual Salary
Resolution.9
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 5-38 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-40
5:19

ARTICLE IX
Borough Engineer
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as Ch. 3, Art. XI, of the 1973 Code]
§ 5-41. Creation of office; term.
A Borough Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council. He shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council on a retainer basis at a rate to
be determined by the Council.
§ 5-42. Powers and duties.
The Borough Engineer shall:
§ 5-43. Appointment as Planning Board Engineer and Zoning Board of
Adjustment Engineer.11
Except in extraordinary circumstances, the Borough Engineer shall be appointed by the
Planning Board and by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as board engineer, who shall
review and report on the applications and other matters pending before the boards at the
direction of the boards, and who shall attend meetings of the boards unless otherwise
instructed.
A. Prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications for public works and
improvements undertaken by the Borough, either on force account or by public
contract.
B. Prepare, review and approve specifications for public works contracts, supervise
and inspect the execution of such contracts and certify satisfactory completion of
work to authorize progress payments pursuant to contract.
C. Prepare, maintain and preserve maps, charts and records of roads, utilities, public
buildings and structures and all public facilities owned or operated by the
Borough.10
D. Examine and approve applications for streets acceptances and exceptions in
accordance with the requirements of applicable ordinances.
E. Study and report upon the technical requirements of streetlighting and traffic
control as requested by the Mayor and Council.
F. Provide all technical and engineering advice and assistance required, with the
assistance of such consultants as the Mayor and Council may authorize.
G. Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Mayor and Council.
10. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding review of subdivision plats, which immediately followed this subsection,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
11. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 5-41 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-43
5:21

ARTICLE X
Department of Public Works
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as Ch. 3, Art. XII, of the 1973 Code; amended
in its entirety 8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 752]
§ 5-44. Establishment of Department.
There is hereby established a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be
known as the "Public Works Manager."
§ 5-45. Term and qualifications of Public Works Manager.
The Public Works Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Council. He shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council and shall attain tenure
of office after five years of continuous service as provided by law. He shall be certified
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6a et seq.
§ 5-46. Powers and duties of Public Works Manager.
The Public Works Manager shall:
A. Have general supervision over all matters relating to the construction, management,
maintenance and operation of the physical properties of the Borough.
B. Develop a comprehensive program for the removal of snow and direct the removal
of snow and the cleaning of streets.
C. Supervise and direct all maintenance and repair employees employed by the
Borough.
D. Be responsible for the servicing of all requests and complaints from citizens
involving Borough facilities, including, but not limited to, storm flooding and road
damages.
E. Provide all mechanical services required by any department, office or agency of the
Borough.
F. Under the supervision of the Mayor and Council and/or the Borough Engineer,
supervise the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of all public
streets within the limits of the Borough, and regulate street openings, the
construction, alteration and repair of sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and
encroachments by objects and structures above and below public streets and
sidewalks, and prevent interference with the public use thereof, and maintain
reasonable standards of maintenance and repair.
G. Provide for the construction, reconstruction, maintenance and repair of storm sewer
systems within the limits of the Borough.
H. Operate and maintain all Borough properties.
I. Perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and Council.
J. Supervise the collection and disposal of solid waste.
§ 5-44 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-47
5:23
§ 5-47. Employees of Department; compensation.
The Public Works Manager shall hire such employees as are required for the
performance of the duties set forth in this article, with the approval of the Public Works
Committee and the Personnel Committee, at a compensation to be fixed by the Mayor
and Council by ordinance.
§ 5-47 SHREWSBURY CODE § 5-47
5:24
ARTICLE XI
Zoning Officer
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as Ch. 3, Art. XIII, of the 1973 Code;
amended in its entirety 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 691]
§ 5-48. Creation of office; term.12
The office of Zoning Officer is hereby created. A Zoning Officer shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council for a term of one year, or
until his successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 5-49. Salary.
The salary of the Zoning Officer shall be as set forth in the annual Salary Resolution.13
§ 5-50. Powers and duties. [Amended 9-9-1996 by Ord. No. 72014]
A. The Zoning Officer shall serve as the administrative officer for matters involving
issuance of zoning permits and for matters involving enforcement pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 94, Zoning and Land Development, of the Code of the
Borough of Shrewsbury.
B. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer:
(1) To review all applications for zoning permits for the purpose of ascertaining
whether or not the proposed building, structure or use complies in all respects
with the provisions of Chapter 94.
(2) To endorse his approval upon such applications and upon all zoning permits
where the proposed building, structure or use is in full compliance with the
provisions of Chapter 94 and to endorse his disapproval upon all such
applications where the proposed building, structure or use is not in full
compliance with the provisions thereof.
(3) In connection with his approval or disapproval of such applications and zoning
permits, to make inspections of the premises which are the subject of such
applications as be necessary to ascertain their compliance or noncompliance
with the provisions of Chapter 94.
(4) To inspect any building, place or premises or the use thereof is in compliance
with the provisions of Chapter 94, and, if he finds the same not in compliance,
to order, in writing, the correction of any such noncomplying premises or use.
No zoning permit shall be issued unless or until the approval of the Zoning
Officer has been endorsed upon the application therefor and upon such zoning
permit.
(5) To file an annual report of all activities of the office of Zoning Officer with the
Borough Administrator.
12. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
13. Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Salaries and Compensation.
14. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 5-48 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-50
5:25
§ 5-51. Bond required; liability.
§ 5-52. Cooperation of other officials.
The Zoning Officer may request and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the
discharge of his duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the Borough.
§ 5-53. Right of entry.
The Zoning Officer, in the discharge of his official duties and upon proper identification,
shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour.
(6) To report to the Borough Administrator for administrative and budgetary
purposes.
A. Before entering office, the Zoning Officer shall enter into a bond in favor of the
Borough of Shrewsbury in such amount as shall be prescribed by the Mayor and
Council, which bond shall be approved as to form and surety by the Borough
Attorney and filed with the Borough Clerk.
B. The Zoning Officer, acting in good faith for the Borough in the discharge of his
duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved
from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as
a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of
his duties. Any suit brought against the Zoning Officer because of such act or
omission performed by him in the enforcement of any ordinance shall be defended
by the Borough Attorney until final termination of the proceeding.
§ 5-50 SHREWSBURY CODE § 5-53
5:26
ARTICLE XII
Clerks of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and Planning Board
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as Ch. 3, Art. XXIII, of the 1973 Code;
amended in its entirety 2-5-2001 by Ord. No. 776]
§ 5-54. Creation of office of Clerk of the Zoning Board of Adjustment; duties;
salary.
A Clerk of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be appointed by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. He shall hold office at the pleasure of said Zoning Board of Adjustment.
He shall keep the minutes and records of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, issue and
deliver all notices of meetings required to be given to members of said Zoning Board
of Adjustment, receive and transmit all communications to or on behalf of said Zoning
Board of Adjustment, including such certifications as may be issued by said Board, and
perform such additional duties as may be prescribed by Borough ordinance. The salary
of the Clerk of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be as set forth in the annual Salary
Resolution.15
§ 5-55. Creation of office of Clerk of the Planning Board; duties; salary.
A Clerk of the Planning Board shall be appointed by the Planning Board. He shall hold
office at the pleasure of said Planning Board. He shall keep the minutes and records
of the Planning Board, issue and deliver all notices of meetings required to be given
to members of said Planning Board, receive and transmit all communications to or on
behalf of said Planning Board, including such certifications as may be issued by said
Board, and perform such additional duties as may be prescribed by Borough ordinance.
The salary of the Clerk of the Planning Board shall be as set forth in the annual Salary
Resolution.
15. Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 5-54 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-55
5:27

ARTICLE XIII
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Adopted 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 896]
§ 5-56. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms needed for the
execution of the Borough of Shrewsbury's responsibility to assist in the provision of
affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.
§ 5-57. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program for Borough
of Shrewsbury to ensure that the restricted units under administration are affirmatively
marketed and sold or rented, as applicable, only to low- and moderate-income
households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing body
with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the affordable housing
program for the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 5-58. Establishment of position; compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Borough of
Shrewsbury.
B. Appointment. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH), the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing body
and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. Affordable housing program. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible
for oversight and administration of the affordable housing program for the Borough
of Shrewsbury, including the following responsibilities, which may not be
contracted out, exclusive of Subsection C(6) which may be contracted out:
(1) Serving as the Borough of Shrewsbury's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents,
and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough of Shrewsbury's
Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by COAH;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and administrative
agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability controls,
compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as offered or approved by
§ 5-56 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-58
5:29
COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of the
restricted units in the Borough of Shrewsbury as described in Subsection F
below.
D. Responsibilities which may be contracted out. Subject to approval by COAH, the
Borough of Shrewsbury may contract with or authorize a consultant, authority,
government or any agency charged by the governing body, which entity shall have
the responsibility of administering the affordable housing program of the Borough
of Shrewsbury, except for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out
pursuant to Subsection C above. If the Borough of Shrewsbury contracts with
another equity to administer all or any part of the affordable housing program,
including the affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal
Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at the time of
the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing Liaison.
(1) Affirmative marketing:
(a) Conducting an outreach process to ensure affirmative marketing of
affordable housing units in accordance with the affirmative marketing
plan of the Borough of Shrewsbury and the provisions of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services to
low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting,
credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and
landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification:
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews with
interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of gross
income and assets upon which to base a determination of income
eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the determination of
eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the ownership
or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant households
living in the housing region and eligible applicant households with
members working in the housing region where the units are located; and
§ 5-58 SHREWSBURY CODE § 5-58
5:30
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the affirmative
marketing plan of the Borough of Shrewsbury when referring households
for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls:
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions and
mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of each
restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its control
period, including the recorded deed with restrictions, recorded mortgage
and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation of the
mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the appropriate
county's register of deeds or county clerk's office after the termination of
the affordability controls for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental:
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the administrative agent regarding the
availability of restricted units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- and moderate-income households regarding the
availability of restricted units for resale or rerental.
(5) Processing requests from unit owners:
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted units who
wish to take out home equity loans or refinance during the term of their
ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from owners
of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements to the units
that would affect the selling price, such authorizations to be limited to
those improvements resulting in additional bedrooms and bathrooms and
the cost of central air-conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests by owners of
restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement:
(a) Securing, annually, lists of all affordable housing units for which tax bills
are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such owners that they
must either move back to their unit or sell it;
§ 5-58 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-58
5:31
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at the
earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or development,
written acknowledgment of the requirement that no restricted unit can be
offered, or in any other way committed, to any person, other than a
household duly certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family homes,
of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with the telephone
number of the administrative agent where complaints of excess rent can
be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other appropriate
municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as approved by
COAH, setting forth procedures for administering such affordability
controls; and
(g) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions necessary and
appropriate to carry out its responsibilities hereunder.
§ 5-58 SHREWSBURY CODE § 5-58
5:32
ARTICLE XIV
Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator
[Adopted 7-16-2007 by Ord. No. 899]
§ 5-59. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide standards for the position of Municipal
Emergency Management Coordinator.
§ 5-60. Legal authority; appointment; duties.
The position of Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator is based on provisions
of public laws and directives which carry the force of law.
A. New Jersey state law: New Jersey Statutes Annotated (N.J.S.A.) Appendix A:9-33
et seq. (Chapter 251, P.L. 1942, as amended by Chapter 438, P.L. 1953). These laws
set forth responsibilities, obligations and authorities.
(1) Appointment of Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator. The Mayor
shall appoint a Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator from among
the residents of the municipality. The Municipal Emergency Management
Coordinator shall serve for a term of three years. As a condition of
appointment and the right to continue for the full term of the appointment, the
Coordinator shall successfully complete the approved courses within one year
of appointment. The Governor may remove a Municipal Emergency
Management Coordinator at any time for cause.
(2) Duties of Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator.
(a) The Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator shall be responsible
for the planning, activating, coordinating and the conduct of emergency
management operations within the municipality.
(b) The Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator shall be a member
and shall serve as Chairman of the local Emergency Management
Council.
(c) Each Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator shall appoint more
than one Deputy Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator(s) with
the approval of the Mayor. Wherever possible, such Deputy(ies) shall be
appointed from among the salaried officers or employees of the
municipality.
B. New Jersey Office of Emergency Management Directive #61, November 19, 1986,
indicates:
(1) Wherever, in the opinion of the Municipal Emergency Management
Coordinator, a disaster has occurred or is imminent in the municipality, the
Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator shall proclaim a state of local
disaster emergency within the municipality.
(2) The Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator, in accordance with
§ 5-59 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-60
5:33
§ 5-61. Qualifications.
§ 5-62. Basic training.
The Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator shall complete the following
courses:
§ 5-63. Responsibilities.
The Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator is responsible for the provision of
leadership in the field of emergency management at the municipal level of government.
As such, the Coordinator is responsible for emergency management program
administration and program development encompassing the four phases of emergency
management: mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery. The Municipal
regulations promulgated by the State Director of Emergency Management,
shall be empowered to issue and enforce such orders as may be necessary to
implement and carry out emergency management operations and to protect the
health, safety, and resources of the residents of the municipality.
(3) The County Emergency Management Coordinator shall be immediately
advised of the proclamation of a state of local disaster emergency by the
Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator and the action taken.
A. The Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator shall have a minimum of two
years' experience in the planning, development and administration of emergency
response activities, such as those provided by police, fire, rescue, medical or
emergency management units either in the public or private sector or in the military
service.
B. The Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator must be a resident of the
municipality.
C. The Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator must have a good reputation
and a sound moral character.
D. The State of New Jersey, counties and municipalities are equal opportunity
employers. All persons shall have the opportunity to obtain employment without
discrimination because of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, sex,
marital status or physical handicap, subject only to conditions and limitations
applicable alike to all persons.
A. Within one year of appointment:
(1) Emergency Program Manager (correspondence course).
(2) Emergency Management Workshop-Basic.
B. Continuing education. Following the completion of the first year's courses, the
Municipal Emergency Management Coordinator must complete 24 classroom
hours of emergency management continuing education per year. All courses taken
by the Municipal Emergency Coordinator must be submitted to and approved by
the County Emergency Management Coordinator.
§ 5-60 SHREWSBURY CODE § 5-63
5:34
Emergency Management Coordinator shall also be responsible for the following:
A. Program administration.
(1) Ensure that the Municipal Office of Emergency Management is available on a
twenty-four-hour basis.
(2) Supervise the day-to-day operations of the Municipal Office of Emergency
Management.
(3) Ensure that the municipality meets all requirements for the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's Emergency Management Assistance Program,
including meeting goals agreed to in the annual workplan, maintaining a
currently approved municipal emergency operations plan, and providing the
New Jersey Office of Emergency Management with quarterly program status
reports, if applicable.
(4) Prepare, submit, and justify the annual municipal emergency management
budget.
(5) Secure county, state and federal technical and financial assistance available
through the County Office of Emergency Management.
(6) Personally attend at least 75% of the scheduled County Office of Emergency
Management meetings. The Coordinator must assure representation at all other
county emergency management meetings.
(7) Maintain a continuing knowledge of all municipal, county, state and federal
laws and plans concerning emergency management.
(8) Maintain adequate files, records and correspondence relating to emergency
management activities.
(9) Interact with the County Emergency Management Coordinator regarding:
(a) Municipal Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) review;
(b) All mutual aid agreements;
(c) Hazard Identification Capability Assessment and Multi-Year
Development Plan (HICA/MYDP);
(d) The approval and scheduling of attendees for state and federally
sponsored emergency management courses, etc.
(10) Coordinate with the municipal agencies, departments, and bureaus regarding
their emergency management responsibilities.
(11) Implement policies and procedures regarding emergency management.
(12) Conduct quarterly staff meetings, providing advance notice to the County
Office of Emergency Management.
(13) Receive and react to weather emergency notifications.
§ 5-63 ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT § 5-63
5:35
(14) Cooperate with the National Warning System (NAWAS) program.
(15) Comply with all directives, rules and regulations issued by the State Office of
Emergency Management.
(16) Conduct a minimum of one exercise per year, providing a minimum thirty-day
advance notice through the County Office of Emergency Management to the
State Office of Emergency Management.
B. Program development: recruit, organize, coordinate, and train a staff to administer
the following emergency management functions and programs:
(1) Alerting and warning communications.
(2) Medical.
(3) Damage assessment.
(4) Emergency operating center.
(5) Emergency public information.
(6) Evacuation.
(7) Fire and rescue.
(8) Hazardous materials.
(9) Health.
(10) In-place shelter.
(11) Law enforcement.
(12) Public works.
(13) Radiological protection.
(14) Reception and care.
(15) Resource management.
(16) Social services.
§ 5-63 SHREWSBURY CODE § 5-63
5:36
Chapter 9
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Municipal Ethics Board — See Ch. 21.
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 170.
Trees, shrubbery and landscaping — See Ch. 246.
§ 5-63 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 5-63
9:1

ARTICLE I
Environmental Commission
[Adopted 3-12-1970 by Ord. No. 281 (Ch. 3, Art. XIX, of the 1973 Code); amended
in its entirety 6-11-1990 by Ord. No. 612]
§ 9-1. Establishment of Commission.
The Borough of Shrewsbury Environmental Commission is hereby established pursuant
to Chapter 245 of the Laws of 1968 and Chapter 35 of the Laws of 1972 (N.J.S.A.
40:56A-1 to 40:56A-7, inclusive).
§ 9-2. Membership; terms of office; removal of members; vacancies. [Amended
10-18-1993 by Ord. No. 666; 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. 940]
§ 9-3. Alternate members. [Added 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
A. A Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor, one of
whom shall be a member of the Planning Board and all of whom shall be residents
of the Borough of Shrewsbury. The members shall serve without compensation,
except as hereinafter provided. The Mayor shall designate one of the members to
serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the Commission. The terms of office of
the first Commissioners shall be for one, two or three years as designated by the
Mayor in making his or her appointment, and their successors shall be appointed
for terms of three years and until the appointment and qualification of their
successors. The Mayor and Borough Council may remove any member of the
Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a
hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel. A vacancy on the Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
B. The Mayor may also appoint not more than five associate members for terms of one
year. Associate members may attend all public meetings of the Environmental
Commission but shall have no vote on any action taken by the Commission.
A. The governing body may, by ordinance, provide for the appointment of not more
than two alternate members. Alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the authority
appointing them as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
B. The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms of
the alternate members first appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one
year for Alternate No. 2 so that the term of not more than one alternate member
shall expire in any one year. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
C. An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in which he has
either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. An alternate member
may, after public hearing if he requests one, be removed by the governing body for
cause.
§ 9-1 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 9-3
9:3
§ 9-4. Powers of Commission.
The Commission is established for the protection, development or use of natural
resources, including water resources, and for the preservation of scenic, historic,
aesthetic, educational, environmental, ecological and scientific values to be found in the
lands, waters and total environment of the Borough of Shrewsbury. The Commission
shall have power to conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land
areas of the Borough and may coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized
for similar purposes and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts,
plans and pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its purpose. It shall
keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including open marshlands,
swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain information on the proper use of such
areas and may, from time to time, recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs
for inclusion in the Master Plan and the development and use of such areas.
§ 9-5. Acquisitions by Commission.
The Environmental Commission may, subject to the approval of the governing body,
acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the municipality by gift,
purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes and shall administer
the same for such purposes subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift. Such an
acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest, development right, easement,
including conservation easement, covenant or other contractual right, including a
conveyance on conditions or with limitations or reversions, as may be necessary to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and
properly utilize open spaces and other land and water areas in the municipality.
§ 9-6. Records; annual report.
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and
make an annual report to the Mayor and Council.
§ 9-7. Appointment of staff.
The Commission may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may from time to
time require, provided that the same be within the limit of funds appropriated to it by the
Mayor and Council.
§ 9-8. Studies and recommendations.
The Environmental Commission shall have power to study and make recommendations
concerning open space preservation, water resources management, air pollution control,
solid waste management, noise control, soil and landscape protection, environmental
appearance, marine resources and protection of flora and fauna.
D. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not
vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member.
In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
§ 9-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 9-8
9:4
ARTICLE II
Shade Tree Commission
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as §§ 3-121 to 3-124 of the 1973 Code]
§ 9-9. Creation of Commission; membership; terms of office; vacancies.
[Amended 3-11-1975 by Ord. No. 367]
§ 9-10. Alternate members. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 95416]
A. There is hereby created a commission to be called the "Shade Tree Commission of
the Borough of Shrewsbury," which shall consist of such members as provided in
Subsection B below. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
B. From and after January 1, 2004, the Shade Tree Commission shall consist of seven
residents of the Borough of Shrewsbury who shall be appointed by the Mayor. The
present five members now in office, or their successors in the event of a vacancy,
shall serve out their present terms, which expire on December 31, 2004, December
31, 2005, December 31, 2006, December 31, 2007, and December 31, 2008. Upon
the expiration of said terms residents appointed to fill these respective positions
shall be appointed by the Mayor for full five-year terms, to take effect January 1.
One of the additional two members shall be appointed by the Mayor for a term
ending December 31, 2007, and the other additional member shall be appointed by
the Mayor for a term ending December 31, 2008. Thereafter, appointments to these
two additional positions shall be made by the Mayor for full five-year terms, to take
effect on January 1. It is the intention that as each term expires future appointments
shall be for five-year terms, each to take effect January 1, and to expire in a different
year except for the two new terms. Any vacancy caused by death, resignation,
removal or otherwise shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term. [Added
11-14-1977 by Ord. No. 406; amended 2-17-2004 by Ord. No. 824]
A. The governing body may, by ordinance, provide for the appointment of not more
than two alternate members. Alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the authority
appointing them as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
B. The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that the terms of
the alternate members first appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one
year for Alternate No. 2 so that the term of not more than one alternate member
shall expire on any one year. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of
term shall be filled by the appointing authority for the unexpired term only.
C. An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in which he has
either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. An alternate member
may, after public hearing, if he requests one, be removed by the governing body for
cause.
D. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not
vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member.
16. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 9-10, 9-11 and 9-12 as §§ 9-11, 9-12 and 9-12.1, respectively.
§ 9-9 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 9-10
9:5
§ 9-11. Organization of Commission; appointment of Chairman and Secretary.
The Shade Tree Commission shall organize within 30 days after appointment and then,
and annually thereafter in January of each year, elect a Chairman and Secretary.
§ 9-12. Duties of Commission.
It shall be the duty of the Commission to:
§ 9-12.1. General powers and authority of Commission. [Amended 5-15-2006 by
Ord. No. 871]
In addition to the powers specifically enumerated in Part II, General Legislation, Chapter
246, and in Chapter 94, Zoning and Land Development, of the Code of the Borough of
Shrewsbury, the Shade Tree Commission shall have such powers as are authorized by
N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 to 40:64-14, inclusive, and as amended and supplemented.
In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
A. Advise and consult with the Mayor and Council on all matters relating to the
planting, control, care, protection, improvement and removal of shade and
ornamental trees or shrubbery now or hereafter situated on and along any public
street, highway, park, parkway or public place of the Borough.
B. Propose amendments and repeal of ordinances in the manner prescribed by the
governing body of the Borough of Shrewsbury; and any and all ordinances
necessary or proper for carrying out the provisions in Part II, General Legislation,
Chapter 246, Trees, Shrubbery and Landscaping, of this Code. [Added 5-15-2006
by Ord. No. 871]
C. Make and enforce any and all reasonable rules, regulations and orders pertaining to
or covering any matter authorized by this article and Chapter 246, Trees, Shrubbery
and Landscaping, and by N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 to 40:64-14, inclusive, as at any time
amended or supplemented, or as otherwise permitted by law. [Added 5-15-2006 by
Ord. No. 871]
§ 9-10 SHREWSBURY CODE § 9-12.1
9:6
ARTICLE III
Recreation Committee
[Adopted 11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 656 (Ch. 3, Art. XXII, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 9-13. Committee established; membership. [Amended 11-19-2001 by Ord. No.
791; 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. 939]
§ 9-14. Terms.
The members of the Committee first appointed shall serve for the following terms: three
members for one year, three members for two years and three members for three years.
Members thereafter appointed shall serve for terms of three years, except that members
appointed to fill vacancies shall be appointed to serve the remainder of the term of the
original appointment. If the membership of the Committee is increased or decreased,
members will be appointed to such terms as will provide, as nearly as possible, that the
terms of the same number of members expire in any one year as expire in any other year.
§ 9-15. Powers and duties; reports.
The Committee shall from time to time advise and consult with the Mayor and Council
as to the needs, requirements and program of the Borough with respect to public
playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers and recreation facilities and shall from
time to time, of its own motion or when required by the Mayor and Council, submit to
the Mayor and Council such reports as may be required by the Mayor and Council. The
Committee shall have no separate power to commit the Borough for any funds, bills,
charges and expenses, but may, on or before the first day of November in each year,
submit to the Mayor and Council a report as to what amounts the Committee deems
necessary or advisable to be included in the budget for the year following for any of
the purposes for which it is appointed. Such budget reports shall specify the purpose or
purposes for which the expenditure of funds is advised or requested.
§ 9-16. Supervisor of Recreation.
The Committee may also suggest to the Mayor and Council the appointment or
designation of a person or persons to act as Supervisor of Recreation, who shall be
properly qualified for the work for which his or her appointment has been requested.
§ 9-17. Solicitation of funds and property.
A. The Mayor, with the consent and approval of the majority of the members of the
Borough Council, is authorized and empowered to appoint a Committee to be
known as the "Shrewsbury Recreation Committee," to consist of 11 members, one
of whom shall be a member of the Borough Council.
B. The Mayor and Council may also, in its discretion, appoint not more than five
associate members, all to be under the age of 18 years, for a term of one year.
Associate members may attend all public meetings of the Recreation Committee
but shall have no vote on any action taken by the Committee.
A. The Committee may solicit, but only for and in the name of the Borough, funds and
property, both real and personal, which it may deem advisable or necessary in
§ 9-13 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 9-17
9:7
§ 9-18. Organization of Committee.
The Committee shall, after its creation, organize by electing one of its members
President and such other officers as it may deem necessary and shall have the power to
adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the proper conduct of the work and business for
the purposes for which it is created.
§ 9-19. Park and recreation rules.
§ 9-20. Enforcement of park and recreation rules; violations and penalties.
furthering the purposes for which it is appointed. Any funds or property so solicited
or offered for said purposes shall be accepted and received by resolution or other
proper action of the Mayor and Council.
B. In order to provide the funds, in whole or in part, necessary to carry out its
programs, the Committee may arrange and provide for the giving of exhibitions,
plays, concerts, games and contests and may employ public parks, places,
playgrounds or recreational facilities for the purpose of giving the same. The
Committee may charge and collect a reasonable admission fee for each person
entering such public place, playground or recreation place as a spectator during the
time when the same is being used or employed for such purposes but shall not use
or employ any such place for such purpose for a greater period than a ratio of one
hour to every two hours in each day during which the public park, place, playground
or recreation facilities are utilized nor more than 16 hours in any week, and when
any such public facility is used for such purpose no admission fee shall be charged
or collected from children under 12 years of age. The Committee may charge and
collect a reasonable service charge from persons using, as participants, special areas
and facilities, which require special maintenance and the use of which is restricted
to relatively few people, in order to assist in the meeting of the operating costs
thereof in whole or in part.
A. The Committee may from time to time recommend to the Mayor and Council the
adoption of rules and regulations governing the operation and use of Borough parks
and other recreation facilities but shall have no separate power to adopt and enforce
any such rules and regulations.
B. The Mayor and Council may, by resolution, adopt rules and regulations governing
the operation and use of Borough parks and other recreation facilities, and such
rules and regulations shall be on file with the Borough Clerk and shall be issued
upon request.
A. All rules and regulations governing the operation and use of Borough parks and
other recreation facilities, as adopted by the Mayor and Council pursuant to § 9-19,
shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of the rules
and regulations governing the operation of parks as provided in Subsection A
above, which shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of
Shrewsbury, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 170 of the Code.
[Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
§ 9-17 SHREWSBURY CODE § 9-20.1
9:8
§ 9-20.1. Criminal history background checks of employees and volunteers
involved in recreation programs. [Added 6-20-2011 by Ord. No. 959]
A. Background checks required.
(1) The Shrewsbury Recreation Committee, a nonprofit youth-serving
organization, as defined by state law, N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1, shall require all
employees and volunteers of that organization who have regular, unsupervised
contact with minors to obtain a criminal history background check.
(2) The Borough shall bear the costs associated with conducting the background
check, in accordance with fees established by the State Bureau of
Identification and the Division of State Police and in accordance with N.J.S.A.
15A:3A-2(d).
B. Conditions under which a person shall be disqualified from service. A person shall
be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer of a nonprofit youthserving
organization if that person's criminal history background check reveals a
record of conviction of any of the following crimes and offenses:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and disorderly
persons offenses as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq., such as criminal
homicide; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., such as assault, reckless
endangerment, threats, stalking; N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq., such as
kidnapping; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1, et seq., such as sexual assault; or N.J.S.A.
2C:15-1 et seq., such as robbery.
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq., such as
endangering the welfare of a child.
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New Jersey
Statutes;
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled substance
analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes
except Paragraph (4) of subsection (a) of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10 (minimal
amounts of marijuana or hashish).
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New Jersey,
would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly persons offenses described in
this section.
C. Submission, exchange of background information.
(1) Each employee or volunteer shall submit his or her application and consent for
a criminal history background check to the Borough Administrator. The
Borough Administrator shall coordinate the background checks with the New
Jersey State Police, in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1
et seq.
§ 9-20.1 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 9-20.1
9:9
(2) Once an accurately completed application and consent for a criminal
background check is received by the Borough Administrator, the employee or
volunteer will be given the necessary documents to get his or her fingerprints
taken by an authorized state agency (Sagem Morpho, Inc.). The employee or
volunteer is responsible for making and keeping the necessary appointment for
fingerprints to be taken. The Borough will seek restitution from any employee
or volunteer for any fees charged by Sagem Morpho, Inc., for appointments
canceled and not rescheduled within the time frame established by Sagem
Morpho, Inc.
(3) The State Police Bureau of Identification shall inform the Borough
Administrator whether the employee's or volunteer's criminal history record
background check reveals a conviction of a disqualifying crime or offense
specified in Subsection B of this section. The Borough Administrator is not
given any personal information on the individual's record, only that the
individual is, or is not, recommended to coach or work. The results of the
background check will only be shared with the Recreation Committee
Chairperson, unless an appeal is made, thus involving the members of the
Appeals Council
(4) If the background check disqualifies the individual from employment or
volunteering, he or she shall be so notified by the Borough Administrator. The
details in the background check that result in a negative determination by the
State Police are only available to the employee or volunteer upon making a
formal request to the State Bureau of Investigation. It will then be up to the
individual to obtain a copy of this record and provide it to the Borough
Administrator for appeal consideration.
(5) Successful background checks shall be reported to the Recreation Committee
Chairman, who shall maintain a list of all individuals who are qualified to
serve as employees or volunteers with nonprofit youth-serving organizations
by virtue of their having successfully completed the background check.
(6) A successful background check remains valid for three years.
(7) After the initial three-year period all Recreation Program employees, coaches,
and other volunteers shall undergo a N.J. State Police "name check"
background check as a renewal process. The employee or volunteer shall only
be required to provide his or her name, address, DOB and signature on a form
authorizing the Borough of Shrewsbury to receive the background results. The
Borough of Shrewsbury shall process the form and pay all costs. [Added
6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 1013]
(8) Access to criminal history record information shall be limited in accordance
with law, including, N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1 et seq.
[Amended 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 1013]
D. Appeal procedure.
(1) Any person whose criminal history background check disqualifies that person
from employment or from volunteering may appeal his or her disqualification.
§ 9-20.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 9-20.1
9:10
(a) A person may challenge the accuracy of the criminal history record.
(b) A person may claim to be rehabilitated.
(c) No person may appeal a disqualification on the grounds of rehabilitation,
if the person has been rejected because that person has been convicted,
adjudicated delinquent or acquitted by reason of insanity of aggravated
sexual assault; sexual assault; aggravated criminal sexual contact;
kidnapping pursuant to Paragraph (2) of Subsection c of N.J.S.A.
2C:13-1; endangering the welfare of a child by engaging in sexual
conduct which would impair or debauch the morals of the child pursuant
to Subsection a of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; endangering the welfare of a child
pursuant to Paragraph (4) of Subsection b of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; luring or
enticing pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1993, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 2C:13-6);
criminal sexual contact pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3b if the victim is a
minor; kidnapping pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-2, or false imprisonment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-3, if the victim is a minor and the offender is
not the parent of the victim; knowingly promoting prostitution of a child
pursuant to Paragraph (3) or Paragraph (4) of Subsection b. of N.J.S.A.
2C:34-1; or an attempt to commit any of these enumerated offenses.
(2) A challenge to the accuracy of the report shall be filed with the Shrewsbury
Borough Chief of Police, who shall coordinate the challenge with the New
Jersey State Police.
(3) An appeal based on rehabilitation shall be made to the Appeals Council, which
shall consist of the Recreation Committee Chairperson, the Shrewsbury
Borough Chief of Police, or the Chief's designee, and the Shrewsbury Borough
Administrator. Any such appeal must be made within 30 days of receipt of the
notice of disqualification.
(4) In determining whether a person has affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation,
the Appeals Council shall consider the following factors:
(a) The nature and responsibility of the position which the convicted person
would hold or has held, as the case may be;
(b) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(c) The circumstances under which the offense occurred;
(d) The date of the offense;
(e) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(f) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
(g) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the offense; and
(h) Any other evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or
the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received, acquisition
of additional academic or vocational schooling, successful participation
in correctional work-release programs, or the recommendation of those
§ 9-20.1 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 9-20.1
9:11
who have had the person under their supervision.
(5) If the Appeals Council determines that the disqualified person has been
successfully rehabilitated, it shall enter that person's name on the list of
qualified employees and volunteers maintained by the Recreation Committee.
(6) Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the members of
the Appeals Committee, as authorized by federal or state statute, rule or
regulation, executive order, administrative code, local ordinance or resolution
regarding obtaining and disseminating of criminal history record information
obtained under this subsection. The records shall be exempt from public
disclosure under Common Law or N.J.S.A 47:1A-1 et seq.
(7) The Appeals Committee shall limit its use of criminal history record
information solely to the authorized person for which it was obtained, and
criminal history record information furnished shall not be disseminated to
persons or organizations not authorized to receive the records for authorized
purposes. Use of this record shall be limited solely to the authorized purpose
for which it was given, and it shall not be disseminated to any unauthorized
persons. Any person violating federal or state regulations governing access to
criminal history record information may be subject to criminal and/or civil
penalties.
E. Penalty.
(1) Failure to comply with this section may result in the Borough withholding
funding for the nonprofit youth-serving organization, prohibiting the use of
facilities, or withholding funding for facility maintenance.
(2) Unless it is reauthorized by the Borough Council, this section shall expire on
December 31, 2014.
(3) In the event that any portion of this section is found to be invalid for any reason
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be limited in its
effect only to that portion of this section actually adjudged to be invalid, and
the remaining portions of this section shall be deemed severable therefrom and
shall not be affected.
(4) This section shall take effect June 20, 2011.
§ 9-20.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 9-20.1
9:12
ARTICLE IV
Community Alliance for the Prevention of Alcohol and Drug Abuse
[Adopted 11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 88517]
§ 9-21. Preamble.
Whereas, alcoholism and drug abuse are important public health and law enforcement
problems: now, therefore, the Shrewsbury Borough Council establishes the Shrewsbury
Community Alliance for the Prevention of Alcohol and Drug Abuse (hereinafter
"Alliance") for the purpose of organizing and coordinating efforts involving schools,
law enforcement, business groups and other community organizations for the purpose of
reducing alcoholism and drug abuse.
§ 9-22. Establishment of a community alliance.
A. The Mayor, with the consent and approval of the majority of the members of the
Borough Council, is authorized and empowered to appoint a community alliance to
be known as the "Shrewsbury Alliance for the Prevention of Alcohol and Drug
Abuse," which shall consist of such members as provided in Subsection B below.
B. The membership of the Alliance shall consist of representatives of the Borough of
Shrewsbury, that shall include a member of the governing body; Chief of Police or
his designee; the Municipal Court Judge or his designee; representative of the
Shrewsbury Borough School Board of Education; the School Superintendent or his
designee; a member of the school parent-teacher group; representatives of religious
groups, business community, civic organizations and Borough citizens. Total
number of appointees can equal 12 plus appointees. Experience has shown that
some representatives of the Borough, school, civic and religious organizations often
cannot or do not attend meetings but are consulted on specific matters the Alliance
is considering or participate in the development of programs.
C. Terms. The terms of office shall be for one, two and three years, as follows:
(1) Representatives of the governing body, Police Department, Municipal Court,
Shrewsbury Borough School District, i.e., member of the Board of Education,
Superintendent; member of the parent-teacher group shall be appointed to a
two-year term.
(2) Representatives of religious groups, business community, civic organizations
shall be appointed to a two-year term.
(3) The terms of office of the first Alliance shall be for one, two, or three years as
designated by the Mayor in her recommendation to Council, and their
successors shall be appointed for terms of three years and until the
appointment and qualification of their successors.
(4) Any vacancy on the Alliance occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
17. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 1-1-2007.
§ 9-21 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 9-23
9:13
§ 9-23. Organizations of the Alliance.
The Alliance shall organize within 30 days after appointment and then and annually
thereafter, in January of each year, elect a Chairman and Secretary.
§ 9-24. Duties of the Alliance.
A. Organize and coordinate efforts involving schools, law enforcement, business
groups and other community organizations for the purpose of reducing alcoholism
and drug abuse.
B. Develop comprehensive and effective alcoholism and drug abuse prevention
programs in grades kindergarten through eighth, in cooperation with Shrewsbury
school representatives.
C. Develop comprehensive alcoholism and drug abuse community awareness
programs.
§ 9-23 SHREWSBURY CODE § 9-24
9:14
ARTICLE V
Shrewsbury Community Garden
[Adopted 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 990]
§ 9-25. Preamble.
The Shrewsbury Community Garden is hereby established for the support of recreational
community gardens for residents to grow their own produce through best gardening
practices. Benefits include the preservation of green space as residents work
collaboratively and share information in gardening techniques. In addition, the
Shrewsbury Community Garden will provide an educational forum for members to
expand horticultural knowledge by way of cross-cultural and intergenerational
connections as well as foster pride in a community-wide organization.
§ 9-26. Committee established; terms.
§ 9-27. Organization.
The Shrewsbury Community Garden shall organize within 30 days after appointment
and then, and annually thereafter in January of each year, elect a Chairman, a Vice
Chairman and a Secretary.
§ 9-28. Bylaws.
The Shrewsbury Garden Community is hereby authorized to establish bylaws for its
operation, which shall be approved by the Shrewsbury Borough Council prior to
implementation. Any amendment to the bylaws shall also be approved by the
Shrewsbury Borough Council.
A. The Mayor is authorized and empowered to appoint a Committee to be known as
the "Shrewsbury Community Garden," to consist of nine members.
B. The initial terms of office of the first Shrewsbury Community Garden shall be for
one, two or three years as designated by the Mayor, and their successors shall be
appointed for terms of three years and until the appointment and qualification of
their successors.
C. Any vacancy on the Shrewsbury Community Garden occurring otherwise than by
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an
original appointment.
§ 9-25 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS § 9-28
9:15

Chapter 13
CLAIMS APPROVAL
§ 13-1. Approval and payment of claims.
A. Any person claiming payment from the Borough shall present a detailed bill of
items or demand to the Borough Chief Financial Officer specifying particularly
how the bill or demand is made up, duly certified by the party claiming payment
that it is correct.
B. Each claim presented to the Borough for payment shall be certified by a member of
the Borough Council or other officer or employee of the Borough which
Councilman or other officer or employee shall have knowledge of the fact that the
goods have been received by or the services rendered to the Borough. The signature
shall appear on the claim and it shall be the duty of the Borough Chief Financial
Officer to determine whether such signature appears thereon.
C. Claims shall then be presented to the chairman of the committee responsible for the
placing of the order and a bills list shall be submitted to the Chairman of the Finance
Committee for review. In the event the Chairman of the Finance Committee is
unavailable the bills list shall be presented to any other member of the Finance
Committee. After the claims have thus been presented, the same shall either be
approved or disapproved with reasons for disapproval and returned to the Borough
Clerk who shall then present these claims to the governing body for formal approval
or disapproval at any voting meeting of the governing body.
D. Claims shall be considered by the governing body which shall approve the same,
except that said governing body may reject any claim presented to it stating the
reason for such rejection. Any disapproved claim shall be referred back to the
Borough Clerk with such instructions as the governing body may give at the time
of disapproval.
E. It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk to record all claims in the official minutes
indicating that the governing body has by formal action approved the same with
appropriate record as to any claims disapproved or rejected.
F. It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk or such other officer designated by
resolution of the governing body, to indicate on said bills list that they have been
approved for payment.
G. After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, they shall be
turned over to the Chief Financial Officer, who shall place the date of approval on
each claim and forthwith prepare the necessary checks for the payment thereof,
which said checks shall be signed by the Mayor and the Borough Clerk and
thereafter countersigned by the Chief Financial Officer. After preparing checks for
the payment of claims, he/she shall record them in proper books of account and
thereafter mail or otherwise distribute the checks to the claimants.
H. In the case of payrolls, the appropriate department heads or such officer or
employee as may be designated by resolution of the governing body shall prepare
§ 9-28 CLAIMS APPROVAL § 13-1
13:1
the necessary payrolls for all employees, which payrolls shall be duly certified by
the person authorized to certify that the services have been rendered and the amount
specified is in fact due and owing to the employee or employees. Said payroll shall
then be approved by the department head responsible therefor and presented to the
governing body for approval.
I. Whenever claims are presented for reimbursement for actual and necessary
traveling expenses incurred by local officials where authorized to travel by the
Borough, such claims shall be itemized and supported by receipts where available
and presented as are other claims in order to obtain reimbursement for such
expenses.
§ 13-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 13-1
13:2
Chapter 17
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Attorney — See Ch. 5, Art. V. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 45.
§ 13-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 13-1
17:1

ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 10-5-1948 by Ord. No. 66 (Ch. 3, Art. XVII, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 17-1. Establishment of Court; term and salary of Judge. [Amended 9-27-1973 by
Ord. No. 346]
There is hereby created and established under and by virtue of the authority given by
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq. and any amendments thereto or supplements thereof, a court
in and for the Borough of Shrewsbury, to be known as Municipal Court of Shrewsbury
Borough, with all the jurisdiction, functions, powers and duties provided by said law and
by any amendments thereof or supplements thereto, and with any and all jurisdiction,
functions, powers and duties which may hereafter be conferred upon it under any laws
or statutes relating thereto. The Municipal Judge shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council, for a term of three years from the date
of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified. The salary of
the Municipal Judge shall be as set forth in the annual Salary Resolution.18 The salary
of the Municipal Judge shall be paid in the same manner as the salaries of other
municipal officers are paid, and shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and any other allowances
whatsoever.
§ 17-2. Municipal Court Administrator. [Added 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346;
amended 7-8-1991 by Ord. No. 625]
A Municipal Court Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council. He shall hold office for a term of one year. The Municipal Court
Administrator shall receive an annual salary to be determined by the Mayor and Council,
which shall be paid in the manner as the salaries of other municipal officers are paid,
and which shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and other allowances whatsoever. He shall
perform such functions and duties as shall be prescribed for him by the law, the court
rules applicable to municipal courts and the Judge of the Municipal Court.
§ 17-3. Deputy Municipal Court Administrator. [Added 9-27-1973 by Ord. No.
346; amended 7-8-1991 by Ord. No. 625]
A Deputy Municipal Court Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council. He shall hold office for a term of one year. The
Deputy Municipal Court Administrator shall receive an annual salary to be determined
by the Mayor and Council, which shall be paid in the manner as the salaries of other
municipal officers are paid, and which shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and other
allowances whatsoever. He shall perform such functions and duties as shall be prescribed
for him by the law, the court rules applicable to municipal courts, the Court
Administrator and the Judge of the Municipal Court.
18. Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 17-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 17-3
17:3

ARTICLE II
Borough Prosecutor
[Adopted 2-11-1975 by Ord. No. 365 (§ 3-17.1 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 17-4. Office created; appointment.
There is hereby created the office of Borough Prosecutor who shall be nominated by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, at the organizational meeting, or at
any time thereafter, in the event such appointment by the Mayor and Council is deemed
advisable or necessary.
§ 17-5. Term of office.
The term of office of the Borough Prosecutor, whose office is herein created, shall be at
the pleasure of the Mayor and Council, but in any event shall expire on December 31 of
the year in which said Borough Prosecutor is appointed.
§ 17-6. Duties.
The duties of the Borough Prosecutor, to be appointed as herein provided, shall be to
prosecute any and all matters on behalf of the Borough and/or the state in the Municipal
Court of the Borough of Shrewsbury and to be in attendance at all times when the Judge
so requests.
§ 17-7. Conflicts of interest.
In the event of a conflict of interest or otherwise, the Borough Prosecutor shall call upon
the Borough Attorney to attend to any such matters.
§ 17-8. Compensation.
The compensation of the Borough Prosecutor shall be such as shall, from time to time,
be fixed by resolution of the Borough Council or by the Borough's Salary Resolution.19
19. Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 17-4 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 17-8
17:5

ARTICLE III
Municipal Court Public Defender
[Adopted 3-10-1997 by Ord. No. 729 (§ 3-17.2 of the 1973 Code); amended
2-9-1998 by Ord. No. 745]
§ 17-9. Office created; appointment.
There is hereby created the office of Municipal Court Public Defender who shall
be nominated by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, at the
organizational meeting, or at any time thereafter, in the event such appointment by the
Mayor and Council is deemed advisable or necessary.
§ 17-10. Term of office.
The term of office of the Municipal Court Public Defender, whose office is herein
created, shall be at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council, but in any event shall expire
on December 31 of the year in which said Municipal Court Public Defender is appointed.
§ 17-11. Duties.
The Municipal Court Public Defender shall provide all necessary and desirable legal
counsel and advice required for the defense of cases in the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Shrewsbury on behalf of those indigent defendants who are entitled by law
to appointment of counsel and as approved by the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 17-12. Application fee.20
Every person who makes application to the Shrewsbury Borough Municipal Court for
representation by the Public Defender in any matter pending before the Court shall pay
an application fee of not more than $200. The Municipal Court may waive the required
application fee, in whole or in part, if the Court determines that the application fee
imposes an unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation.
§ 17-13. Compensation.
The compensation of the Municipal Court Public Defender shall be such as shall, from
time to time, be fixed by resolution of the Borough Council or by the Borough's Salary
Resolution.21
20. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
21. Editor's Note: See Ch. 45, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 17-9 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 17-13
17:7

Chapter 19
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
§ 19-1. Provision of indemnification and legal defense.
Except as hereinafter provided, the Borough of Shrewsbury, hereinafter known as the
"Borough," shall, upon the request of any present or former official, employee or
appointee of the Borough, provide for indemnification and legal defense of any civil
action brought against said person or persons arising from an act or omission falling
within the scope of his or her public duties.
§ 19-2. Exceptions.
The Borough shall not indemnify any person against the payment of punitive damages,
penalties or fines, but may provide for the legal defense of such claims in accord with
the standards set forth herein. The Borough may refuse to provide for the defense and
indemnification of any civil action referred to herein if the Borough of Shrewsbury
determines that:
§ 19-3. Construal of terms.
The terms of this chapter and the definition of "official," "employee" and "appointee" are
to be construed liberally in order to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, except that
these terms shall not mean:
A. The act or omission did not occur within the scope of a duty authorized or imposed
by law;
B. The act or failure to act was the result of actual fraud, willful misconduct or actual
malice of the person requesting defense and indemnification; or
C. The defense of the action or proceeding by the Borough would create a conflict of
interest between the Borough and the person or persons involved.
A. Any person who is not a natural person;
B. Any person while providing goods or services of any kind under any contract with
the Borough except an employment contract;
C. Any person while providing legal or engineering services for compensation, unless
said person is a full-time employee of the Borough; and
D. Any person who, as a condition of his or her appointment or contract, is required to
indemnify and defend the Borough and/or secure insurance.
§ 17-13 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 19-4
19:1
§ 19-4. Indemnification.
§ 19-5. Defense in best interest of Borough.
In any other action or proceeding, including criminal proceedings, the Borough may
provide for the defense of a present or former official, employee or appointee, if the
Borough of Shrewsbury concludes that such representation is in the best interest of the
Borough and that the person to be defended acted or failed to act in accord with the
standards set forth in this chapter.
§ 19-6. Borough to control representation.
Whenever the Borough provides for the defense of any action set forth herein and
as a condition of such defense, the Borough may assume exclusive control over the
representation of such persons defended, and such person shall cooperate fully with the
Borough.
§ 19-7. Means of defense.
The Borough may provide for the defense pursuant to this chapter by authorizing its
attorney to act in behalf of the person being defended or by employing other counsel for
this purpose or by asserting the right of the Borough under any appropriate insurance
policy that requires the insurer to provide defense.
A. The Borough shall provide for defense of and indemnify any present or former
official, employee or appointee of the Borough who becomes a defendant in a civil
action, if the person or persons involved:
(1) Acted or failed to act in a matter in which the Borough has or had an interest;
(2) Acted or failed to act in the discharge of a duty imposed or authorized by law;
and
(3) Acted or failed to take action in good faith.
B. For purposes of this chapter, the duty and authority of the Borough to defend and
indemnify shall extend to a cross-claim or counterclaim against said person.
§ 19-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 19-7
19:2
Chapter 21
ETHICS BOARD, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
§ 21-1. Creation.
There shall be a Municipal Ethics Board in and for the Borough, established in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq. (Chapter 29 of the Laws
of 1991).
§ 21-2. Membership.
The Municipal Ethics Board shall consist of six members who are residents of the
Borough of Shrewsbury, at least two of whom shall be public members. The members
of the Ethics Board shall be appointed by the governing body of the municipality. The
members shall be chosen by virtue of their known and consistent reputation for integrity
and their knowledge of local government affairs. No more than three members of the
Ethics Board shall be of the same political party.
§ 21-3. Terms of office.
The members shall serve for terms of five years; except that of the members initially
appointed, two of the public members shall be appointed to serve for terms of four years,
and the remaining members shall be appointed to serve for terms of three years. Each
member shall serve until his successor has been appointed and qualified. Any vacancy
occurring in the membership of the Ethics Board shall be filled in the same manner as
the original appointment for the unexpired term.
§ 21-4. Election of Chairperson.
The members of the Municipal Ethics Board shall annually elect a Chairman from
among the membership.
§ 21-5. Compensation; facilities; expenses; personnel.
A. Members of the Ethics Board shall serve without compensation but shall be
reimbursed by the municipality for necessary expenses incurred in the performance
of their duties under this chapter.
B. The governing body of the municipality shall provide the Municipal Ethics Board
with offices for the conduct of its business and the preservation of its records and
shall supply equipment and supplies as may be necessary.
C. All necessary expenses incurred by the Municipal Ethics Board and its members
§ 19-7 ETHICS BOARD, MUNICIPAL § 21-5
21:1
§ 21-6. Municipal Code of Ethics.
shall be paid, upon certification of the Chairman, by the Municipal Chief Financial
Officer within the limits of funds appropriated by the municipal governing body by
annual or emergency appropriations for those purposes.
D. The Municipal Ethics Board may appoint employees, including independent
counsel, and clerical staff as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter
within the limits of funds appropriated by the municipal governing body for those
purposes.
A. Within 90 days after the establishment of a Municipal Ethics Board, that Ethics
Board shall promulgate by resolution a Municipal Code of Ethics for all local
government officers and employees serving the municipality. Local government
officers and employees serving a municipal independent authority shall be deemed
to be serving the municipality for purposes of this chapter.
B. The Municipal Code of Ethics so promulgated shall be either identical to the
provisions set forth in Section 15 of the Local Government Ethics Act (N.J.S.A.
40A:9-22.15) or more restrictive, but shall not be less restrictive. Within 15 days
following the promulgation thereof, the Municipal Code of Ethics and a notice of
the date of the public hearing to be held thereon shall be published in at least one
newspaper circulating within the municipality and shall be distributed to the
Municipal Clerk and to the heads of the local government agencies serving the
municipality for circulation among the local government officers and employees
serving the municipality. The Municipal Ethics Board shall hold a public hearing
on the Municipal Code of Ethics not less than 30 days following its promulgation
at which any local government officer or employee serving the municipality and
any other person wishing to be heard shall be permitted to testify. As a result of the
hearing, the Ethics Board may amend or supplement the Municipal Code of Ethics
as it deems necessary.
(1) If the Municipal Code of Ethics is not identical to the provisions set forth in
Section 15 of the Local Government Ethics Act, the Municipal Ethics Board
shall thereafter submit the Municipal Code of Ethics to the Local Finance
Board for approval. The Board shall approve or disapprove a Municipal Code
of Ethics within 60 days following receipt. If the Board fails to act within that
period, the Municipal Code of Ethics shall be deemed approved. A Municipal
Code of Ethics requiring Board approval shall take effect for all local
government officers and employees serving the municipality 60 days after
approval by the Board.
(2) A Municipal Code of Ethics identical to the provisions set forth in Section 15
of the Local Government Ethics Act shall take effect 10 days after the public
hearing held thereon. The Municipal Ethics Board shall forward a copy of the
Municipal Code of Ethics to the Municipal Clerk and shall make copies of the
Municipal Code of Ethics available to local government officers and
employees serving the municipality.
§ 21-5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 21-7
21:2
§ 21-7. Powers and duties.
A Municipal Ethics Board shall have the power to:
§ 21-8. Advisory opinions.
A local government officer or employee serving the municipality may request and
obtain from the Municipal Ethics Board an advisory opinion as to whether any proposed
activity or conduct would in its opinion constitute a violation of the Municipal Code
of Ethics or any financial disclosure requirements. Advisory opinions of the Municipal
Ethics Board shall not be made public, except when the Ethics Board, by the vote of 2/3
of all of its members, directs that the opinion be made public. Public advisory opinions
shall not disclose the name of the local government officer or employee unless the Ethics
Board, in directing that the opinion be made public, so determines.
§ 21-9. Complaints; proceedings.
A. Initiate, receive, hear and review complaints and hold hearings with regard to
possible violations of the Municipal Code of Ethics or financial disclosures
requirement by local government officers or employees serving the municipality.
B. Issue subpoenas for the reduction of documents and the attendance of witnesses
with respect to its investigation of any complaint or to the holding of a hearing.
C. Forward to the County Prosecutor or the Attorney General or other governmental
body any information concerning violations of the Municipal Code of Ethics or
financial disclosure requirements by local government officers or employees
serving the municipality which may become the subject of criminal prosecution or
which may warrant the institution of other legal proceedings by the Attorney
General.
D. Render advisory opinions to local government officers or employees serving the
municipality as to whether a given set of facts and circumstances would constitute
a violation of any provision of the Municipal Code of Ethics or financial disclosure
requirements.
E. Enforce the provisions of the Municipal Code of Ethics and financial disclosure
requirements with regard to local government officers or employees serving the
municipality and to impose penalties for the violation thereof as are authorized by
this chapter.
F. Adopt rules and regulations and to do other things as are necessary to implement
the purposes of this chapter.
A. The Municipal Ethics Board, upon receipt of a signed written complaint by any
person alleging that the conduct of any local government officer or employee
serving the municipality is in conflict with the Municipal Code of Ethics or
financial disclosure requirements, shall acknowledge receipt of the complaint
within 30 days of receipt and initiate an investigation concerning the facts and
circumstances set forth in the complaint. The Ethics Board shall make a
determination as to whether the complaint is within its jurisdiction or frivolous or
without any reasonable factual basis. If the Ethics Board shall conclude that the
§ 21-7 ETHICS BOARD, MUNICIPAL § 21-9
21:3
complaint is outside its jurisdiction, frivolous or without factual basis, it shall
reduce that conclusion to writing and shall transmit a copy thereof to the
complainant and to the local government officer or employee against whom the
complaint was filed. Otherwise, the Ethics Board shall notify the local government
officer or employee against whom the complaint was filed of the nature of the
complaint and the facts and circumstances set forth therein. The officer or employee
shall have the opportunity to present the Ethics Board with any statement or
information concerning the complaint which he wishes. Thereafter, if the Ethics
Board determines that a reasonable doubt exists as to whether the local government
officer or employee is in conflict with the Municipal Code of Ethics or any financial
disclosure requirements, it shall conduct a hearing in the manner prescribed by
Section 12 of the Local Government Ethics Act (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.12), concerning
the possible violation and any other fact with respect to the conduct of the local
government officer or employee. The Ethics Board shall render a decision as to
whether the conduct of the officer or employee is in conflict with the Municipal
Code of Ethics or any financial disclosure requirements. This decision shall be
made by no less than 2/3 of all members of the Ethics Board.
B. If the Ethics Board determines that the officer or employee is in conflict with the
code or any financial disclosure requirements, it may impose any penalties which it
believes appropriate within the limitations of this chapter. A final decision of the
Ethics Board may be appealed to the Local Finance Board within 30 days of the
decision.
C. All statements, complaints, requests or other written materials filed pursuant to this
chapter, and any rulings, opinions, judgments, transcripts or other official papers
prepared pursuant to this chapter, shall be preserved for a period of at least five
years from the date of filing or preparation, as the case may be.
§ 21-9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 21-9
21:4
Chapter 25
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Volunteer incentives — See Ch. 51.
§ 25-1. Limits of Fire District.
The incorporated limits of the Borough of Shrewsbury shall be the Fire District of this
Fire Department.
§ 25-2. Establishment of Department.22
The Fire Department of this Borough shall consist of Shrewsbury Hose Company No. 1,
a volunteer fire company. The officers of said company shall be such as are designated
by its constitution and bylaws, copies of which shall be filed with the Borough Clerk.
§ 25-3. Powers of company; membership elections and qualifications. [Amended
9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346; 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 404; 5-10-1982 by Ord. No.
469; 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 774]
The said company of the Fire Department shall have power to provide for the election
of its officers and members and manage its own affairs, subject to its constitution and
bylaws. However, before any person so elected as a member shall actually become a
member, his election to such membership shall receive the approval of the Borough
Council, and before any officer so elected shall take office, his election to such office
shall receive the approval of the Borough Council. Membership in the Fire Department
shall be as set forth in the bylaws of the Fire Department.
§ 25-4. Prevention of misuse of equipment.23
It shall be the duty of every member of the Fire Department to prevent unauthorized
persons from riding on any apparatus or using any Borough fire equipment at any time. It
shall be the duty of all officers of the Department to prevent any misuse of the apparatus
by any member and to prevent excessive speed in driving any apparatus and to prevent
any member from conducting himself in such a manner as to cause a breach of the peace
or reflect discredit on the Fire Department and the Borough.
§ 25-5. Apparatus not to leave Borough without authorization.
No apparatus, except in case of necessity, shall leave the Borough limits. The Mayor,
Chairman of the Fire Committee, Chief, First Assistant Chief or Second Assistant Chief
may permit any apparatus to leave the limits of the Borough on a call for assistance
22. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
23. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 21-9 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 25-5
25:1
from outside the Borough. The Mayor or Chairman of the Fire Committee shall have
sole power to permit apparatus to leave the limits of the Borough for repairs or to attend
parades or firemen's tournaments.
§ 25-6. Special use of apparatus or equipment.
No apparatus or equipment shall be used for any trial of skill or power except by consent
of the Chief or the First or Second Assistant Chief, nor shall it be removed from the
firehouse for any use whatever, except for an alarm of fire, drill or authorized trial of
skill or power, except with the approval of the Mayor, Chairman of the Fire Committee,
the Chief or the First or Second Assistant Chief.
§ 25-7. Speed limit for apparatus. [Amended 5-10-1982 by Ord. No. 46924]
When going to an alarm of fire, fire apparatus shall be operated at a rate of speed
consistent with public safety.
§ 25-8. Blue light permits.25
§ 25-9. Calling and control of outside assistance.
Should a fire develop within the limits of the Borough that requires assistance from outof-
town fire departments, the Chief or, in his absence, the person in command at any
fire is hereby vested with power to call such out-of-town assistance as he may deem
necessary to aid in the extinguishing of the fire. The members of such out-of-town fire
A. Eligibility. Applicants for permits authorizing the use of blue emergency warning
lights pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:24-5 et seq. may be considered eligible providing the
Chief of the Fire Company certifies that the applicant of the Fire Department is an
active member in good standing of a volunteer fire company and may display a blue
emergency warning light.
B. Application. Pursuant to state regulations, the completed application shall be
submitted to the Borough Clerk for submission to the Mayor for review. The Clerk
shall forward an approved application to the appropriate state office and a copy
thereof to the Chief of the Fire Company and to the Police Department.
C. Possession and exhibition. Mounting of emergency lights shall be in compliance
with regulations set forth by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles. The blue
light permit issued to the volunteer member of the Fire Department must be in the
possession of the operator of the vehicle when the blue light(s) are displayed on the
vehicle and must be exhibited upon the request of any law enforcement official.
D. Validity; cancellation; revocation. Permits are valid for four years from the date of
issuance and are not transferable. When a member of the Fire Department to whom
a permit is issued ceases to be an active member in good standing of a volunteer
fire company, the permit must be surrendered to the New Jersey Division of Motor
Vehicles within 10 days of the cause for cancellation or revocation.
24. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
25. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 25-5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 25-9
25:2
departments shall be under the command of the Chief or, in his absence, the person in
command of the fire.
§ 25-10. Records of fires attended; annual report.
A complete record of all fires attended by this Department shall be kept by the company,
and the Chief shall make a full report of this record annually, before December 31, to the
Borough Council.
§ 25-11. Reports of violations; examinations of charges.
It shall be the duty of the officers of this Department to promptly report any violation of
this chapter to the Chief, and that officer shall report the same to the Borough Council at
its next regular meeting. The Borough Council shall examine into such charges and shall
take such action thereon as it may deem necessary, provided that no penalties other than
such as are provided in this chapter shall be enforced.
§ 25-12. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for any violation of this chapter shall be, in the case of an officer,
degradation from office and expulsion from the Department and, in the case of a fireman,
expulsion from the Department.
§ 25-9 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 25-12
25:3

Chapter 29
HEALTH, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health legislation — See Part III.
§ 25-12 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 25-12
29:1

ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 8-2-1926 by Ord. No. 1 (Ch. 3, Art. XX, of the 1973 Code); amended in
its entirety at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III)]
§ 29-1. Board of Health continued.
The Board of Health, as heretofore established in the Borough in accordance with Title
26 of the Revised Statutes, is hereby continued.
§ 29-2. Members; terms; vacancies.
The Board of Health shall consist of seven members. Each member shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the consent of the Council and shall serve for a term of four years,
except in the case of vacancies which shall be filled for the unexpired term only. In
addition, the Mayor may appoint, with the consent of the Council, two alternates who
shall be designated at the time of appointment as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2.
The alternate members shall serve for terms of two years, except that the terms of the
alternate members first appointed shall be two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for
Alternate No. 2. A vacancy occurring other than by expiration of a term shall be filled by
the Mayor with the consent of Council for the unexpired term only. Alternate members
may participate in discussions but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member.
§ 29-3. Rules and regulations; election of President.
The Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its own government. It shall
elect a President from among its members.
§ 29-4. Appointment of health officers and staff.
The Board of Health shall appoint a Registrar of Vital Statistics, Secretary and Sanitary
Inspector, and may also appoint such other officers or assistants as said Board of Health
may deem necessary. The appointment of the Registrar of Vital Statistics shall be
governed by N.J.S.A. 26:8-11 et seq. All appointees of said Board of Health shall be
governed by the rules of said Board and may be removed for cause by said Board, unless
governed otherwise by statute. The police of the Borough, when on police duty, shall
promptly report to the Board of Health every violation of the health ordinances of the
Borough which may come within their observation or knowledge.
§ 29-5. Liabilities.
The Board of Health shall not contract liabilities of any kind beyond the amount allowed
by law, except on appropriation made for its use by the Mayor and Council.
§ 29-6. Powers and duties.
The Board of Health shall have all of the powers provided in N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.
§ 29-1 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 29-6
29:3

ARTICLE II
Clerk of the Board
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 (Ch. 97, Art. I, of the 1973 Code); amended in
its entirety 3-4-2004 by Ord. No. 828]
§ 29-7. Appointment; term of office.
The Board of Health shall appoint a Clerk of the Board of Health, who shall serve at the
pleasure of said Board of Health.
§ 29-8. Duties.
The Clerk of the Board of Health shall:
§ 29-9. Adoption of standards of performance.
There is hereby adopted by the Board of Health of the Borough of Shrewsbury for the
purpose of establishing performance standards and guidelines that certain New Jersey
Administrative Code known as "Public Health Practice Standards of Performance for
Local Boards of Health in New Jersey," the whole thereof. One copy of said code
hereinabove mentioned has been annexed to this article and is hereby made a part of this
article as if fully incorporated herein. Three copies of said code have been placed on file
in the office of the Clerk of the Borough of Shrewsbury upon introduction hereof and
they will remain there on file for the use and examination of the public until this section
is adopted and, if this section is adopted, will remain available to the public and on file
in said Clerk's office and in such other place as may be required by law.
A. Keep the minutes and records of the proceedings of the Board of Health and
publish, maintain and compile its ordinances and resolutions.
B. Keep the minutes and records of any Board of Health committee, upon request of
the chairman of the committee.
C. Provide secretarial and clerical services for the members of the Board of Health in
the discharge of their official duties.
D. Perform such functions as are vested in the Clerk of the Board of Health by the
licensing provisions of state law or ordinance.
E. Issue and deliver all notices of meetings required to be given to members of the
Board of Health.
F. Receive and transmit all communications to or on behalf of the Board of Health.
G. Charge and receive for the use of the Borough such fees for transcripts or
certifications as shall be authorized by the Board of Health.
H. Perform such other, different and additional powers, functions and duties as may be
prescribed by law or ordinance.
§ 29-7 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 29-9
29:5

Chapter 35
MUTUAL AID
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 39.
§ 29-9 MUTUAL AID § 29-9
35:1

ARTICLE I
Monmouth County Mutual Aid Agreement
[Adopted 11-9-1998 by Ord. No. 757 (Ch. 5, Art. I, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 35-1. Authority and enactment.
This article is created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1(6) and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 and
is adopted as a reciprocal agreement with all municipalities participating in the countywide
mutual aid compact. Pursuant to this agreement, the Borough of Shrewsbury
shall render assistance to any participating municipality by providing members of the
Shrewsbury Police Department, upon request, to help preserve the public peace and
order.
§ 35-2. Compensation of officers.
The municipality requesting assistance shall compensate the officers at an agreed upon
rate by forwarding payment to the municipality, which will then compensate those
officers who rendered assistance.
§ 35-3. Worker's compensation claims.
In the event that a member of the Shrewsbury Police Department is injured while
rendering assistance to a participating municipality, the municipality receiving the
assistance shall reimburse the municipality rendering assistance for any and all expenses
incurred as a result of a worker's compensation claim filed by the injured officer.
§ 35-4. When effective.
This article is separate and distinct from any mutual aid agreements previously entered
into between the Borough of Shrewsbury and any other municipalities, and shall remain
in full force and effect until specifically repealed by an affirmative act of the governing
body.
§ 35-1 MUTUAL AID § 35-4
35:3

Chapter 39
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 17.
Mutual aid — See Ch. 35.
Public access to records — See Ch. 42.
§ 35-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 35-4
39:1

ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 11-21-1967 by Ord. No. 251 (Ch. 3, Art. XV, of the 1973 Code); amended
in its entirety 8-31-1992 by Ord. No. 650]
§ 39-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Borough.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough.
POLICE COMMITTEE — A three-member committee of Borough Council members
appointed from amongst its members.[Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
§ 39-2. Purpose. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
The purpose of this article is to prescribe rules and regulations respecting the
organization of and operation of the Police Department of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 39-3. Department established. [Amended 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 783; 5-15-2006
by Ord. No. 871; 9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 1020]
There is hereby created in and for the Borough of Shrewsbury a Police Department
which shall consist of 16 sworn officers to include a Chief of Police and no more than
one Captain, two Lieutenants, four Sergeants, one Detective Sergeant and nine officers
to be appointed to these positions by a recommendation of the Police Committee to the
Mayor and Council.
§ 39-4. Appropriate authority. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
The Police Committee, a three-member committee of Borough Council members
appointed from amongst its members, shall be designated the appropriate authority as
provided in New Jersey state statutes. The appropriate authority shall be responsible for
the overall performance of the Police Department. The appropriate authority shall adopt
and promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the Police Department and
for the discipline of its members.
§ 39-5. Powers and duties of Chief of Police. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No.
871]
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall be directly
responsible to the appropriate authority for its efficiency and day to day operations.
Pursuant to policies established by the appropriate authority, the Police Chief shall:
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police Department and any
special emergency directive for the disposition and discipline of the Department
and its member officers;
B. Have, exercise, and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the Police
Department;
§ 39-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 39-5
39:3
§ 39-6. Powers and duties of Captain. [Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 783; amended
9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 1020]
§ 39-7. Powers and duties of Lieutenant. [Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 783;
amended 9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 1020]
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
D. Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the efficient operation of
the Police Department to be exercised under the Chief's direction and control; and
E. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as shall be
prescribed on the operation of the Police Department during the preceding month
and make such other reports as may be requested by the appropriate authority.
A. It shall be the duty of the Captain to assist the Chief of Police in the performance of
the Chief's duties, and they shall have such hours of active duty as may be
prescribed by the Chief of Police.
B. In the absence of the Chief of Police, the Captain shall assume immediate command
of the Police Department and shall serve in the capacity of Acting Chief of Police
until the Chief shall return to duty or until otherwise directed by the Police
Commissioner. During such service as Acting Chief of Police, the Captain shall
have all the responsibilities, duties, powers and authority of the Chief of Police
unless otherwise prohibited or in conflict with the statutes of the State of New
Jersey.
C. They shall at all times keep themselves well informed on all matters within the
Police Department or coming to the attention of the Police Department and shall
bring all matters of importance to the direct attention of the Chief of Police.
D. It shall be the duty of the Captain to supervise the establishment and maintenance
of all necessary records and filing systems to adequately provide for the proper
needs of all branches and members of the Police Department.
A. It shall be the duty of the Lieutenant to assist the Chief of Police and Captain in the
performance of his duties, and he shall have such hours of active duty as may be
prescribed by the Chief of Police.
B. In the absence of the Chief of Police and the Captain, the Lieutenant shall assume
immediate command of the Police Department and shall serve in the capacity of
Acting Chief of Police until the Chief shall return to duty or until otherwise directed
by the Police Commissioner. During such service as Acting Chief of Police, the
Lieutenant shall have all the responsibilities, duties, powers and authority of the
Chief of Police unless otherwise prohibited or in conflict with the statutes of the
State of New Jersey.
C. They shall at all times keep themselves well informed on all matters within the
Police Department or coming to the attention of the Police Department and shall
bring all matters of importance to the direct attention of the Chief of Police.
D. It shall be the duty of the Lieutenant and Captain to supervise the establishment and
§ 39-5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 39-7
39:4
§ 39-8. Powers and duties of Detective Sergeant. [Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No.
783]
§ 39-9. Powers and duties of Sergeant. [Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 783;
amended 9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 1020]
maintenance of all necessary records and filing systems to adequately provide for
the proper needs of all branches and members of the Police Department.
E. The Lieutenant will perform any additional duties assigned by the Chief of Police.
A. It shall be the duty of the Detective Sergeant to assign and instruct subordinates in
police criminal investigation methods and procedures, investigation practices and
related law enforcement problems. Provides training as needed.
B. It shall be the duty of the Detective Sergeant to supervise criminal and noncriminal
investigations; investigate improper police services or actions; when necessary,
take proper police action against law violators; inspect subordinates, assignments
and posts; and noting and correcting or reporting any conditions which require
police attention.
C. He shall at all times keep himself well informed on all matters within the Police
Department and shall bring all matters of importance through proper chain of
command.
D. It shall be the duty of the Sergeant, Detective Sergeant, Lieutenant and Captain to
supervise the establishment and maintenance of all necessary records and filing
systems to adequately provide for the proper needs of all branches and members of
the Police Department.
E. The Detective Sergeant will perform any additional duties assigned by the Chief of
Police.
A. It shall be the duty of the Sergeant to assign and instruct subordinates in police
patrol methods and procedures, investigation practices and related law enforcement
problems. Provides training as needed.
B. It shall be the duty of the Sergeant to supervise criminal and noncriminal
investigations; investigate improper police services or actions; when necessary,
take proper police action against law violators; inspect subordinates and patrol
units, assignments and posts; and noting and correcting or reporting any conditions
which require police attention.
C. They shall at all times keep themselves well informed on all matters within the
Police Department or coming to the attention of the Police Department and shall
bring all matters of importance through proper chain of command.
D. It shall be the duty of the Sergeant, Lieutenant and Captain to supervise the
establishment and maintenance of all necessary records and filing systems to
adequately provide for the proper needs of all branches and members of the Police
Department.
E. The Sergeant will perform any additional duties assigned by the Chief of Police.
§ 39-7 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 39-10
39:5
§ 39-10. Powers and duties of police officer. [Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 783;
amended 9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 1020]
§ 39-11. Police Physician.
Within the Department there shall be a Police Physician who shall have all of the
powers, functions and duties of a borough police physician prescribed by law. The Police
Physician shall be appointed each year by the Mayor with the consent of the Council and
shall serve from January 1 of the year of his appointment for a term of one year or until
such time as his successor shall be appointed.
§ 39-12. Powers and duties of Police Department. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord.
No. 871]
The Police Department shall preserve the public peace; protect life and property; detect,
arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of New Jersey and ordinances of the Borough
of Shrewsbury; direct and control traffic; provide attendance and protection during
emergencies; provide appearances in court; cooperate with all other law enforcement
agencies; and provide training for the efficiency of its members and officers.
§ 39-13. Qualifications. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not qualified as provided
in New Jersey state statutes. The appropriate authority may also require that an applicant
for appointment to the Police Department shall successfully complete a physical, mental
and psychological examination.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officer to take appropriate action to protect life and
property; preserve the peace; prevent crime; detect and arrest violators of the law;
enforce all federal, state and local laws and ordinances coming within Departmental
jurisdiction; safely and expeditiously regulate traffic; aid citizens in matters within
police jurisdictions; take appropriate police action in aiding fellow officers as
needed; and provide miscellaneous services.
B. It shall be the duty of the police officer to exercise authority consistent with the
obligations imposed by the oath of office and in conformance with the policies of
the Department; abide by all the rules, regulations and Departmental procedures
and directives governing police officers; and be accountable and responsible to their
supervisors for obeying all lawful orders.
C. It shall be the duty of the police officers to coordinate their efforts with other
employees of the Department to achieve Department objectives; conduct
themselves in accordance with high ethical standards, on and off duty; and strive to
improve their skills and technique through study and training.
D. It shall be the duty of the police officers to familiarize themselves with the area of
authority and responsibility for the current assignment; perform their duties
promptly, faithfully and diligently; and perform all related work as required.
E. The police officer will perform any additional duties assigned by the Chief of
Police.
§ 39-10 SHREWSBURY CODE § 39-14
39:6
§ 39-14. Special officers. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury may appoint from time to time
special law enforcement officers in accordance with New Jersey state statutes for terms
not exceeding one year. They shall possess and exercise all the powers and duties
provided by said statutes during their term in office, but shall not be continued as regular
members of the Police Department and shall not be entitled to tenure. The Chief of
Police may authorize special law enforcement officers when on duty to exercise the
same powers and authority as regular members of the Police Department including the
carrying of firearms and the power of arrest.
§ 39-15. Suspension or removal. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
No member or officer of the Police Department shall be suspended, removed, fined or
reduced in rank for any cause other than for incapacity, misconduct or disobedience
as provided in the New Jersey state statutes and the Police Department's rules and
regulations.26
§ 39-16. Previous orders.
All rules, regulations, procedures and orders previously issued, contrary to those
embodied in the manual, are hereby revoked. All other rules, regulations, orders and
procedures not in conflict with those contained in this manual shall remain in force.
26. Editor's Note: Former §§ 3-86 and 3-87, regarding establishment and amendment of rules and regulations, which
immediately followed this section, were deleted 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871.
§ 39-14 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 39-16
39:7

ARTICLE II
Fees
[Adopted 3-12-1974 by Ord. No. 352 (Ch. 60 of the 1973 Code); amended in its
entirety 10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 699]
§ 39-17. Fees for certain services established. [Amended 3-4-2004 by Ord. No.
827; 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 844; 9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 1020]
Fees comply with Open Public Records Act (OPRA)27 requirements.
§ 39-18. Exemptions.
No fee shall be charged for any report for which a formal request is made by any local,
county, state or federal law enforcement agency or by the federal postal authorities.
§ 39-19. Receipt; disposition of moneys.
The Police Department shall issue a receipt for all fees and moneys received for the
services extended or materials furnished as hereinabove provided. All moneys received
shall be forwarded to the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
27. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 39-17 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 39-19
39:9

Chapter 42
RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5. Police Department records — See Ch. 39, Art. II.
§ 42-1. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of this Borough to recognize the public's
general right to know pursuant to the Open Public Records Act (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1
et seq.). All records kept in the course of official duties by any Borough officer or
employee shall be deemed to be "government records," as that term is defined by
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, and such records shall be subject to inspection by the public unless
exempt under the statute or other regulation, common law practice, executive order of
the Governor, rules of court, federal law or judicial decision.
§ 42-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
GOVERNMENT RECORD —
§ 42-3. Custodian of records; records request form.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, the Borough Clerk is designated as the custodian
of records. The Clerk shall adopt a form for the use of any person who requests access
to a record, and such form shall contain all of the information required by N.J.S.A.
47:1A-5f.
§ 42-4. Inspection and copying of public records.
Any record that has been made, maintained or kept on file in the course of official
business by a public agency or an officer of that public agency, or that has been
received in the course of official business by a public agency or an officer of
that public agency. "Government records" includes papers, printed documents,
handwritten documents, e-mails, tape recordings, computer records, electronically
stored information, books, maps, and photographs.
A.
The term "government record" does not include inter-agency or intra-agency
advisory, consultative or deliberative material; information that is security and
business-related, law enforcement related; personal information; records pertaining
to investigations. (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.)
B.
A. Any person seeking to inspect, examine or copy a public record of this municipality
shall make application in writing to the Borough Clerk, during regular business
hours, on the form provided. All requests for public records shall be as specific as
possible, including the type of record and date created, if known.
§ 39-19 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 42-4
42:1
§ 42-5. Time limits for compliance.
Unless a shorter time period is otherwise provided by statute, regulation or executive
order, the Clerk shall grant access to government record or deny a request for access to
a record as soon as possible, but not later than seven business days after receiving the
request, provided that the record is currently available and not in storage or archived.
In the event that the Clerk fails to respond within seven business days after receiving
a request, the failure to respond shall be deemed a denial of the request, unless the
requestor has elected not to provide a name, address or telephone number, or other means
of contacting the requestor. If the requestor has elected not to provide a name, address,
or telephone number, or other means of contacting the requestor, the Clerk shall not be
required to respond until the requestor reappears before the custodian seeking a response
to the original request. If the government record is in storage or archived, the requestor
shall be so advised within seven business days after the Clerk receives the request. The
requestor shall be advised by the Clerk when the record can be made available. If the
record is not made available by that time, access shall be deemed denied.
§ 42-6. Posting of appeals procedure.
The Clerk shall post prominently in public view, in or adjacent to the Clerk's office, a
B. The Borough Clerk shall promptly comply with a request to inspect, examine, copy
or provide a copy of a government record. If the Clerk is unable to comply with a
request for access, he or she shall indicate on the request form the specific basis for
such inability to comply and shall promptly return it to the requestor. The Clerk
shall sign and date the form and provide the requestor with a copy thereof.
C. In those instances where the nature of the request or the record itself leads the
Borough Clerk to doubt whether or not the record is a "government record" as
defined by law or is a record exempt from disclosure, the Clerk shall request an
opinion from the Borough Attorney. A copy of the request form shall be forwarded
to the Attorney, who, after review and investigation, shall issue an opinion and note
such opinion on the request form and promptly return it to the Borough Clerk.
D. If any part of a particular record is exempt from public access pursuant to N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1 et seq., the Clerk shall delete, redact or excise from a copy of the record
that portion which is exempt from access and shall promptly permit access to the
remainder of the record.
E. If the record requested is temporarily unavailable because it is in use or in storage,
the Clerk shall so advise the requestor and shall make arrangements to make a copy
of the record available.
F. If a request for access to a government record would substantially disrupt municipal
operations, the Clerk may deny access to the record after attempting to reach a
reasonable solution with the requestor that accommodates the interests of the
requestor and the municipality.
G. As required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5e, immediate access shall be granted for access to
budgets, bills, vouchers, contracts (including collective negotiations agreements
and individual employment contracts), and public salary and overtime information.
§ 42-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 42-6
42:2
statement that sets forth in clear, concise and specific terms the right to appeal a denial
of or failure to provide access to a government record and the procedure by which an
appeal may be filed.
§ 42-7. Viewing of government records; removal prohibited.
§ 42-8. Procedures and fees for purchasing copies of public records.
Copies of records may be purchased for the fee prescribed by law or regulation. If a fee
is not prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall be the actual cost of duplicating the
record; provided, however, that where the actual cost for duplication of a record exceeds
the rates below, the actual cost shall be imposed:
A. Upon the approval of a request to view, inspect, examine or copy a record, the
record and the requestor shall remain in the presence of the Borough Clerk or his or
her authorized representative at all times. Under no circumstances shall any
government record be removed from the office where it is normally kept unless
accompanied by the custodian or his or her authorized representative.
B. In the event that the nature of a request to view records requires that the Clerk or
other municipal employee observe or monitor such viewing for a period of time
exceeding two hours, the requestor shall be responsible for reimbursing the
municipality for time spent by the Clerk or other employee.
A. Standard-sized paper documents, up to 8 1/2 by 14 inches in size.
Number of Pages Fee Per Page
1 to 10 $0.75
11 to 20 $0.50
All over 20 $0.25
B. Municipal lien search (N.J.S.A. 54:5-11): $10.
C. Large size paper documents and maps, include, but not limited to, Zoning Map,
Street Map, Soils Survey Map, site plan, subdivision plat, Tax Map, and
engineering plans: $1.25 per square foot of paper size.
D. Preprinted documents. Fees for printed books, manuals, periodicals, pamphlets,
supplements and/or binders in hard or soft cover or spiral bound shall be based on
the actual cost charged to the Borough. Preprinted documents include, but are not
limited to, the Borough of Shrewsbury Code Volume I and Volume II, Master Plan,
Environmental Resource Inventory, and/or printed pamphlets or supplements
derived from same.
E. Police reports and photographs. See Chapter 39, Police Department, Article II.
F. Electronic records, documents or database. The following fees cover the cost of
copying existing files to floppy disk or CD-ROM sent via e-mail. Any request for
software conversions shall be subject to the special service charge described in
Subsection H(3). For security reasons, the use of floppy disks or CD-ROM
provided by the requestor is prohibited.
§ 42-6 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 42-8
42:3
(1) Floppy disks: $75 plus cost of disk ($0.50 each).
(2) CD-ROM: $75 plus cost of CD ($3 each).
(3) Conversion of paper text to electronic documents or database: $5 per page plus
special service charge.
G. Reproduction of GIS data. Topographic price list (based on 100 scale) of any GIS
data owned by the Borough shall be as follows:
(1) 8 1/2 x 11 Photocopy 21 acres $250
(2) 8 1/2 x 14 Photocopy 27 acres $325
(3) 11 x 17 Photocopy 43 acres $515
(4) 15 x 20 Photocopy 69 acres (1/2) sheet) $715
(5) 20 x 30 Photocopy 138 acres (1 full sheet) $1,090
H. Deposit/payment.
(1) A deposit shall be paid prior to filing any anonymous request where it is
estimated that the information requested will cost in excess of $5 to reproduce.
The amount of the deposit shall equal the total estimated cost of filling the
request.
(2) Prepayment is required when the record is voluminous, unusual or requires the
use of a vendor or services of a professional.
(3) Special service charge.
(a) A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner of collation
or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary business size or where such record involves an extraordinary
expenditure of time and effort to accommodate the request.
(b) The actual cost (materials and supplies) of duplication or reproduction,
plus a service charge of $35 per hour or the actual direct cost of labor (if
more), shall be imposed for each hour of extraordinary time predicted to
be utilized to respond to the request. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special service charge prior to it
being incurred.
(4) Whenever the in-house municipal workforce or available municipal equipment
is insufficient to duplicate or produce government records in a timely fashion,
the custodian may cause such duplication or reproduction to be accomplished
by the Borough Engineer or Borough Planning Director or outside vendors
such as copy centers or producers of engineer digital images or to be
accomplished by other professionals. If the costs of such duplication or
production charged by such offices/vendors exceeds charges set forth in
N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5 (OPRA), the actual cost of same, without any additional
surcharge for labor costs, shall be paid.
(5) Supplemental charges. Cost of any travel necessitated for the reproduction of
§ 42-8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 42-8
42:4
records shall be added. Any postage or shipping charges shall be added for any
and all records to be sent by mail or advisory service, if so requested.
§ 42-8 RECORDS, PUBLIC ACCESS TO § 42-8
42:5

Chapter 43
RETIREMENT PROGRAMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 17.
Board of Health — See Ch. 29.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 45.
§ 42-8 RETIREMENT PROGRAMS § 42-8
43:1

ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 922]
§ 43-1. Eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be eligible for and
shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement Program:
§ 43-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined Contribution
Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2:
§ 43-3. Construal of provisions.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to Chapter 92 of the Laws of
2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from time to time, and any regulations
or guidance documents from the Local Finance Board or the Division of Pensions or
Benefits.
§ 43-4. Filing of provisions.
A copy of Ordinance No. 922 shall be filed with the Director of the Division of Pensions
and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
A. Borough Administrator;
B. Municipal Attorney;
C. Municipal Engineer;
D. Municipal Prosecutor;
E. Municipal Court Judge.
A. Certified Health Officer;
B. Tax Collector;
C. Chief Financial Officer;
D. Construction Code Official;
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent;
F. Tax Assessor;
G. Municipal Planner;
H. Registered Municipal Clerk;
I. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
J. Principal Public Works Manager.
§ 43-1 RETIREMENT PROGRAMS § 43-4
43:3

Chapter 45
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 45-1. Salaries set in annual resolution.
The salaries and compensation of all officers and employees of the Borough of
Shrewsbury shall be as set forth in the annual Salary Resolution.
§ 45-2. Public copy to be filed.
A copy of the current Salary Resolution shall be kept on file by the Borough Clerk for
the examination and inspection of the public.
§ 45-3. Mandatory direct deposit policy. [Added 4-20-2020 by Ord. No. 1067]
A. Commencing when administratively feasible, but in no event later than July 1,
2020, Borough employees shall be paid by direct deposit only, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
52:14-15f.
B. The Borough Administrator may grant an exemption from these requirements as
administratively necessary, subject to governing body approval by resolution.
C. The Borough Administrator may grant exemptions for seasonal and/or temporary
employees, as administratively necessary, without governing body approval.
D. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:14-15f, any information concerning net pay, any
accompanying information approved for distribution with net pay, and W-2 forms
in accordance with applicable federal law shall be made available only on the
internet with restricted access, provided by the Borough or an authorized third-party
payroll provider.
§ 43-4 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 45-3
45:1

Chapter 53
VOLUNTEER INCENTIVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
§ 45-3 VOLUNTEER INCENTIVES § 45-3
53:1

ARTICLE I
Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 8-13-2003 by Ord. No. 81428]
§ 53-1. Establishment of program.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq., to reward members of the Borough of Shrewsbury
Volunteer Fire Department and the Borough of Shrewsbury Volunteer First Aid Squad
(inclusive of the fire companies and first aid squads recognized and sanctioned by the
Borough) for their loyal, diligent and devoted services to the residents of the Borough of
Shrewsbury.
§ 53-2. Annual contributions.
§ 53-3. Accrual of points.
Each active volunteer member shall accrue and be credited with points, to be totaled on
an annual basis per calendar year, for volunteer services provided as per the Borough of
Shrewsbury LOSAP point system schedules set forth herein as part of this article.29 The
Fire Department and First Aid Rescue Squad shall at the conclusion of each calendar
year provide a list and recommendation as to the members achieving the required 50
points of service and the basis for that recommendation. The governing body will
thereafter make the determinations to the members on the list as to compliance with the
eligibility requirement for each calendar year.
A. The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to be made by the Borough
annually to a tax-deferred income account for each volunteer member who the
Borough determines meets the annual eligibility criteria set forth below, that such
contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall be established by
the Borough of Shrewsbury pursuant to the Act, and that such plan shall be
administered in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, the U.S.
Internal Revenue Code, and this article.
B. The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions for each eligible member whom
the Borough had determined has performed and accrued 50 points of service in the
particular calendar year pursuant to the Borough of Shrewsbury point system. The
governing body of the Borough reserves the right to amend the point system and
schedule.
C. The annual contribution amount for each year of future service for each eligible
volunteer member shall be $1,150. The estimated annual cost of this program shall
be based on 40 members for a total cost of $46,000.
28. Editor's Note: This ordinance was passed at referendum 11-4-2003.
29. Editor's Note: Said LOSAP point system schedules are on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 53-1 VOLUNTEER INCENTIVES § 53-3
53:3

Part II, General Legislation
§ 53-3 VOLUNTEER INCENTIVES § 53-3
53:5

Chapter 59
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 59-1. Registration required.
§ 59-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who owns, operates, leases
or maintains any alarm system situated in the Borough of Shrewsbury if the alarm
system has an audible signaling device or a device which requires a response by the
Police Department, Fire Department, First Aid Squad or other Borough agency. The
provisions of this chapter shall in no way prohibit service by a private source to persons
within or without the Borough, so long as such activity is not in violation of this
chapter, and provided further that any person owning, operating, leasing or maintaining
a premises protected by an alarm system shall be responsible for the registration thereof
in accordance with this chapter.
A. Any person who desires to own, operate, lease or maintain an alarm system in the
Borough of Shrewsbury shall file a registration application on the form provided by
the Shrewsbury Police Department. The application shall contain the location of the
alarm; the installer's name and address; the contact number for the central station to
where the alarm is to be reported to; the type of device; information relating to false
alarms and testing procedures; a list of names to be contacted in the event of an
alarm, at least one of whom shall have an address and phone number different than
the registrant's; and such other information as may be required by the Police
Department. It shall be the registrant's obligation to file a written amendment with
the Police Department within 10 days indicative of any changes contained in the
present registration application.30
B. The Police Department shall issue a registration certificate for the ownership,
operation or maintenance of an alarm system to any person desiring to own,
operate, lease or maintain an alarm system if the Police Department is satisfied that
the registration information is complete and that the alarm system is capable of
being operated in conformance with this chapter. The registration certificate may
be granted subject to any special conditions stated thereon, if this is deemed
necessary by the Police Department.
C. A registration certificate shall be valid for as long as the registrant occupies the
premises for which the certificate has been issued, provided that all required
amendments thereto have been filed. A registration certificate shall automatically
terminate upon a change in occupancy for the premises for which the certificate was
issued.
D. The Borough of Shrewsbury shall not charge any fee to any person filing a
registration application or an amendment thereto.
30. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 53-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 59-3
59:1
§ 59-3. Maintenance; malfunctions and disconnection.
All components of an alarm system shall be maintained in good repair and shall operate
in a proper manner. When evidence exists that there has been failure to comply with
the maintenance and operation requirements of this chapter, the Police Department shall
then be authorized to demand that such alarm system be disconnected until such time
as compliance with the provisions of this chapter has been established. The Police
Department shall have the right to disconnect any malfunctioning equipment from any
alarm system until such time as the malfunction has been corrected and the alarm system
is operating in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 59-4. Time limit for audible alarms.
All audible signaling devices shall be equipped with a timing device to limit the
sounding of the signaling device to 15 minutes or less.
§ 59-5. Rule-making authority.
The Police Department shall have the authority to promulgate written rules and
regulations and incorporate recommendations proposed by the Fire Department, First
Aid Squad or other Borough agencies, subject to the approval by a resolution adopted by
the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury, which rules and regulations shall
supplement this chapter and provide for record-keeping and the efficient operation and
management of alarm systems in the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 59-6. False alarms and penalties. [Amended 3-14-1994 by Ord. No. 676]
A. In the case of a false alarm or of improper maintenance or operation of an alarm
system, any person having knowledge thereof shall immediately notify the Police
Department. The Police Department shall cause an investigation to be made of all
false alarms and of all improper maintenance or operation of alarm systems and
shall keep a record of such false alarms on file.
B. For such false alarms, this chapter prescribes the following penalties:
(1) For the first and second false alarm in any given calendar year, a warning shall
be issued.
(2) For the third false alarm in the same calendar year, a fine not to exceed $25,
plus court costs, shall be paid to the Borough.
(3) For the fourth or any subsequent false alarm in a calendar year, a fine not to
exceed $50, plus court costs, shall be paid to the Borough.
C. Where the investigation of the Police Department discloses a continued disregard
by the owner for taking remedial steps for avoiding false alarms or for continued
failure to maintain or operate an alarm system, the Police Department shall have the
right to require disconnection of the alarm system for a limited or permanent time,
giving the owner an opportunity to show cause to the Police Department why such
action should not be taken. A person aggrieved by the decision of the Police
Department shall have the right to appeal said decision to the Mayor and Council
within 10 days of the decision.
§ 59-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 59-6
59:2
§ 59-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device, such as a bell, siren, whistle, horn, gong or Klaxon,
employed to call attention to or provide warning of intrusion by any person or by fire,
smoke, flood or other peril, whether the same provides a visual or audio response, alarm
or warning, if such warning is capable of being heard or received at any point beyond the
interior walls of the house, apartment, office, store, industrial building or other structure
in or on which the alarm system has been placed.31
PERSON — Any individual, person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, joint
venture, society, club, trustee, trust or incorporated activity.
REGISTRANT — Any person owning, operating, leasing or maintaining an alarm
system within the scope of this chapter, who has been issued a registration certificate to
operate and maintain such alarm system.
§ 59-8. Interpretation, repealer and severability.
Except as the same may be clearly inconsistent herewith, this chapter shall not be
deemed to repeal any ordinance, rule or regulation which regulates any activity in
the Borough of Shrewsbury. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with
the terms of this chapter shall be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistencies. If any section or part of a section of this chapter is declared to
be held illegal or unconstitutional, no other part of a section of this chapter or other
ordinance shall be affected thereby, but the unconstitutional section or part thereof shall
be rescinded and the remaining provisions of this chapter shall continue in full force.
§ 59-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to the penalties set forth in § 59-6 above in the discretion of the Judge of the
D. Any unauthorized equipment pertaining to an alarm system may be ordered to be
disconnected by the Police Department for noncompliance with this chapter. Any
placing, installing or maintaining of unauthorized equipment or failing to file a
required registration application or amendment thereto shall be a violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50, plus court costs, which shall
be paid to the Borough. Each and every day that such equipment is installed or
maintained shall be considered a separate violation. Any person placing, installing
or maintaining any alarm system shall be deemed as having consented to inspection
of the premises on which said alarm system is installed or maintained at reasonable
hours by the Police Department.
E. Any act of God (i.e., flood, hurricane, earthquake, etc.) which affects the operation
and performance of an approved alarm system shall, after such determination by the
Police Department, not subject the owner, operator, lessee, or maintainer to any fine
or penalty as herein prescribed in this chapter.
31. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "dial alarm" and "local alarm," which immediately followed this definition,
were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 59-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 59-9
59:3
Municipal Court.
§ 59-9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 59-9
59:4
Chapter 63
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food establishments — See Ch. 126.
Hours of business — See Ch. 139.
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 170.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
§ 63-1. Annual license fees. [Amended 8-1-1961 by Ord. No. 185; 6-11-1970 by
Ord. No. 292; 5-9-1972 by Ord. No. 328; 1-16-1978 by Ord. No. 413; 4-14-1986 by
Ord. No. 539; 12-30-1991 by Ord. No. 635; 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871; 8-21-2006
by Ord. No. 879]
A. Annual license fees shall be as follows: [Amended 10-15-2018 by Ord. No. 1053]
Class of License 2019/2020 Annual License Fee
Plenary retail consumption license $1,584
Plenary retail distribution license $1,296
Class of License 2020/2021 Annual License Fee
Plenary retail consumption license $1,900
Plenary retail distribution license $1,555
Class of License 2021/2022 Annual License Fee
Plenary retail consumption license $2,280
Plenary retail distribution license $1,866
Class of License 2022/2023 Annual License Fee
Plenary retail consumption license $2,500
Plenary retail distribution license $2,239
Class of License 2023/2024 Annual License Fee
Plenary retail consumption license $2,500
Plenary retail distribution license $2,500
B. Transfer fees. The fee that must be paid to the Borough of Shrewsbury with a
person-to-person transfer application is 10% of the annual license fee. The fee that
must be paid to the Borough of Shrewsbury with a place-to-place transfer
application is 10% of the annual license fee. If there is a combined person-to-person
and place-to-place transfer application filed, it must be accompanied by a fee equal
to 20% of the annual license fee. These fees are retained by the Borough of
§ 59-9 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 63-1
63:1
§ 63-2. Maximum number of licenses.
Not more than three plenary retail consumption licenses and not more than one plenary
retail distribution license shall be issued and outstanding in the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 63-3. Permitted hours of sale. [Amended 5-15-1962 by Ord. No. 197; 12-8-1965
by Ord. No. 228; 2-8-1966 by Ord. No. 230; 9-14-1981 by Ord. No. 460; 12-11-1989
by Ord. No. 601; 10-20-2003 by Ord. No. 821; 5-2-2011 by Ord. No. 958]
§ 63-4. Presence of minors in licensed premises restricted. [Amended 9-14-1981 by
Ord. No. 460; 5-14-1984 by Ord. No. 500]
No plenary retail consumption license shall permit any person under the age of 21 years
in a room on the licensed premises in which a bar is located, unless such person is
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
§ 63-5. Service in nonpublic areas of premises.
No plenary retail consumption licensee shall allow, permit or suffer the service of any
alcoholic beverage in any back room or side room which is not open to the use of the
public generally, except that in hotels guests may be served in their rooms or in public
Shrewsbury whether or not the transfer is granted.
C. State fees. A fee of $200 payable by check or money order to the Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control must accompany each original application form
forwarded from the municipality to the Division for a new license, renewal of a
license, or transfer of a license. This fee will be retained by the state whether or not
the transaction is approved.
A. No licensee shall sell or allow or permit or suffer the sale or delivery of any distilled
spirits, at retail, in its original container, for consumption off the licensed premises
or allow, permit or suffer the removal of any distilled spirits, in its original or
opened container, from retail licensed premises before 10:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
on Sunday, except if Christmas Eve or New Year’s Eve shall fall on a Sunday
before 10:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m., or before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on any
other day of the week, except that the hours of sale for malt alcoholic beverages and
wine in original bottle or can containers for consumption off the premises shall be
the same as the hours of sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises, as set forth in Subsection B below.
B. No licensee shall sell or allow or permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery of any
alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the
licensed premises on Sundays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and
on any other day of the week between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. During
the hours that sales of alcoholic beverages are hereinabove prohibited, the entire
licensed premises shall also be closed, and no person shall be permitted or admitted
to remain therein except the licensee or a bona fide employee of the licensee;
provided, however, that this closing provision shall not apply to bona fide hotels,
restaurants or other establishments where the principal business or activity is other
than the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 63-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 63-5
63:2
or private dining rooms.
§ 63-6. Parents required to attend hearing of minor. [Added 12-30-1991 by Ord.
No. 635]
All persons under the legal drinking age found to be unlawfully in possession of
alcoholic beverages in the Borough of Shrewsbury will be detained by police, their
names and addresses recorded, their parents notified by police and released only to a
parent or responsible adult over the age of 21.
§ 63-7. Consumption or possession by minor.
No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase, sell, consume or possess any
alcoholic beverage on any public or private street, highway, park, footway or other
public or quasi-public place or in a private residence in the Borough of Shrewsbury,
unless such consumption or possession is in connection with a religious observance,
ceremony or rite or in the presence of and with the permission of a parent or guardian
who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages. No person
under the age of 21 years shall consume or have in his or her possession any alcoholic
beverages while in a motor vehicle in any public place or quasi-public place in the
Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 63-8. Knowledge of consumption or possession by minor.
No person shall own, leave or manage real property or lease that property in the case of
another person, with the knowledge that an alcoholic beverage is purposely or knowingly
offered, served or made available to a person under the legal age for consuming alcoholic
beverages, or entice, encourage or permit that person to drink an alcoholic beverage,
unless:
A. A parent or guardian of any person 18 to 20 years of age charged with a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to attend the hearing of the
complaint. For the purpose of compelling such attendance, the Judge of the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Shrewsbury is hereby authorized and directed
to cause the parent or guardian of such person to attend the hearing by issuing
appropriate subpoenas to compel such attendance. It shall be sufficient compliance
with the provisions hereof if one of the parents or one of the guardians attends the
hearing pursuant thereto.
B. Any person under 18 years of age charged with a violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter must be accompanied by a parent or guardian upon his or her
appearance in the Superior Court of New Jersey, Family Part.
A. The real property is licensed or required to be licensed by the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.;
B. The person making the property available, or leaving it in the care of another
person, is of the legal age to consume alcoholic beverages and is the parent or
guardian (or a first cousin or closer relative by blood, marriage or adoption) of the
person who consumes alcoholic beverages; or
C. The alcoholic beverages are consumed by a person under the legal age for
§ 63-5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 63-8
63:3
§ 63-9. Sale to person under legal age; defenses.32 [Added 7-16-2007 by Ord. No.
900]
Anyone who sells or provides any alcoholic beverage to a person under the legal age
for purchasing alcoholic beverages is a disorderly person; provided, however, that the
establishment of all the following facts by a person making any such sale shall constitute
a defense to any prosecution therefor:
§ 63-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 897; 3-3-2008
by Ord. No. 907]
All persons 18 years of age or over, who sell, make available, serve or knowingly permit
possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by a person under the age of 21 in the
Borough of Shrewsbury, will be subject to the minimum penalty as follows: disclosure
of their names, addresses and violations to the media for publication, and a fine of not
less than $50 or more than $1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 63-11. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by underaged persons
on private property; specific penalties. [Added 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 897]
consuming alcoholic beverages during a religious observance, ceremony or rite.
A. That the purchaser falsely represented in writing, or by producing a driver's license
bearing a photograph of the licensee, or by producing a photographic identification
card issued pursuant to § 2 of P.L. 1980, c. 47 (N.J.S.A. 39:3-29.3), or a similar
card issued pursuant to the laws of this state, another state or the federal government
that he or she was of legal age to make the purchase;
B. That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary prudent person
would believe him or her to be of legal age to make the purchase; and
C. That the sale was made in good faith relying upon such written representation, or
production of a driver's license bearing a photograph of the licensee or production
of a photographic identification card issued pursuant to § 2 of P.L. 1980, c. 47
(N.J.S.A. .39:3-29.3), or a similar card issued pursuant to the laws of this state,
another state or the federal government and appearance and in the reasonable belief
that the purchaser was actually of legal age to make the purchase.
A. Restrictions and penalties. Any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic
beverages who, without legal authority, knowingly possesses or who knowingly
consumes any alcoholic beverage on private property shall be punished by a fine of
$250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offenses.
(1) The court may, in addition to the fine authorized for this offense, suspend or
postpone for six months the driving privilege of the defendant. Upon
conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement of that person's
driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the New Jersey Division of
Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of the suspension or postponement
32. Editor's Note: Former § 63-9, Keg registration, as added 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 897, was repealed 3-3-2008 by Ord. No.
907. This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 63-10 through 63-12 as §§ 63-9 through 63-11, respectively.
§ 63-8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 63-11
63:4
period imposed by the court pursuant to this section. If a person at the time
of the imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of
license postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege
of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is
imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the person reaches the
age of 17 years.
(2) If a person, at the time of the imposition of a sentence, has a valid driver's
license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect the license and
forward it to the Motor Vehicle Commission along with the report. If for any
reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in the report the
complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of the person, as well
as the first and last date of the license suspension period imposed by the court.
(3) The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person is
convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license suspension
or postponement, the person shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to acknowledge receipt of the
written notice in writing. Failure to receive a written notice or failure to
acknowledge in writing the receipt of a written notice shall not be a defense to
a subsequent charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
(4) The court shall, of any person convicted under this section who is not a New
Jersey resident, suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident driving
privileges in the State of New Jersey of the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Motor Vehicle Commission the required report. The
court shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this section.
Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Motor Vehicle Commission shall
notify the appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension
or postponement.
B. Exceptions:
(1) This provision shall not apply to or prohibit an underaged person from
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony or rite, or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of their parent, guardian
or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages. As used herein, "guardian" means a person who has qualified as a
guardian of the underaged person pursuant to testimony or court appointment,
and "relative" means the underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling
or any other person related by blood or affinity.
(2) This provision shall not apply to or prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages
by any such underaged person while actually engaged in performance of
employment by a person or facility licensed under Title 33 of the Revised
Statutes, or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in
a culinary arts or hotel management program at the county vocational school
or post-secondary educational institution; however, no ordinance enacted
pursuant to this section shall be construed to preclude the imposition of a
penalty under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law
§ 63-11 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 63-11
63:5
against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on
or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
C. If any section, paragraph, subparagraph, clause or provision of this section shall be
adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph,
subparagraph, clause or provision so adjudged and the remainder of this section
shall be deemed valid and effective.
§ 63-11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 63-11
63:6
Chapter 67
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 163.
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 170.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
Solid waste — See Ch. 210.
Pet waste and wildlife feeding — See Ch. 215.
§ 63-11 ANIMALS § 63-11
67:1

ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 9-6-1955 by Ord. No. 112 (Ch. 31 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 67-1. Running at large prohibited.
No dog shall be permitted to run at large at any time in the Borough of Shrewsbury,
except as hereinafter provided.
§ 67-2. Leash requirements.
§ 67-3. Injury or damage to property of others prohibited. [Amended 2-8-1988 by
Ord. No. 567; 5-13-1991 by Ord. No. 623]33
No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any dog shall suffer or permit
it to do any injury or damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds, trees or any
property of persons other than the owner or person having the care, custody or control of
such dog.
§ 67-4. Owner or custodian responsible for damage.
The owner or custodian of any dog referred to in § 67-3 shall be responsible and liable
for any damage done by any such dog.
§ 67-5. Responsibilities and liability of owner; keeping of dogs which disturb
public peace prohibited. [Amended 2-8-1988 by Ord. No. 567]
A. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit the same to
run at large anywhere in the Borough, except upon the property of the person
owning, keeping or harboring said dog.
B. Any dog off the premises of any person owning, keeping or harboring the same
shall be accompanied by a person capable of controlling said dog and who has the
dog upon a leash not exceeding 10 feet in length or in a crate or box or otherwise
securely confined so as to prevent it from running at large.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the Borough any dog
which is known to be vicious or which has evidenced a disposition to attack human
beings, unless the dog is securely confined within a building, muzzled and securely
confined within an area completely surrounded by a secure fence five feet in height
or muzzled, leashed and attended by a person capable of controlling the dog.
B. Dogs bites; barking dogs.
(1) The owner of a dog which bites a person while such person is on or in a public
place or lawfully on or in a private place, including the property of the owner
of the dog, shall be liable for such damages as may be suffered by the person
bitten, regardless of the former viciousness of such dog or the owner's
knowledge of such viciousness. The owner of a dog shall be responsible for
33. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 67-1 ANIMALS § 67-5
67:3
§ 67-6. License required; license and registration tag fees; expiration date.
[Amended 9-13-1966 by Ord. No. 238; 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346; 12-19-1981 by
Ord. No. 467; 10-3-1983 by Ord. No. 490; 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 671; 10-7-2003
by Ord. No. 816; 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 835]
§ 67-7. Appointment of Animal Control Officer authorized. [Amended 5-15-2006
by Ord. No. 871]
The Mayor and Council shall have the power to appoint an Animal Control Officer
whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Mayor and Council
shall also have power to enter into a contract with one or more persons for the exercise
of the duty of the Animal Control Officer and to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 67-8. Seizure and detention of dogs running at large. [Amended 5-15-2006 by
Ord. No. 871]
any damage caused by the destruction or wounding of sheep, lambs, domestic
animals or poultry, except dogs and cats, committed by the dog.
(2) No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which barks, howls or cries
continuously for 10 minutes or intermittently for 30 minutes so that same
unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or property of persons
residing in the vicinity. The provisions of this section shall apply to all private
or public facilities, including any animal pounds, kennels and pet shops, where
a dog is held for any reason.
A. Each and every dog shall be duly licensed and shall bear evidence of such license
at all times, in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey. The annual fee
for such license shall be $12 for each dog including any fees imposed by the State
of New Jersey. In addition, an annual fee of $3 shall be paid for any dog of
reproductive age which has not had its reproductive capacity permanently altered
through sterilization. Said licenses and renewals thereof shall expire on the last day
of January in each year. A late fee of $5 shall be assessed each month on all license
renewals issued to dog owner after the expiration date of January 31. [Amended
10-1-2007 by Ord. No. 903]
B. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as ”Seeing Eye” dogs,
dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known as "service dogs"
and dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs,
shall be licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove provided for, except that
the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
[Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
A. The Animal Control Officer or any other person appointed for the purpose shall
take into custody and impound, or cause to be taken into custody and impounded,
any male or female dog running at large in this municipality contrary to any of the
provisions or sections of this article.
B. When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice, when notice
can be given, or has been detained for seven days after seizure, when notice cannot
be given, in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, and if the owner
§ 67-5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 67-8
67:4
§ 67-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346; 3-14-1994
by Ord. No. 678; 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19, any person convicted of violating any
provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service
not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. Any person charged with violating
any provision of this article after once having been convicted of a violation of this article
shall be required to appear in court to answer such charge.
§ 67-10. Provisions supplementary to statutes and other regulations.
Nothing herein contained shall in any way be construed as relieving any person from
complying with any state statutes or other regulations pertaining to the licensing and
registration of dogs, and this article is intended to be supplementary to any provisions of
any such other laws.34
or person keeping or harboring said dog has not claimed said dog and paid all
expenses incurred by reason of its seizure and detention, and if the dog be
unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring
said dog has not produced a license and registration tag for said dog, the Animal
Control Officer or other designated authority may cause the dog to be offered for
adoption or destroyed in manner causing as little pain as possible.
34. Editor's Note: Former § 31-11, Referendum requested, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 2-8-1988
by Ord. No. 567.
§ 67-8 ANIMALS § 67-10
67:5

ARTICLE II
Cats
[Adopted 10-7-1991 by Ord. No. 631 (Ch. 24 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 67-11. Definitions.
Certain words, phrases and terms in this article are defined for the purposes herein as
follows:
ANIMAL — For the purpose of this article, dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or certified
by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, male, female or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven months or
which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY—Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part of a kennel,
wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the Borough of
Shrewsbury, or any designated representative thereof, charged with administering the
issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this article.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified by a
licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, shall include every person
having a right of property or custody in such cat and every person who has such cat in
his/her keeping or who harbors or maintains a cat or knowingly permits a cat to remain
on or about any premises occupied by that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization or institution
commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 67-12. Rabies vaccination. [Amended 10-20-2003 by Ord. No. 820]
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep, harbor or
maintain any cat over seven months of age within the Borough of Shrewsbury
unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The provisions of this section do not
apply to cats held in a cattery, or those held by a state-licensed or federally licensed
research facility, or a veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept for
diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments, or licensed animal shelters,
pounds, kennels or pet shops.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in
accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and
Recommendations for Immunization published by the National Association of State
Public Health Veterinarians, except as provided for in Subsection E.
C. Any rabies vaccination certificate that expires before November 1 of the licensing
year will require an updated vaccination prior to the issuance of a new license.
§ 67-11 ANIMALS § 67-12
67:7
§ 67-13. Licensing requirements.
D. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of
each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
E. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such vaccination
for a specified period of time by the local Board of Health, upon presentation of a
veterinarian's certificate stating that because of an infirmity or other physical
condition, or regimen of therapy, the inoculation of such cat shall be deemed
inadvisable.
A. Cats must have license number displayed. Any person who shall own, keep or
harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and procure from the Clerk of
the municipality, or other official designated by the governing body thereof to
license cats in the municipality in which he/she resides, a license and official
registration tag with license number, or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned,
kept or harbored, and shall place upon such cat a collar or other device with the
license number securely fastened or displayed thereto. Acceptable methods of
displaying license number shall include but are not limited to breakaway or elastic
collars. License tags or sleeves are not transferable.
B. Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing
age, or of any cat which attains licensing age, shall make application for a license
tag or sleeve for such cat within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
This requirement will not apply to a nonresident keeping a cat within the Borough
of Shrewsbury for no longer than 90 days.
C. Cats brought into jurisdiction.
(1) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough of
Shrewsbury any cat licensed in another state for the current year, and bearing
a registration tag or sleeve, and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Borough of Shrewsbury for a period of more than 90 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for each such cat.
(2) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Borough of
Shrewsbury any unlicensed cat and shall keep same or permit same to be kept
within the Borough of Shrewsbury for a period of more than 10 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for each such cat.
D. Application; contents; preservation of information. The application shall state the
breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which license and registration are
sought and whether it is of a long- or short-haired variety; also the name, street and
post office address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat.
The information on said application and the registration number issued for the cat
shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk or other local official
designated to license cats in the municipality.
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall be furnished
by the municipality and shall be numbered serially and shall bear the year of
issuance and the name of the municipality.
§ 67-12 SHREWSBURY CODE § 67-13
67:8
F. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of exemption;
requirement for license. No municipal clerk or other official designated by the
governing body of any municipality to license cats therein shall grant any such
license and official registration tag or sleeve for any cat, unless the owner thereof
provides evidence that the cat to be licensed and registered has been inoculated with
a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture and the United
States Department of Human Services, or has been certified exempt as provided by
§ 67-12 of this article. The rabies inoculation shall be administered by a duly
licensed veterinarian or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to do the same.
G. License fee schedule. A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of $13 for
each unneutered cat and $10 for each neutered cat. [Amended 10-20-2003 by Ord.
No. 820]
H. Fees; renewals; expiration date of license. [Amended 12-3-1993 by Ord. No. 672;
10-20-2003 by Ord. No. 820]
(1) A license from another municipality shall be accepted. The person applying
for the license and registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay the fee fixed or
authorized. The fee for the renewal of the license and registration tag or sleeve
shall be the same as for the original, and said license, registration tag or sleeve
and renewal thereof shall expire on the last day of January in the following
year. A late fee of $5 per month shall be assessed on all license renewals issued
to a cat owner after the expiration date of January 31.
(2) Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in the
licensing year for any cat in the Borough of Shrewsbury. Any valid New
Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey municipality shall be
accepted by this municipality as evidence of compliance.
I. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person owning,
keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat upon the request of any health official,
police officer, animal control officer or other authorized person.
J. Interfering with persons performing duties under this article. No person shall
hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any
duty under this article.
K. Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other moneys collected or received
under the provisions of this article shall be forwarded to the Chief Financial Officer
of the municipality and shall be placed in a special account separate from any of the
other accounts of the municipality and shall be used for the following purposes
only: collecting, keeping and disposing of cats liable to seizure, for local prevention
and control of rabies, providing antirabies treatment under the direction of the local
Board of Health for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to rabies
and for administering the provisions of this article. Any unexpected balance
remaining in such special account shall be retained until the end of the third fiscal
year following and may be used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At
the end of said third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year
thereafter, there shall be transferred from such special account to the general funds
of the municipality any amount then in such account which is in excess of the total
§ 67-13 ANIMALS § 67-13
67:9
§ 67-14. Nuisances upon public and private property.
§ 67-15. Seizure and detention of cats running at large.
§ 67-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-1994 by Ord. No. 677]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof. Any person charged with violating any provision of
this article after once having been convicted of a violation of this article shall be required
to appear in court to answer such charge.
§ 67-17. Construal of provisions.
Nothing herein contained shall in any way be construed as relieving any person from
complying with any state statutes or other regulations pertaining to the licensing and
registration of cats, and this article is intended to be supplementary to any provisions of
any such other laws.
amount paid into the special account during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
A. No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any cat shall permit
such cat to soil or defile or to commit any nuisance upon any sidewalk, gutter,
street, thoroughfare, park, in or upon any public property or in or upon the property
of persons other than the owner or person having the care, custody and control of
such cat.
B. No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any cat shall suffer or
permit it to soil or defile or do any injury or damage to any lawn, shrubbery,
flowers, grounds, trees or any property of persons other than the owner or person
having the care, custody or control of such cat.
C. It shall be the duty of any person owning or having the care, custody or control of
any cat to remove any feces left by such cat on any sidewalk, gutter, street,
thoroughfare, park or other public area or private property not his own.
A. Any person appointed for the purpose shall take into custody and impound, or cause
to be taken into custody and impounded, any male or female cat running at large in
this municipality contrary to any of the provisions or sections of this article.
B. When any cat so seized has been detained for seven days after notice when notice
can be given, or has been detained for seven days after seizure when notice cannot
be given, in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, and if the owner
or person keeping or harboring said cat has not claimed said cat and paid all
expenses incurred by reason of its seizure and detention, and if the cat is unlicensed
at the time of the seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring said cat has
not produced a license and registration tag for said cat, the designated authority may
cause the cat to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible.
§ 67-13 SHREWSBURY CODE § 67-17
67:10
ARTICLE III
Kennels, Pounds and Shelters
[Adopted 11-2-1998 by Ord. No. 756 (Ch. 51 of the 1973 Code); amended in its
entirety 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
§ 67-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of boarding or selling
dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on a regular basis, except a pet shop. Every
place where five or more dogs are kept or maintained for commercial purposes shall be
considered a "kennel."
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every person having
a right of property in such dog and every person who has such dog in his keeping.
POUND — An establishment for the confirmation of dogs seized under the provisions
of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where five or more dogs are received, housed and
distributed without charge.
§ 67-19. License required.
No person shall operate a kennel, pound or shelter without obtaining a license. Any
person holding such license shall not be required to secure individual licenses for dogs
owned by the licensee and kept at such establishments. These licenses shall not be
transferable to another owner or different premises.
§ 67-20. Application information.
The application for a license shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk and shall contain
the following information:
§ 67-21. Approval of Health Officer.
No license shall be issued unless the Borough Health Officer inspects the premises and
states that the establishment complies with local and state rules governing the location
of and sanitation of such establishment.
A. The name and permanent address and local address of the applicant.
B. The street address where the establishment is located or proposed to be located,
together with a general description of the premises.
C. The purposes for which it is to be maintained.
D. The maximum number of animals and dogs to be accommodated by such
establishment at any one time.
§ 67-18 ANIMALS § 67-22
67:11
§ 67-22. License term.
Licenses issued for kennels, pounds and shelters shall state the purpose for which the
establishment is maintained, and all licenses shall expire on the last day of June of each
year.
§ 67-23. License fees.
Annual fees for licenses under this section shall be as follows:
§ 67-24. Compliance with state regulations.
§ 67-25. Reports to State Health Department.
The Clerk shall forward to the State Department of Health a list of kennels, pounds and
shelters within 30 days after the licenses therefor are issued, which list shall include the
name and address of each licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 67-26. Control of dogs off premises.
No dog kept in a kennel, pound or shelter shall be permitted off the premises, except on
leash or in a crate or other safe control.
A. Kennel accommodating dogs, cats or other animals:
(1) For 10 or fewer animals: $10.
(2) For more than 10 animals: $25.
B. Pound or shelter: no fee (nonprofit).
C. All establishments that provide additional services for animals including, but not
limited to, grooming services and day care services: same as established under
Chapter 152 of the Code of the Borough of Shrewsbury.35 [Added 9-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 969]
A. All licenses issued for kennels, pounds or shelters shall be subject to revocation by
the Borough Clerk on recommendation of the State Department of Health or the
Borough Health Officer for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the
State Department of Health or the Health Officer, after the owner has been afforded
a hearing by either the State Department of Health, local Board of Health, or the
Health Officer.
B. Any person holding a license to operate a kennel, pound or shelter shall comply
with all Borough ordinances and the rules and regulations promulgated by the State
Department of Health governing the sanitary conduct and operation of kennels,
pounds and shelters, the preservation of sanitation therein, and the prevention of the
spread of rabies and other infectious diseases of dogs or other animals within and
from such establishments.
35. Editor's Note: See Ch. 152, Licenses.
§ 67-22 SHREWSBURY CODE § 67-27
67:12
§ 67-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
§ 67-27 ANIMALS § 67-27
67:13

Chapter 72
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 90. Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 170.
§ 72-1. Findings.
Within the Borough there are a substantial number of bicycle owners and it is in the
interest of the Borough that persons operating bicycles do so with safety, and registration
would aid the Police Department in identifying owners, reducing the number of thefts of
bicycles and assisting in the recovery of lost or stolen bicycles.
§ 72-2. Registration available.
Any bicycle owned by a resident of the Borough may be registered at the Police
Department in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
§ 72-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BICYCLE—Any device, propelled by human power, upon which any person may ride,
having two tandem wheels, either of which is more than 14 inches in diameter. (This
definition does not apply to toy bicycles or velocipedes.)
§ 72-4. Inspections.
The Chief of Police or his designated representatives, who shall in all cases be members
of the Police Department, shall inspect each bicycle offered for registration. If any
bicycle offered for registration is found by the Police Department not to be in rideable
condition or not to be properly equipped as provided for in this chapter, registration
of such bicycle may not be issued until it shall be determined to be in such rideable
condition and to be properly equipped.
§ 72-5. Issuance of registration.
The Police Department is hereby authorized and directed, upon written application to
it, to issue to the residents of the Borough registration certificates for bicycles, which
certificates shall run to June 30 of each calendar year. All such registration certificates
shall be dated the date of issue.
§ 72-6. Registration decals and cards.
The Police Department shall provide each year a registration decal, together with
registration certificate cards, that shall have numerical numbers stamped thereon in
§ 67-27 BICYCLES § 72-6
72:1
numerical order beginning with number one and shall indicate the years for which they
were issued and letter indicating that they were issued by the Borough of Shrewsbury.
The registration decal shall be suitable for attachment to the frame of the bicycle at the
headsetting or at any location where it will always be plainly visible, and it shall also
be the duty of the owner to attach the decal in a secure manner as to make difficult its
removal. The Police Department shall also provide and issue a registration card with
numbers corresponding to the numbers on the license decal.
§ 72-7. Altering registrations.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity to willfully destroy,
mutilate or alter the number of any registration decal issued pursuant to this chapter.
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or other entity to willfully destroy,
mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame registered pursuant to this chapter from
removing the same registration decal. The Police Department may also stamp on the
frame of any registered bicycle a number which shall be the secret number of the Police
Department, if so required in the administration of this chapter to prevent bicycle larceny
and to recover stolen bicycles.
§ 72-8. Fees.
No fee is required. There shall be no fee charged by the Police Department or by any
other department or agency of the Borough in connection with the administration of this
chapter.
§ 72-9. Operation of bicycles.
The following rules and regulations shall be observed in the operation of a bicycle in
the roadways, streets and public places in the Borough. These rules and regulations are
intended to supplement the laws of the State of New Jersey and do not alter them. The
laws of the State of New Jersey are incorporated herein as if set forth in detail.
A. Every person operating a bicycle shall at all times operate the bicycle with due
regard for the safety of other persons and vehicles lawfully upon the streets,
highways, and public places, as well as for his safety, and shall at all times and
under all conditions yield the right-of-way to pedestrians on the streets, highways
and public places and on the crosswalks.
B. Every person operating a bicycle shall comply with all vehicle traffic laws which
apply to bicycles and all vehicle traffic signs and signals erected for the regulation
of traffic.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon the streets, highways
and public places of the Borough during the period from one hour after sunset to
one hour before sunrise unless such bicycle is equipped with a front light which
shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and
with a lamp on the rear which shall emit a red light visible from a distance of at
least 500 feet to the rear. In addition to the red lamp, a red reflector may be mounted
on the rear, of a type approved by the police, which shall be visible from all
distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle.
§ 72-6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 72-9
72:2
§ 72-10. Violations and penalties.
§ 72-11. Registration not required.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the issuance of
registration certificates or decals to the owners or operators of bicycles owned or
operated within the Borough of Shrewsbury.
D. It shall be unlawful to operate upon the streets, highways and public places of the
Borough a bicycle that is not equipped with adequate brakes which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
E. Before turning or changing the direction of any bicycle upon any street, highway,
parkway or public place, it shall be the duty of the bicycle rider to give a signal by
the extension of the hand to indicate the direction it is the intention to proceed.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle upon any street, highway or
public place to attach himself or attach the bicycle to any other moving vehicle.
G. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle which is equipped to carry
only the operator to carry another person on the front or rear frame or handlebars or
on any part not intended to carry a passenger.
H. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle without maintaining full
control of such bicycle, keeping both hands on the handlebar, except when
necessary to signal.
I. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a
bell or other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon
a bicycle any siren or whistle.
J. Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side
of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle
or one proceeding in the same direction. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway
shall ride in single file.
A. Any person under the age of 18 years who is accused by a member of the Police
Department of violating any of the provisions of this chapter relating to the vehicle
traffic laws or the bicycle safe riding rules and regulations shall be issued a
summons by the Police Department returnable in the Juvenile and Domestic
Relations Court of Monmouth County.
B. Any person over the age of 18 years accused of violating the terms of this chapter
shall be summoned by the Police Department to a hearing in the Municipal Court
of the Borough. Upon conviction in said Court of a violation of the terms of this
chapter, such person shall be fined not more than $25 for the first offense and not
more than $50 for each subsequent offense.
§ 72-9 BICYCLES § 72-11
72:3

Chapter 77
BRUSH, GRASS, WEEDS AND DEBRIS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 118.
Housing standards — See Ch. 145.
Nuisances — See Ch. 163.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Solid waste — See Ch. 210.
Yard waste — See Ch. 215.
§ 77-1. Mayor and Council may order removal.
Whenever it shall appear necessary and expedient to the Mayor and Council for the
preservation of the public health, safety, general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard,
to remove from lands lying within the limits of the Borough of Shrewsbury, brush,
weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and
debris, the Mayor and Council shall cause notice thereof to be given to the owner, tenant,
occupants or person in control of such lands, and said owner, tenant, occupants or person
in control shall, within 10 days after notice thereof, remove the same.
§ 77-2. Removal by Borough after noncompliance by landholder. [Amended
9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
In case the owner, tenant, occupants or person in control of any such lands shall refuse or
neglect to remove the said brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris within 10 days after notice thereof as aforesaid
and in the manner required by the Borough, such owner, tenant, occupant or person
in control of such lands shall be in violation of this chapter, and the same shall be
removed by or under the direction of the Construction Code Official of the Borough
of Shrewsbury or such other officer of the Borough as the Mayor and Council may
designate from time to time.
§ 77-3. Costs of public removal to be a lien.
In cases where the aforesaid brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris are removed from any lands as
provided for herein by or under the direction of the Construction Code Official or
such other officer as the Mayor and Council may designate from time to time, the
Construction Code Official or such other officer shall certify the cost thereof to the
Mayor and Council, who shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause
the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands; the amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form a
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest
at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in
the same manner as taxes.
§ 72-11 BRUSH, GRASS, WEEDS AND DEBRIS § 77-4
77:1
§ 77-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
OBNOXIOUS GROWTHS—Any growth of grass over six inches in height on any lot,
excluding grass and/or vegetation and plants indigenous to areas of any lot designated
as wetland and within stream corridors; and all and any growth of plants poisonous
to human beings or detrimental to human health or deemed illegal by the state and/or
federal government.[Added 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346; amended 2-10-1997 by Ord.
No. 727]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or group of persons; and the
plural or singular, and masculine, feminine or neuter, shall be inferred, whichever is
appropriate for the effectuation of this chapter.
§ 77-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof. Each day that the violation or violations continue to
exist shall be a separate violation.
§ 77-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 77-5
77:2
Chapter 88
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 94.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 118.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 122.
Housing standards — See Ch. 145.
§ 88-1. Enforcing agency established; subcode officials designated.
§ 88-2. Salaries of officials.
The salaries of all officials shall be set forth in the annual Salary Resolution.36
§ 88-3. Fees established.
The fees for various permits authorized pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code shall
be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 23, Uniform Construction Code, of the
Administrative Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq., as amended from time to time. All fees
shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of any permits.
A. There is hereby established in the Borough of Shrewsbury a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency, to be known as the "Shrewsbury Borough
Construction Code Enforcement Agency," consisting of a Construction Official,
Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode
Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official, and such other subcode officials for such
additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs,
State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing
agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et
seq.), as amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant
N.J.A.C 5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the same person,
provided that such person is qualified, pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C.
5:23, to hold each such position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at one
office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances.
A. The plan review fee shall be 20% of the amount to be charged for a new
construction permit and shall be paid at the time of application. Plan review fees are
36. Editor's Note: The annual Salary Resolution is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 77-5 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 88-3
88:1
not refundable. For projects which do not require plan review for all subcodes, the
fee shall be an appropriate percentage (but not less that 5%) of the subcode fee
which is applicable.
B. The basic construction fee shall be the sum of the parts computed on the basis of
volume of the cost of construction and the number of plumbing fixtures and devices
and the number of electrical fixtures and devices and the number of sprinklers,
standpipes and heat and smoke detectors at the unit rates provided therein, plus any
special fees.
(1) The building subcodes fees shall be as follows:
(a) New construction based on the volume of the structure. Volume shall be
computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction
fee shall be $0.034 per cubic foot of volume for buildings and structures
classified and defined in Articles 3 and 6 of the building subcode, except
that the fee shall be $0.027 per cubic foot of volume for Use Groups A-I,
A-2, A-3, A-4, F-l, F-2, S-1 and S-2, and the fee shall be $0.065 per cubic
foot under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), with the maximum fee for such
structures on farms not to exceed $1,000.
[1] Additions. The fee for additions shall be computed on the same basis
as for new construction for the added portion.
(b) Renovations, alterations and repairs or site construction associated with
preengineered systems of commercial farm buildings, premanufactured
construction and external utility connection for premanufactured
construction shall be based upon the estimated cost of work.
[1] The fee shall be in the amount of $34 per $1,000 for the first $50,000
of estimated cost; from over $50,000 to and including $100,000, the
additional fee shall be $23 per $1,000 of estimated cost above
$50,000; above $100,000, the additional fee shall be $20 per $1,000
of estimated cost above $100,000.
[2] For the purpose of determining estimated cost, the applicant shall
submit to the Construction Official such data as may be available,
produced by the architect or engineer of record or by a recognized
estimating firm or by the contractor. A bona fide contractor's bid, if
available, shall be submitted. The Construction Official shall make
the final decision regarding estimated cost.
(c) Combination fees for renovations or additions shall be computed as the
sum of the fees computed separately in accordance with Subsection
B(1)(a) and (b).
(d) The roofing or siding fee shall be a flat fee of $58 for Use Groups R-3,
R-4 and R-5.
(e) The minimum fee shall be $50 for residential; $75 for nonresidential.
(2) Plumbing fees shall be as follows:
§ 88-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 88-3
88:2
(a) Plumbing fixtures and devices.
[1] All fixtures, appliances, (future and current), gas piping and
nontestable backflow preventers and also including:
[a] Trap primers.
[b] Ice-maker lines.
[c] Humidifier lines.
[d] Condensate lines.
[e] Condensate pumps.
[f] Coffee lines.
[g] Water heaters.
[h] Hot-water heating zones.
[2] The charge for each item(s) shall be $20.
(b) For grease trap(s), oil separator(s), water-cooled air conditioner(s), sewer
and water connection(s), refrigeration unit(s), utility service
connection(s), backflow preventer(s) (testable), steam boiler(s), hot water
boiler(s), active solar system(s), sewer pump(s), interceptor(s), pump(s),
pressure-reducing valve(s), air admittance valve and fuel-oil piping, the
fee for each shall be $82.
(c) Periodic inspections for cross connections and backflow preventers that
are subject to testing, requiring reinspection annually, the fee for each
device shall be $75.
(d) For domestic hot water boilers, furnaces and air-conditioning units, the
fee shall be $65.
(e) The minimum fee shall be $50 for residential and $75 for nonresidential.
(3) Fire protection fees shall be as follows:
(a) Smoke detector or devices.
[1] The fee for five or fewer shall be $35.
[2] For each additional 15 (or part thereof), the fee shall be $20.
(b) Alarm devices (i.e., heat, pulls, water flow).
[1] The fee for five or fewer shall be $35.
[2] For each additional 15 (or part thereof), the fee shall be $20.
(c) Supervisory devices (i.e., tampers, low/high air) or signaling devices (i.e.,
horns/strobes, bells).
§ 88-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 88-3
88:3
[1] The fee for 5 or fewer shall be $35.
[2] For each additional 15 (or part thereof), the fee shall be $20.
(d) Sprinkler heads (wet and dry).
[1] The fee for 10 or fewer heads: $100.
[2] The fee for 11 to and including 100 heads: $150.
[3] The fee for 101 to and including 200 heads: $280.
[4] The fee for 201 to and including 400 heads: $748.
[5] The fee for 401 to and including 600 heads: $1,000.
[6] The fee for 601 heads and up: $1,500.
(e) The fee for each standpipe shall be $289.
(f) The fee for each kitchen exhaust system shall be $100.
(g) The fee for independent preengineered systems (CO2, halon, foam, wet
or dry chemical, etc.) shall be $116.
(h) The fee for each gas- and oil-fired appliance which is not connected to
the plumbing system shall be $50.
(i) Tanks.
[1] The fee for installation of tanks up to 550 gallons in water capacity
shall be $50.
[2] The fee for installation of tanks over 550 gallons in water capacity
shall be $75.
(j) The fee for each incinerator shall be $460.
(k) The fee for each crematorium shall be $460.
(l) The fee for each alarm panel shall be $50.
(m) The fee for each fire pump shall be $250.
(n) The fee for each preaction valve shall be $35.
(o) The fee for each dry pipe/alarm valve shall be $25.
(p) The fee for each smoke control system shall be $100.
(q) The minimum fire fee for residential uses shall be $50.
(r) The minimum fire fee for nonresidential uses shall be $75.
(4) Electrical fees shall be as follows:
(a) Electrical fixtures and devices:
§ 88-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 88-3
88:4
[1] From one to 25 receptacles, fixtures or switches, 15 to 20 amp only:
$36.
[2] Increments of 25 additional items: $25.
(b) One HP or less than or equal to 10 HP $25.
[1] Greater than 10 HP or less than or equal to 50 HP: $46.
[2] Greater than 50 HP or less than or equal to 60 HP: $92.
[3] Greater than 60 HP or less than or equal to 70 HP: $140.
[4] Greater than 70 HP or less than or equal to 80 HP: $186.
[5] Greater than 80 HP or less than or equal to 90 HP: $240.
[6] Greater than 90 HP or less than or equal to 100 HP: $300.
[7] Greater than 100 HP: $457.
(c) Electrical devices: includes transformers and generators:
[1] One KW or less than or equal to 10 KW: $25.
[2] Greater than 10 KW or less than or equal to 45 KW: $46.
[3] Greater than 45 KW or less than or equal to 55 KW: $92.
[4] Greater than 55 KW or less than or equal to 65 KW: $186.
[5] Greater than 65 KW or less than or equal to 75 KW: $240.
[6] Greater than 75 KW or less than or equal to 85 KW: $300.
[7] Greater than 85 KW or less than or equal to 95 KW: $350.
[8] Greater than 95 KW or less than or equal to 112.5 KW: $400.
[9] Greater than 112.5 KW: $457.
(d) Service equipment: term includes service panels, service entry, transfer
switch and subpanels, each equipment piece priced as follows:
[1] Greater than 0 amp or less than or equal to 100 amp: $75.
[2] Greater than 100 amp or less than or equal to 200 amp: $100.
[3] Greater than 200 amp or less than or equal to 300 amp: $125.
[4] Greater than 300 amp or less than or equal to 400 amp: $160.
[5] Greater than 400 amp or less than or equal to 500 amp: $200.
[6] Greater than 500 amp or less than or equal to 600 amp: $240.
[7] Greater than 600 amp or less than or equal to 700 amp: $286.
§ 88-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 88-3
88:5
[8] Greater than 700 amp or less than or equal to 800 amp: $320.
[9] Greater than 900 amp: $457.
(e) For the purpose of computing these fees, all electrical and communication
devices, utilization equipment and motors which are part of premises
wiring, except those which are portable plug-in type, shall be counted.
(f) For photovoltaic systems, the fee shall be based on the designated
kilowatt rating of the solar photovoltaic system as follows:
[1] One to 50 kilowatts, the fee shall be $58.
[2] Fifty-one to 100 kilowatts, the fee shall be $200.
[3] Greater than 100 kilowatts, the fee shall be $576.
(g) Permanently installed pools, inground or aboveground, residential,
including hot tub/spa and fountains, each: $100.
[1] If applicable, underwater light, each: $10.
(h) Commercial alarm control unit shall be, [price does not include devices;
refer to Subsection B(4)(a)]:
[1] Residential shall be $50.
[2] Commercial shall be $75.
(i) Air conditioning:
[1] Less than five tons shall be $65.
[2] Greater then five tons shall be $65.
(j) Furnace shall be $35.
(k) Annual pool inspection shall be $50.
(l) The minimum electrical fee for residential uses shall be $50.
(m) The minimum electrical fee for nonresidential uses shall be $75.
(5) Special fees.
(a) Decks. The fee to construct a deck for Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5 shall
be based on square footage as follows:
[1] Up to and including 200 square feet shall be $50.
[2] Over 200 square feet and including 400 square feet shall be $75.
[3] Over 400 square feet and including 1,000 square feet shall be $100.
[4] Over 1,000 square feet shall be $150.
(b) Swimming pools.
§ 88-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 88-3
88:6
[1] The fee for installation of an aboveground pool more than 18 inches
in depth or more than 750 gallons in capacity for Use Groups R-3,
R-4 and R-5 shall be $50.
[2] The fee for installation of a private in-ground pool more than 18
inches in depth or more than 750 gallons in capacity for Use Groups
R-3, R-4 and R-5 shall be $100.
[3] The fee for installation of a public pool (in-ground or aboveground)
shall be $200.
(c) Wood-/coal-burning stoves and chimneys. The fee for installation of
wood-coal-burning stoves, fireplaces, heatolators, like devices and/or
chimneys shall be $45.
(d) Accessory and storage structures. Unless otherwise exempt by N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.14(b)8:
[1] The permit fee for construction or installation of a shed or similar
accessory structure up to 100 square feet shall be $50.
[2] The permit fee for construction and installation of an accessory
storage shed or similar accessory structures over 100 square feet and
less than 200 square feet shall be $75.
(e) Demolition and removal.
[1] The permit fee for demolition or removal of a structure of less than
5,000 square feet in area and less than 30 feet in height for one- or
two-family residences (Use Groups R-3, R-4 and R-5) and structures
on farms included under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d) shall be $50.
[2] The permit fee for demolition of farm outbuildings and minor
accessory structures (Use Group U) shall be $30.
[3] The permit fee for demolition of all other buildings, structures or use
groups shall be $150.
[4] For removal of buildings and structures from one lot to another lot
or to a new location on the same lot, the fee shall be $20 for the first
$1,000 of estimated cost, plus $15 for each additional $1,000 of cost
or part hereof. Estimated cost shall be the sum of the following: the
estimated cost of moving, plus the cost of the new foundations and
all work necessary to place the building or structure in its completed
condition in the new location.
[5] The permit fee for the demolition of tanks shall be $75 per tank.
(f) Satellite dishes and radio transceiver equipment. The fee to install
satellite dish, radio, television or other transceiver equipment to be
installed for residential use shall be $35. The fee to install satellite dish,
radio, television or other transceiver equipment to be installed for
nonresidential use shall be $100.
§ 88-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 88-3
88:7
(g) Fence.
[1] The fee to erect a fence in Use Groups R-3, R-4, R-5 and U which
acts as a barrier for a private pool or is in excess of six feet in height
shall be $25.
[2] The fee to erect a fence (not to exceed eight feet in height) for all
other use groups and which acts as a barrier for a public pool shall
be $100.
(h) The permit fee for asbestos hazard abatement shall be $70 for each
construction permit issued. A certification of occupancy must be issued
following the successful completion of an asbestos hazard abatement
project. The certificate fee shall be $14.
(i) The permit fee for lead hazard abatement shall be $70 for each
construction permit issued. A certification of clearance must be issued
following the successful completion of a lead hazard abatement project.
The certificate fee shall be $14.
(j) The permit fee for tents in excess of 900 square feet or more than 30 feet
in any dimension shall be $75.
(k) The fee to construct a sign, unless exempted by N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.14(b)6,
shall be in the amount of $l per square foot of surface area of the sign,
computed on one side only for double-faced signs. The minimum fee
shall be $35.
(l) The permit fee for a temporary structure used in the course of
construction of other activities, whose life is limited to not more than one
year, shall be $75.
(6) Certificate of occupancy.
(a) The fee for a certificate of occupancy (unless otherwise indicated) shall
be $50 for residential and $100 for nonresidential.
(b) The fee for a certificate of occupancy issued under N.J.A.C. 5:2.2(c) shall
be $120.
(c) The fee for the first issuance and the renewal of a temporary certificate of
occupancy shall be $30.
(7) The fee for an application for variation in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10
shall be $450 for Class 1 structures and $75 for Class 2 and Class 3 structures.
The fee for resubmission of an application for a variation shall be $229 for
Class 1 structures and $45 for Class 2 and Class 3 structures.
(8) Annual permits.
(a) Fees for annual construction permits shall be as follows:
[1] One to 25 workers (including foreman): $667 per worker.
§ 88-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 88-3
88:8
§ 88-4. Fire limits.
[2] Each additional worker over 25: $232 per worker.
(b) Note: Prior to issuance of the annual permit, a training registration fee of
$140 per subcode and a list of not more than three individuals to be
trained per subcode must be submitted by the applicant to the Department
of Community Affairs, Bureau of Code Services, Training Section, along
with a copy of the construction permit (Form F170). Checks shall be
made payable to "Treasurer of State of New Jersey."
(9) New Jersey state training fees.
(a) For new construction and additions, the fee shall be in the amount of
$0.00334 per cubic foot of volume. Volume shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28.
(b) The fee for all other construction (except preengineered systems of
commercial farm buildings) shall be $0.00170 per $1,000 of the value of
construction. No fee shall be collected for preengineered systems of
commercial farm buildings.
A. The following fire limits are established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23:
(1) Beginning at the intersection of the New Jersey Transit, North Jersey Coastline
Rail Line right-of-way and White Road and running thence along the right-ofway
of said railroad; in a northwesterly direction, to New Jersey State
Highway No. 35 (Broad Street); thence along Broad Street, in a southerly
direction, to its intersection with White Road; thence in an easterly direction
along White Road to the point or place of beginning; said block being
triangular in shape and being bound by New Jersey State Highway No. 35
(Broad Street), White Road and the right-of-way of the New Jersey Transit -
North Jersey Coastline Rail Line.
(2) Beginning at the point of intersection of New Jersey State Highway No. 35
(Broad Street) and County Route 520 (Newman Springs Road); thence in a
westerly direction along County Route 520 (Newman Springs Road) to its
intersection with Laurel Street; thence in a southerly direction along Laurel
Street to its intersection with Hadden Avenue; thence in an easterly direction
along Hadden Avenue to its intersection with New Jersey State Highway No.
35 (Broad Street); thence in a northerly direction along the New Jersey State
Highway No. 35 (Broad Street) to the point or place of beginning; said block
being rectangular in shape and being bound by New Jersey State Highway No.
35 (Broad Street), County Route 520 (Newman Springs Road), Laurel Street
and Hadden Avenue.
B. The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council,
biannually, a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire limits. This report shall
indicate the recommendations of the Construction Official, the Building Subcode
Official and the Fire Subcode Official regarding those areas which should be
designated as within fire limits, with the reasons therefor.
§ 88-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 88-4
88:9

Chapter 90
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 72.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 236.
Towing — See Ch. 242.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 250.
§ 88-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 88-4
90:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 90-1. Words and phrases defined.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be
deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.
§ 90-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-1
90:3

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 90-2. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any
person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or
limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138,
any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter provided.
§ 90-3. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets. [Amended 9-20-2010 by
Ord. No. 949; 4-18-2011 by Ord. No. 957]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule I, § 90-19, Schedule XXI, § 90-33.6, and Schedule XXII,
§ 90-33.7, attached hereto and made a part of this chapter.
§ 90-4. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. [Added
8-8-1988 by Ord. No. 577; amended 8-18-2015 by Ord. No. 1017]
§ 90-5. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on certain streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule III,
§ 90-21, of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule
III attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 90-6. Parking time limited on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in Schedule IV,
§ 90-22, at any time between the hours listed in said Schedule IV of any day (except
Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in said
Schedule IV attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 90-7. Diagonal parking.
On or within the traffic circle or cul-de-sac located in the north end of Sickles Place,
vehicles shall be parked diagonally to the curb and within the lines marked on said street
indicating the spaces within which any such vehicle will be parked.
§ 90-7.1. Handicapped parking. [Added 3-14-1988 by Ord. No. 568; amended
7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 646]
A. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II, § 90-20,
of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in said Schedule II attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. The parking of any motor vehicle having a gross weight in excess of 6,000 pounds
upon any of the streets in the Borough of Shrewsbury between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. is prohibited.
A. Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, "handicapped person" is defined as a
§ 90-2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-7.1
90:5
person who qualifies under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 and who possesses
a handicapped person identification card issued by the Director of the Division of
Motor Vehicles.
B. General statement. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or stand a motor
vehicle in any parking space designated for the exclusive use of handicapped
persons, unless such person is a handicapped person or is transporting a
handicapped person and is utilizing the handicapped parking space for the benefit
of such handicapped person.
C. Special license plate or placard. All motor vehicles parking, stopping or standing in
a handicapped person parking space must have a special license plate or placard
issued by the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 39:4-205, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-206.
D. Handicapped parking in municipal parking lots and Board of Education property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, 39:4-202, 39:4-183.27 and
39:4-198, off-street municipal parking yards and Board of Education property as
shown in Schedule XVII, § 90-33.2, attached to and made part of this chapter, are
designated as handicapped parking areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who
have been issued special identification cards for plates or placards by the Division
of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other
person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
E. Handicapped parking on street. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-197, 39:4-202, 39:4-183.27 and 39:4-198, on-street locations as shown in
Schedule XVIII, § 90-33.3, attached to and made part of this chapter, are designated
as handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces are for use by persons who have been
issued special identification cards for plates or placards by the Division of Motor
Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person
shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
F. Handicapped parking on private property open to the public. In accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, 39:4-183.27 and 39:4-198, off-street parking
yards as shown in Schedule XIX, § 90-33.4, attached to and made part of this
chapter, are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such spaces are for use by
persons who have been issued special identification cards for plates or placards by
the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of
Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
G. Handicapped parking on all other private property. In accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, 39:5A-1, 39:4-202, 39:4-183.27 and 39:4-198, offstreet
parking yards as designated in Schedule XX, § 90-33.5, attached to and made
part of this chapter, are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards for plates or
placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued by the
Chief of Police. No other persons shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
H. Signs, pavement markings, installation and maintenance. The owners of the
premises referred to in Subsections F and G above shall provide and install signs
and pavement markings for each parking space reserved for use by handicapped
§ 90-7.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-7.1
90:6
persons, which signing and markings shall be checked by the Shrewsbury Borough
Police Department to ensure installations meet federal specifications, and all
signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement markings shall
be the responsibility of the owners of said property. The owners shall, subsequent
to initial procurement and installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings
in good condition and at no cost or expense to the Borough. The owners shall be
responsible for the repair and restoration or replacement of the same. Requirements
are the R7-8 (handicapped) and the R7-8P (penalty) signs.
I. Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space without a special
vehicle identification card shall be liable to a fine of $250, plus court costs, for the
first offense, and for subsequent offenses a fine of $250, plus court costs, and up to
90 days' community service on such terms and in such form as the Court shall deem
appropriate, or any combination thereof. [Amended 3-14-1994 by Ord. No. 680;
11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 822]
§ 90-7.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-7.1
90:7

ARTICLE III
Limiting Use of Streets to Certain Class of Vehicle
§ 90-8. Buses and trucks with specified gross weights excluded. [Amended
4-9-1979 by Ord. No. 428]
Buses and trucks weighing in excess of the specified gross weight are hereby excluded
from the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule V, § 90-23, except for the
pickup and delivery of materials on such streets, except for vehicles lawfully garaged on
property fronting on the streets listed in Schedule V and except for municipal vehicles,
said Schedule V being attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 90-8.1. Low-speed vehicles.37 [Added 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 882]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOW-SPEED VEHICLE — A four-wheeled motor vehicle, other than a truck,
whose speed attainable in one mile (1.6 km) is more than 20 miles per hour (32
kilometers per hour) and not more than 25 miles per hour (40 kilometers per hour)
on a paved level surface.
MASTER PLAN COMMUNITY — A self-contained development, including
private roadways, authorized by the Borough of Shrewsbury.
B. Operation. Use of low-speed vehicles is prohibited on all Borough roadways. Lowspeed
vehicles shall only be permitted and operated in self-contained age-restricted
Master Plan communities where the speed limit is not more than 25 miles per hour.
Low-speed vehicles shall not be powered by gas or diesel fuel. All low-speed
vehicles must meet the requirements of Part 49 Section 571.500 of the Code of
Federal Regulations.
C. Driver's license required. All persons operating a low-speed vehicle shall hold a
valid driver's license.
D. Title required. Low-speed vehicles shall be titled as specified in Title 39 of the
Statutes of the State of New Jersey. The manufacturer's certificate of origin shall
clearly identify the vehicle as a low-speed vehicle. The State of New Jersey does
not issue vehicle identification numbers to homemade low-speed vehicles or
retrofitted golf carts and such vehicles shall not qualify as low-speed vehicles.
E. Registration.
(1) Motor vehicle registrations shall be required on low-speed vehicles.
(2) Low-speed vehicles shall display two plates, one on the front and one on the
rear of the vehicle at all times.
(3) The fee for registering a low-speed vehicle shall be set by the State of New
Jersey.
37. Editor's Note: Also known as LSV.
§ 90-8 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-8.1
90:9
F. Safety inspection. Low-speed vehicles shall be exempt from state safety inspection.
Upon renewal of a LSV registration, the owner shall certify, under penalty of law,
that all lights, brakes, tires, and seatbelts are in good working condition.
G. Insurance. Low-speed vehicles shall be required to maintain insurance as required
by the State of New Jersey.
H. Dealer requirements. Any person engaged in the retail sale of low-speed vehicles
shall be required to comply with the motor vehicle dealer licensing, registration,
and bonding laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 90-8.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-8.1
90:10
ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 90-9. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI, § 90-24, attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated.
§ 90-9 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-9
90:11

ARTICLE V
Through Streets, Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 90-10. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of streets described
in Schedule VII, § 90-25, attached to and made a part of this chapter are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each
street intersecting the through street, except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations and except at ends of through streets.
§ 90-11. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule
VIII, § 90-26, attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 90-12. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described in Schedule
IX, § 90-27, attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield
intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 90-10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-12
90:13

ARTICLE VI
Loading Zones
§ 90-13. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule X, § 90-28, attached to and made a part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 90-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-13
90:15

ARTICLE VII
Taxi Stands
§ 90-14. Taxi stands designated.
Taxi stands described in Schedule XI, § 90-29, attached to and made a part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 90-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-14
90:17

ARTICLE VIII
Bus Stops
§ 90-15. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII, § 90-30, attached to and made a part of this
chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 90-15 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-15
90:19

ARTICLE IX
Turn Prohibitions
[Amended 7-9-1990 by Ord. No. 613]
§ 90-16. Left-turn prohibitions.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in Schedule XIII,
§ 90-31, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 90-17. U-turn prohibitions.
No person shall make a U-turn at any of the locations described in Schedule XIV,
§ 90-32, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 90-18. No turns.
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations described in Schedule XV, § 90-33,
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 90-18.1. Right turn only permitted.
Right turns only shall be permitted at any of the locations described in Schedule XVI,
§ 90-33.1, attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 90-16 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-18.1
90:21

ARTICLE X
Schedules
§ 90-19. Schedule I: No Parking. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 560]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-3, no person shall park a vehicle at any time
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Avenue of the Common [Added
4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 851;
amended 5-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 1026]
Inner loop Entire length
Beechwood Drive East Between its intersection with
Sycamore Avenue and a point distant
150 feet therefrom
Broad Street Both Entire length
Buttonwood Drive East Between its intersection with
Sycamore Avenue and a point distant
150 feet therefrom
Buttonwood Drive [Added
11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 863]
West Between its intersection with
Sycamore Avenue and a point distant
200 feet therefrom
Garden Road East Between its intersection with
Sycamore Avenue and a point distant
150 feet therefrom
Haddon Avenue North Between Broad Street and Laurel
Street
Haddon Avenue [Added
4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 643]
South Between its intersection with Broad
Street and a point distant 85 feet
westerly therefrom
Haddon Avenue [Added
4-13-1992 by Ord. No. 643]
South Between its intersection with Laurel
Street and a point distant 365 feet
easterly therefrom
Henry Street West Between its intersection with
Newman Springs Road and a point
distant 150 feet southerly therefrom
Heritage Drive [Added
11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 741]
Both Between its intersection with White
Road and a point distant 260 feet
southerly therefrom
Laurel Street West Between its intersection with Francis
Street and its intersection with
Newman Springs Road
§ 90-19 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-19
90:23
Name of Street Side Location
Meadow Drive East [Added
5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 714]
North Between its intersection with Brady
Road and a point 180 feet westerly
therefrom
Meadow Drive East [Added
5-13-1996 by Ord. No. 714]
South Between its intersection with Brady
Road and a point 180 feet westerly
therefrom
Newman Springs Road South Between its intersection with the
west side of Broad Street westerly
and a point distant 500 feet therefrom
Park Avenue [Added 9-19-2011
by Ord. No. 970]
Islands (2) in
center of
roadway
Total area around islands (2) in Park
Avenue roadway
Riordan Place [Added 8-2-1999
by Ord. No. 767]
South Between its intersection with
Shrewsbury Avenue and the entire
length of Riordan Place on the south
side
Shrewsbury Avenue Both Between Newman Springs Road and
Broad Street
Sycamore Avenue South Between a point distant 200 feet east
of the intersection with Broad Street
and a point distant 620 feet east of
said intersection
Sycamore Avenue (County Road
13A) [Added 7-6-2004 by Ord.
No. 841]
South From southwest corner of Elm Lane
to a point 25 feet west
Sycamore Avenue (County Road
13A) [Added 7-6-2004 by Ord.
No. 841]
South Between 190 feet and 284 feet west
of the southwest corner of Elm Lane
Sycamore Avenue (County Road
13A) [Added 7-6-2004 by Ord.
No. 841]
South Between 400 feet and 510 feet east of
southeast corner of Old Farm Road
Thomas Avenue North Between its intersection with Laurel
Street and its intersection with Broad
Street
Thomas Avenue South Between its intersection with Broad
Street and a point distant 150 feet
westerly therefrom
White Road North Between its intersection with Broad
Street and a point 150 feet easterly
therefrom
§ 90-19 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-19
90:24
Name of Street Side Location
White Road South Between its intersection with Broad
Street and its intersection with the
boundary line of the Borough of Little
Silver and the Borough of Shrewsbury
to the east
White Street North Between its intersection with Broad
Street and a point distant 150 feet
easterly therefrom
White Street South Between its intersection with Broad
Street and a point 900 feet easterly
therefrom
§ 90-20. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-4, no person shall park a vehicle between the
hours specified upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Sycamore Avenue Both 6:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m.
East and west of its
intersection with Broad
Street for a distance of 200
feet therefrom
§ 90-21. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing. [Amended 12-12-1983 by Ord.
No. 494; 9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 560; 8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 649]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-5, no person shall stop or stand a vehicle
between the hours specified upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
East Drive Both All Entire length
Main Drive Both All Entire length
North Drive Both All Entire length
§ 90-22. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking. [Amended 10-7-1985 by Ord. No. 536;
9-14-1987 by Ord. No. 560; 8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 785]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-6, no person shall park a vehicle for longer
than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
§ 90-19 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-22
90:25
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit
(hours) Hours Location
Avenue of the
Common [Added
5-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 1026]
Outer loop 2 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
Between Campbell
Court and the
driveway entrance to
160 Avenue of the
Common
Henry Street East 1 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
Entire length
Henry Street West 1 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
Between its
intersection with
Frances Street and a
point distant 150 feet
south of Newman
Springs Road
Laurel Street East 1 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Between Newman
Springs Road and
Haddon Avenue
Monroe Avenue Both 1 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
Between its
intersection with
Broad Street and a
point distant 150 feet
easterly therefrom
Monroe Avenue Both 1 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between its
intersection with
North Monroe Avenue
and a point distant 150
feet easterly from its
intersection with
Broad Street
North Monroe
Avenue
Both 1 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
Entire length
Obre Place [Repealed 9-20-2010 by Ord. No. 949]
Patterson Avenue Both 1 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
Between its
intersection with
Broad Street and a
point distant 150 feet
westerly therefrom
§ 90-22 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-22
90:26
Name of Street Side
Time
Limit
(hours) Hours Location
Patterson Avenue North 1 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
Between its
intersection with
Shrewsbury Avenue
and a point distant 200
feet easterly therefrom
Patterson Avenue South 1 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
Between its
intersection with
Shrewsbury Avenue
and a point distant 270
feet easterly therefrom
Trafalgar Place Both 1 6:00 am. to
10:00 a.m.,
Monday
through
Friday
Between its
intersection with
Sycamore Avenue and
a point distant 650
feet southerly
therefrom.
§ 90-23. Schedule V: Buses and Trucks with Specified Gross Weights Excluded.
[Amended 4-9-1979 by Ord. No. 428; 9-20-2001 by Ord. No. 789]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-8, buses and trucks weighing over the
specified gross weights are excluded from the following described streets or parts of
streets except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets, except for
vehicles lawfully garaged on property fronting on the streets listed herein and except for
municipal vehicles:
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
Henry Street 4 Entire street within Borough limits
Laurel Street 4 Entire street within Borough limits
Obre Place 4 Entire street within Borough limits
Patterson Avenue 4 Entire road within Borough limits
Silverbrook Road 4 Entire road within Borough limits
Thomas Avenue 4 Entire road within Borough limits
White Road 4 Entire road within Borough limits
§ 90-24. Schedule VI: One-Way Streets. [Amended 3-13-1978 by Ord. No. 415]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-9, the following described streets or parts of
streets are hereby designated as one-way streets m the direction indicated:
§ 90-22 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-24
90:27
Name of Street Direction Location
Park Avenue North Easterly side between Sycamore
Avenue and Court Drive
Park Avenue South Westerly side between Court Drive
and Sycamore Avenue
Thomas Avenue East Entire length
§ 90-25. Schedule VII: Through Streets. [Amended 12-12-1977 by Ord. No. 414]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-10, the following described streets or parts
of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the
near right side of each street intersecting the through street, except where yield signs are
provided for in the designations and except at ends of through streets.
Street
Yield
Designations Location
North Park Avenue None Entire length
Park Avenue None Entire length
Patterson Avenue None Between Route 35 and Shrewsbury
Avenue
White Street None Entire length
§ 90-26. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections. [Amended 8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 649;
7-6-1998 by Ord. No. 750; 9-19-2011 by Ord. No. 971]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-11, the following described intersections are
hereby designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Location of Sign
Adams Way (south) and Thornbrooke
Road
A stop sign shall be installed on Adams
Way
Adams Way (north) and Thornbrooke
Road
A stop sign shall be installed on Adams
Way
Alameda Court (east) and Patterson
Avenue
A stop sign shall be installed on Alameda
Court
Alameda Court (west) and Patterson
Avenue
A stop sign shall be installed on Alameda
Court
Allen Street and Patterson Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Allen
Street
Beech Tree Lane and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Beech
Tree Lane
Beechwood Drive and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on
Beechwood Drive
§ 90-24 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-26
90:28
Intersection Location of Sign
Birch Drive and Patterson Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Birch
Drive
Borden Street (north) and White Street A stop sign shall be installed on Borden
Street
Borden Street (south) and White Street A stop sign shall be installed on Borden
Street
Buttonwood Drive and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on
Buttonwood Drive
Colonial Drive and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Colonial
Drive
Constitution Drive (north) and Heritage
Drive
A stop sign shall be installed on
Constitution Drive
Constitution Drive (east) and Heritage
Drive
A stop sign shall be installed on
Constitution Drive
Corn Lane and Silverbrook Road A stop sign shall be installed on Corn
Lane
Court Drive (east) and Park Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Court
Drive
Court Drive (west) and Park Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Court
Drive
Crest Drive and East End Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Crest
Drive
Crest Drive (east) and Park Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Crest
Drive
Crest Drive (west) and Park Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Crest
Drive
Crest Drive and West End Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Crest
Drive
Dorchester Way and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on
Dorchester Way
Dorchester Way and Trafalgar Place A stop sign shall be installed on
Dorchester Way
DPW/Recycling Center Parking Lot and
Heritage Drive
A stop sign shall be installed on DPW/
Recycling Center Parking Lot
East End Avenue and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on East End
Avenue
Elm Lane and Silverbrook Road A stop sign shall be installed on Elm Lane
Elm Lane and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Elm Lane
Francis Street and Trafford Street A stop sign shall be installed on Francis
Street
§ 90-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-26
90:29
Intersection Location of Sign
Garden Road and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Garden
Road
Garden Road (north) and White Street A stop sign shall be installed on Garden
Road
Garden Road (south) and White Street A stop sign shall be installed on Garden
Road
Glorney Street and Patterson Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Glorney
Street
Haddon Avenue and Laurel Street A stop sign shall be installed on Haddon
Avenue
Haddon Avenue and Highway 35 A stop sign shall be installed on Haddon
Avenue
Henry Street and Francis Street A stop sign shall be installed on Henry
Street
Henry Street and Route 520 A stop sign shall be installed on Henry
Street
Heritage Drive and White Road A stop sign shall be installed on Heritage
Drive
Laurel Street and Route 520 A stop sign shall be installed on Laurel
Street
Marc Court and Silverbrook Road A stop sign shall be installed on Marc
Court
Meridian Way and Thornbrooke Road A stop sign shall be installed on Meridian
Way
Monroe Avenue and Highway 35 A stop sign shall be installed on Monroe
Avenue
Municipal Center Lot and Sycamore
Avenue
A stop sign shall be installed at Municipal
Center Lot
N. Monroe Avenue and Monroe Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on N.
Monroe Avenue
N. Monroe Avenue and White Road A stop sign shall be installed on N.
Monroe Avenue
Obre Place and Samara Drive A stop sign shall be installed on Obre
Place
Old Farm Road and Elm Lane A stop sign shall be installed on Old Farm
Road
Old Farm Road and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Old Farm
Road
Parker Place and White Street A stop sign shall be installed on Parker
Place
§ 90-26 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-26
90:30
Intersection Location of Sign
Patterson Avenue and Highway 35 A stop sign shall be installed on Patterson
Avenue
Patterson Court (east) and Patterson
Avenue
A stop sign shall be installed on Patterson
Court
Patterson Court (west) and Patterson
Avenue
A stop sign shall be installed on Patterson
Court
Quaker Way and Spruce Drive A stop sign shall be installed on Quaker
Way
Quaker Way and Birch Drive A stop sign shall be installed on Quaker
Way
Queen Anne Drive and Highway 35 A stop sign shall be installed on Queen
Anne Drive
Regent Drive and Dorchester Way A stop sign shall be installed on Regent
Drive
Regent Drive and Trafalgar Place A stop sign shall be installed on Regent
Drive
Riordan Place and Shrewsbury Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Riordan
Place
Robinson Place (north) and White Street A stop sign shall be installed on Robinson
Place
Robinson Place (south) and White Street A stop sign shall be installed on Robinson
Place
Rosewood Drive and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Rosewood
Drive
Samara Drive and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Samara
Drive
Shadowbrook Drive and Highway 35 A stop sign shall be installed on
Shadowbrook Drive
Shady Lane and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Shady
Lane
Sickles Place (north) and White Street A stop sign shall be installed on Sickles
Place
Sickles Place (south) and White Street A stop sign shall be installed on Sickles
Place
Silverbrook Road and Highway 35 A stop sign shall be installed on
Silverbrook Road
Silverbrook Road and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on
Silverbrook Road
Spruce Drive and Birch Drive A stop sign shall be installed on Spruce
Drive
§ 90-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-26
90:31
Intersection Location of Sign
Spruce Drive and Patterson Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Spruce
Drive
Trafalgar Place and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Trafalgar
Place
Trafford Street and Francis Street A stop sign shall be installed on Trafford
Street
Trafford Street and Patterson Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on Trafford
Street
West End Avenue and Sycamore Avenue A stop sign shall be installed on West End
Avenue
White Street and Beechwood Drive A stop sign shall be installed on White
Street
White Street (east) and Robinson Place
[Added 7-15-2019 by Ord. No. 1065]
A stop sign shall be installed on White
Street
White Street (west) and Robinson Place
[Added 7-15-2019 by Ord. No. 1065]
A stop sign shall be installed on White
Street
Williamsburg Drive and Silverbrook Road A stop sign shall be installed on
Williamsburg Drive
Willow Court and Elm Lane A stop sign shall be installed on Willow
Court
Willow Court and Strauss Drive A stop sign shall be installed on Willow
Court
Windingbrook Way and Avenue at the
Common
A stop sign shall be installed on
Windingbrook Way
§ 90-27. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-12, the following described intersections are
hereby designated as yield intersections:
Intersection Location of Sign
(Reserved)
§ 90-28. Schedule X: Loading Zones. [Amended 8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 649;
3-4-2004 by Ord. No. 829]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-13, the following described locations are
hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Location
"The Grove" East Drive As indicated on site plan
§ 90-26 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-29
90:32
§ 90-29. Schedule XI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-14, the following described locations are
hereby designated as taxi stands:
Location
(Reserved)
§ 90-30. Schedule XII: Bus Stops. [Amended 3-4-2004 by Ord. No. 829]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-15, the following described locations are
hereby designated as bus stops:
A. Along Route 35 southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Thomas Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Thomas
Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) Meadow Drive, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Meadow
Drive and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(3) Obre Place, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Obre Place and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(4) Sycamore Avenue, midblock, beginning 100 feet from the southerly curbline
of Sycamore Avenue and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
(5) Avenue of the Commons, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Avenue of the Commons and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(6) Shrewsbury Plaza, south of the entrance to Shrewsbury Plaza and extending
105 feet.
B. Along Route 35 northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Avenue of the Commons, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Avenue of the Commons and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(2) Sycamore Avenue, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of Sycamore
Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(3) White Street, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of White Street and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(4) East Meadow Drive, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of East
Meadow Drive and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(5) White Road, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of White Road and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 90-29 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-31
90:33
§ 90-31. Schedule XIII: Left-Turn Prohibitions. [Amended 12-10-1984 by Ord.
No. 517; 8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 649; 4-19-2004 by Ord. No. 834; 5-17-2004 by Ord.
No. 836]
Location Prohibited Turn Hours
Haddon Avenue and
Broad Street
Left turn from Haddon
Avenue onto Broad Street
All
Shrewsbury Borough
School parking lot
Left turn from parking lot
onto Obre Place
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on days
when school is in session
§ 90-32. Schedule XIV: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-17, no person shall make a U-turn at any of
the following locations:
Location
(Reserved)
§ 90-33. Schedule XV: No Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-18, no person shall make a turn at any of the
following intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 90-33.1. Schedule XVI: Right Turn Only Permitted. [Added 7-9-1990 by Ord.
No. 613]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-18.1, right turns only shall be permitted at any
of the following locations:
Intersection Permitted Turn
South driveway of Shrewsbury Executive
Center (1030-1040 Broad Street) and
Broad Street
Right turn only from the south driveway of
Shrewsbury Executive Center onto Broad
Street, permitting travel in a southerly
direction only
§ 90-33.2. Schedule XVII: Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and
Board of Education Property. [Added 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 646; amended
3-4-2004 by Ord. No. 829]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-7.1D, the following locations indicated below
are hereby designated as handicapped parking spaces:
§ 90-31 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-33.2
90:34
Property
Number
of Spaces Location
Shrewsbury Municipal
Complex
419 Sycamore Avenue
2 1 space at the east end of the
northernmost parking row in the front
lot; 1 space at the north end of the
western parking row in the rear lot
Shrewsbury Borough
School
20 Obre Place
3 1 space at the eastern end of the
northernmost row of the visitor lot; 2
spaces at the eastern end of the middle
row facing north in the visitor lot
§ 90-33.3. Schedule XVIII: Handicapped Parking, On-Street. [Added 7-13-1992
by Ord. No. 646; amended 3-24-2004 by Ord. No. 829]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-7.1E, the following street locations are hereby
designated as handicapped parking spaces:
Street Side
Number
of Spaces Location
Obre Place [Added
9-20-2010 by Ord.
No. 949; amended
10-15-2018 by Ord.
No. 1052]
South 2 Beginning at the easterly end
of the dead-end street, 15 feet
west from the curbline of
Broad Street, 2 handicap
spaces shall start at a point 303
feet therefrom and end at a
point 40 feet westerly
therefrom
Patterson Avenue North 2 200 feet west of Broad Street
§ 90-33.4. Schedule XIX: Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to
Public and Where Public Is Invited. [Added 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 646]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-7.1F, the locations indicated below are hereby
designated as handicapped parking spaces:
Property
Number
of Spaces Location
Boulders
39 Avenue of the
Commons
2 1 space at eastern end of
northernmost parking row in the
lower lot; 1 space at northern end of
eastern parking row facing building
in the lower lot
Mill Run Building
59 Avenue of the
Commons
2 2 spaces at the west end of the
northern parking row on south side of
the building
§ 90-33.2 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-33.4
90:35
Property
Number
of Spaces Location
Office building
160 Avenue of the
Commons
3 3 spaces at the northern end of the
eastern parking row facing the
building
John Adams Square
167 Avenue of the
Commons
2 2 spaces in southern parking row
facing the building; space Nos. 4 and
5 from the east end of the parking
row
Office building
170 Avenue of the
Commons
3 3 spaces at the northern end of the
eastern parking row facing the
building
John Adams Square
179 Avenue of the
Commons
2 2 spaces in southern parking row on
the north side of the building facing
the building; space Nos. 11 and 12
from the east end of the parking row
Office building
180 Avenue of the
Commons
3 3 spaces at the north end of the
parking row facing the building
Restaurant
431 Broad Street
[Amended 3-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 829]
1 1 space at northern end of the parking
row facing the front of the building
It's Wholesale For Kids
483 Broad Street
2 2 spaces in the south parking row;
space Nos. 12 and 13 from the west
end of the row
Shrewsbury State Bank
Annex
487 Broad Street
1 1 space at west end of the parking
row on the north side of the building
Annie Sez
490 Broad Street
4 2 spaces at south end of the easterly
most parking row; 2 spaces at north
end of the parking row facing the
west side of the building
Office building
499 Broad Street
2 2 spaces in the west parking row
facing the building; space Nos. 1 and
5 from the south end of the row
Hilo Steiner
507 Broad Street
1 1 space north end of the western
parking row
§ 90-33.4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-33.4
90:36
Property
Number
of Spaces Location
Paris to Province
657 Broad Street
1 1 space at east end of the building
facing north
Sycamore Square
661 Broad Street
1 1 space at west end of the north
parking row facing the building
Franklin Commons
703 Broad Street
1 1 space at west end of the northern
parking row facing the building
Friendly's
747 Broad Street
2 2 spaces at west end of southern
parking row on the north side of the
building
Office building
1030 Broad Street
[Amended 3-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 829]
4 4 spaces easternmost parking row on
the west side of the building; spaces
numbered 7, 8, 9 and 10 from the
south end of the row
Office building
1030 Broad Street
[Amended 3-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 829]
4 4 spaces northern parking row on the
south side of the building; spaces
numbered 7, 8, 9 and 10 from the
west end of the row
Madison Place
1129 Broad Street
2 2 spaces in west parking row on the
east side of the building; space Nos.
8 and 9 from the north end of the row
Revmont Park
Broad Street
4 1 space in east parking row on the
west side of the building; space No. 2
from the north end of the row
3 spaces at north end of the westerly
most parking row on the west side of
the building
Office building
1150 Broad Street
[Amended 3-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 829]
1 1 space at west end of the south
parking row facing the building
Planned Parenthood
69 Newman Springs Road
1 1 space at north end of the east
parking row facing the building
Patterson Avenue Office
Center
166 Patterson Avenue
2 1 space at south end of the parking
row facing the building on the east
side of the building
§ 90-33.4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-33.4
90:37
Property
Number
of Spaces Location
1 space at south end of the parking
row facing the building on the west
side of the building
Patterson Avenue Office
Center
170 Patterson Avenue
4 2 spaces at east end of the parking
row facing the building on the north
side of the building
2 spaces at west end of the parking
row facing the building on the north
side of the building
Patterson Avenue Office
Center
174 Patterson Avenue
2 2 spaces at south end of the parking
row facing the building on the east
side of the building
Office building
16 Riordan Place
[Amended 3-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 829]
1 1 space at west end of south parking
row facing the building
Office building
40 Riordan Place
[Amended 3-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 829]
1 1 space in north parking row, space
No. 4, from the west end of the row
facing the building
Office building
41 Riordan Place
2 2 spaces at east end of the north
parking row facing the building
Bank building
169 Shrewsbury Avenue
[Amended 3-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 829]
1 1 space at north end of the east
parking row
Shrewsbury Village
555 Shrewsbury Avenue
5 5 spaces at the east end of the
northernmost parking row
Verizon
575 Shrewsbury Avenue
[Amended 3-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 829]
7 7 spaces in the south parking row
facing the north side of the building;
spaces numbered 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9
from the west end of the row
Jefferson Square
621 Shrewsbury Avenue
3 1 space in the east parking row on the
west side of the building; space No. 6
from the north end of the row
§ 90-33.4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-33.4
90:38
Property
Number
of Spaces Location
2 spaces in the westernmost parking
row on the east side of the building;
space Nos. 5 and 6 from the north
end of the row
Office building
655 Shrewsbury Avenue
2 2 spaces in the east parking row in
the northwest corner of the property;
space Nos. 5 and 6 from the south
end of the row
New Jersey American
Water
661 Shrewsbury Avenue
4 4 spaces in the north parking row in
the front parking lot; space Nos. 3, 4,
5 and 6 from the west end of the row
Wall Lincoln Mercury
681 Shrewsbury Avenue
2 1 space at west end of the
northernmost parking row
1 space at north end of the parking
row facing the west side of the
building
Shrewsbury Business
Center
1151 Shrewsbury Avenue
2 2 spaces in north parking row facing
the south side of the building; space
Nos. 3 and 15 from the east end of
the row
Shrewsbury Business
Center
1163 Shrewsbury Avenue
3 3 spaces in the east parking row
facing the front of the building; space
Nos. 3, 13 and 16 from the north end
of the row
First Assembly of God
Church
220 Sycamore Avenue
5 1 space at west end of the parking
row facing the rear of the church
3 Spaces at the north end of parking
row facing the west side of the
church
1 space along the curb on the
westernmost part of the parking lot;
1st space south of Sycamore Avenue
Presbyterian Church House
352 Sycamore Avenue
2 2 spaces at the west end of the
northern parking row in front of the
Church House
Central Jersey Blood Bank
494 Sycamore Avenue
4 2 spaces in parking row facing the
west side of the building; space Nos.
2 and 3 from the south end of the row
§ 90-33.4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-33.4
90:39
Property
Number
of Spaces Location
2 spaces in the parking row facing
the east side of the building; space
Nos. 2 and 3 from the south end of
the row
Bank building
541 Sycamore Avenue
[Amended 3-4-2004 by
Ord. No. 829]
1 1 space in the west parking row;
space number 5 from the north end of
the row
Office building
20 White Road [Amended
3-4-2004 by Ord. No. 829]
3 2 spaces in the north parking row
facing the south side of the building;
spaces numbered 7 and 8 from the
west end of the row
1 space at south end of parking row
on the north side of the building
§ 90-33.5. Schedule XX: Handicapped Parking on All Other Private Property.
[Added 7-13-1992 by Ord. No. 646]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-7.1G, the locations indicated below are hereby
designated as handicapped parking spaces:
Property
Number
of Spaces Location
Shrewsbury Commons
540 Broad Street
4 4 spaces at the eastern end of the
parking row facing the building on
the north side of the building
Shrewsbury Shops
Broad Street
1 1 space at the east end of the parking
row facing the south side of the
building
The Grove
Broad Street
11 2 spaces at the east end of the
parking row in front of Epsteins
facing each other
1 space at east end of a parking row
in front of Platypus in the north side
row
2 spaces at east end of parking rows
in front of the Gap For Kids facing
each other
1 space at north end of a parking
row in front of Abigails facing west
§ 90-33.4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-33.5
90:40
Property
Number
of Spaces Location
1 space at north end of a parking
row in front of Neves Jewelers
facing west
2 spaces at north end of parking
rows in front of Atlantic Art facing
each other
2 spaces at north end of parking
rows in front of Country Curtains
facing each other
Treasure Island
Broad Street [Amended
3-4-2004 by Ord. No. 829]
7 1 space at the south end of the
easternmost parking row in front of
The Beauty Barn
2 spaces at south end of the parking
rows in front of Kristy's Shoes
facing each other
2 spaces at south end of the parking
rows in front of Famous Footwear
facing each other
2 spaces at south end of the parking
rows in front of JYSK Bed'n Linen,
facing each other
Shrewsbury Plaza
Broad Street
21 3 spaces at east end of a parking row
in front of the Plantation on the
north side
4 spaces at west end of a parking
row in front of Linens N Things on
the north side
4 spaces at west end of a parking
row in front of Acme on the north
side
4 spaces at west end of a parking
row in front of Big Apple Shoes on
the south side
2 spaces at the east end of a parking
row in front of Big Apple Shoes on
the south side
2 spaces along the east parking row
in front of Perkins; space Nos. 3 and
4 from the south end of the row
§ 90-33.5 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-33.5
90:41
Property
Number
of Spaces Location
2 spaces along the east parking row
in front of the AT&T Store; space
Nos. 5 and 6 from the north end of
the row
§ 90-33.6. Schedule XXI: School Bus Parking Only. [Added 9-20-2010 by Ord. No.
949]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-3, no person shall park a vehicle at any time
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Obre Place South Beginning at the eastern end of the dead-end
street, 15 feet west from the curbline of
Broad Street, “School Bus Parking Only”
starts at a point 345 feet therefrom and ends
at a point 40 feet westerly therefrom
§ 90-33.7. Schedule XXII: School Pickup/Dropoff Zone. [Added 9-20-2010 by
Ord. No. 949]
In accordance with the provisions of § 90-3, no person shall park a vehicle at any time
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Obre Place South Beginning at the eastern end of the dead-end
street, 15 feet west from the curbline of
Broad Street, the pickup/dropoff zone starts
at a point 414 feet therefrom and ends at a
point 100 feet westerly therefrom
§ 90-33.5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-33.7
90:42
ARTICLE XI
Parking During Snow Removal and Other Emergencies
§ 90-34. Parking prohibition on Borough streets. [Amended 3-4-2004 by Ord. No.
829]
§ 90-35. Declaration of emergency.
§ 90-36. Vehicles parked in violation deemed a nuisance.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this Article shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable
costs of the removal and storage which may result from such removal, before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
§ 90-37. Effectiveness.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent on signs being erected as required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the street or
highway, no vehicle shall be parked on any Borough street.
B. The above parking prohibition shall remain in effect after the snow has ceased until
the streets have been plowed sufficiently, and to the extent that parking will not
interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
C. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this section, upon
conviction thereof, shall be liable for a fine not exceeding $200, or imprisonment
not exceeding 10 days.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon streets or
sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking signs are displayed. The
Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking police officer is authorized to declare
an emergency and to direct the posting of said emergency no-parking signs when
weather conditions, accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the
avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be posted shall
be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
§ 90-34 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-37
90:43

ARTICLE XII
Speed Limits and No-Passing Streets
§ 90-38. Speed limits established. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord. No. 881; 12-17-2018
by Ord. No. 1054]
§ 90-38.1. No-passing streets. [Amended 4-19-2004 by Ord. No. 834; 5-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 836]
Passing of another vehicle shall not be permitted between the hours specified upon any
of the following described streets or parts of streets:
A. All streets within the Borough of Shrewsbury, with the exception of those
designated below, shall have a speed limit of 25 miles per hour.
B. Exceptions.
(1) Newman Springs Road (Monmouth County Route 520); Shrewsbury Avenue
(Monmouth County Route 13A); and Sycamore Avenue (Monmouth County
Route 13): as established by the County of Monmouth.
(2) Broad Street (New Jersey State Highway Route 35): as established by the State
of New Jersey.
(3) School zones, as listed below, during school ingress and egress: 20 miles per
hour. [NOTE: School ingress and egress is defined as "presence of children is
clearly visible from the roadway, or while children are going to or leaving
school, during opening or closing hours." (N.J.S.A. 39:4-98)]
White Street,* between Broad Street (NJSH Route 35) and Beechwood
Drive
Obre Place,* between Broad Street (NJSH Route 35) and Samara Drive
Samara Drive, between Sycamore Avenue (CR 13A) and Spruce Drive
Birch Drive, between Spruce Drive and Patterson Avenue
Silverbrook Road,* between Broad Street (NJSH Route 35) and Sycamore
Avenue
(CR 13A)
Colonial Drive, From Sycamore Avenue (CR 13A) to its terminus
Parker Place, from White Street to its terminus
The streets that intersect Route 35 as noted with * above require approval of
the Commissioner of NJDOT prior to enactment of those portions of the street
that lie within 500 feet of the state highway right-of-way line. The remaining
streets and portions of streets may be enacted upon passage of this section and
publication according to law.
C. These speed limit reductions are being undertaken as a result of an engineering
study and on the subsequent advice of the Borough Engineer.
§ 90-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-38.1
90:45
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Obre Place Both All Entire length
Samara Drive Both All Entire length
Silverbrook Road Both All Entire length
White Road Both All Entire length
White Street Both All Entire length
§ 90-39. Erection of warning signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the abovedesignated
speed limits and no passing streets as authorized by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
§ 90-38.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-39
90:46
ARTICLE XIII
Shrewsbury Plaza Shopping Center
[Added 12-12-1977 by Ord. No. 414;38amended 8-12-1985 by Ord. No. 531]
§ 90-40. Regulations; violations and penalties.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, vehicular traffic and the parking of motor vehicles in
the shopping center area known as the "Shrewsbury Plaza Shopping Center" on
Broad Street and having exits on Broad Street and Shrewsbury Avenue shall be
subject to the following regulations:
(1) No motor vehicle or other vehicle shall be operated in the area at a speed
greater than 15 miles per hour.
(2) No motor vehicle other than the motor vehicles of employees of businesses
situated in the area shall be parked therein between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m.
(3) There shall be no stopping or standing except in the spaces provided therefor
and delineated by lines painted upon the surface of the parking areas.
(4) The handicapped parking spaces located on the attached site plan39 are hereby
designated as restricted parking spaces for use by persons who have been
issued special vehicle identification cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles
or the temporary cards issued by the Chief of Police. No other persons shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.
B. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a fine not exceeding $200 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 10 days.
38. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Arts. XIII and XIV as Arts. XIV and XV,
respectively, and the renumbering of former §§ 90-41 through 90-44, respectively.
39. Editor's Note: The site plan is attached to Ord. No. 531 and on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 90-40 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-40
90:47

ARTICLE XIV
Shrewsbury Grammar School
[Added 10-2-1989 by Ord. No. 59940]
§ 90-41. Regulations; violations and penalties.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, vehicular traffic and the parking of motor vehicles in
the Grammar School lots known as the "Shrewsbury Grammar School Faculty and
Visitor Parking Lots" on Obre Place having exits on Obre Place shall be subject to
the following regulations:
(1) No motor vehicle or other vehicle shall be operated in the area at a speed
greater than 15 miles per hour.
(2) No motor vehicle shall be parked in any of the lots between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(3) Parking is permitted in the spaces provided and delineated by lines painted
upon the surface of the parking area.
(4) Handicapped parking spaces are hereby designated as restricted parking
spaces for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle identification
cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or the temporary cards issued by the
Chief of Police. No other persons shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
(5) The west driveway of the Visitor Lot and the west driveway of the Faculty No.
2 Lot are one-way driveways and will be for entrance only.
(6) The east driveway of the Visitor Lot and the east driveway of the Faculty No.
2 Lot are one-way driveways and will be for exiting only.
(7) Traffic exiting all lots is controlled by stop signs.
B. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a fine not exceeding $200 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 10 days.
40. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Arts. XIV and XV to become Arts. XV and XVI, respectively.
§ 90-41 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-41
90:49

ARTICLE XV
Shrewsbury Shops
[Added 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 60541]
§ 90-42. Regulations; violations and penalties.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, vehicular traffic and the parking of motor vehicles in
the shopping center area known as the "Shrewsbury Shops" on Broad Street having
exits on Broad Street and Meadow Drive shall be subject to the following
regulations:
(1) No motor vehicle or other vehicle shall be operated in the area at a speed
greater than 15 miles per hour.
(2) No motor vehicle shall be parked in any of the lots between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(3) Parking is permitted in the spaces provided and delineated by lines painted
upon the surface of the parking area.
(4) Handicapped parking spaces are hereby designated as restricted parking
spaces for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle identification
cards by the Division of Motor Vehicles or the temporary cards issued by the
Chief of Police. No other persons shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
B. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a fine not exceeding $200 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 10 days.
41. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Art. XV, Penalties, as Art. XVII.
§ 90-42 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-42
90:51

ARTICLE XVI
Shrewsbury Commons
[Added 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 60542]
§ 90-43. Regulations; violations and penalties.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, vehicular traffic and the parking of motor vehicles in
the shopping center area known as the "Shrewsbury Commons," 550 Broad Street,
having exits on Broad Street, shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) No motor vehicle or other vehicle shall be operated in the area at a speed
greater than 15 miles per hour.
(2) No motor vehicle shall be parked in any of the lots between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(3) Parking is permitted in the spaces provided and delineated by lines painted
upon the surface of the parking area.
(4) Handicapped parking spaces are hereby designated as restricted parking areas
for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle identification cards
by the Division of Motor Vehicles or the temporary cards issued by the Chief
of Police. No other persons shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
B. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a fine not exceeding $200 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 10 days.
42. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Art. XVI, Severability; Repealer; Short Title, as Art. XVIII.
§ 90-43 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-43
90:53

ARTICLE XVII
Traffic Movement and Parking on Public and Private Property
[Added 12-9-1991 by Ord. No. 632]
§ 90-44. The Grove.
A. Route 35 Shrewsbury Associates have filed a written consent with the Borough of
Shrewsbury that the provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes of
New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at The Grove At Shrewsbury located in the Borough of Shrewsbury,
County of Monmouth, and the following regulations shall be enforceable:
(1) All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(2) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached
site plan43 and signed with R7-8 (reserved parking sign and penalty plate) in
the designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the
handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
(3) Through streets and stop intersections. The following streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the
near right side of each street intersecting the through street, except where yield
signs are provided for in the designation:
(a) Through streets.
[1] Meadow Drive: entire length, from a point five feet east of Route NJ
35 to the terminus on The Grove property.
[2] South Drive: entire length, from a point five feet east of Route NJ 35
to a point five feet south of Meadow Drive.
[3] North Drive: entire length, from a point five feet north of Meadow
Drive to West Drive.
(b) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein:
Intersection Stop Sign on
North Drive and West Drive North Drive
(4) Speed limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots shall be
15 miles per hour.
(b) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following roads are:
43. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 90-44 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-44
90:55
Road
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
East Drive 15 Entire length
Meadow Drive 15 Entire length
North Drive 15 Entire length
South Drive 15 Entire length
West Drive 15 Entire length
(c) Regulatory and warning signs shall effect the above designated speed
limits authorized by the Department of Transportation.
(5) Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass
area, pedestrian walkway or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may
be removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
(6) Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
East Drive Both All Entire length
Meadow Drive Both All Entire length
North Drive Both All Entire length
South Drive Both All Entire length
West Drive Both All Entire length
(7) One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these
streets will be permitted on the sides indicated below:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
East Drive South From Meadow
Drive to South
Drive
None
South Drive East From Route NJ
35 to the west
curbline of East
Drive
None
West Drive North From Meadow
Drive to Route
NJ 35
None
(8) Turn prohibitions. No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only
in the manner described:
§ 90-44 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-44
90:56
§ 90-45. The Treasure Island Shopping Center. [Added 8-10-1992 by Ord. No.
649; amended 3-4-2004 by Ord. No. 829]
§ 90-45.1. 674-682 and 684-688 Broad Street. [Added 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1057]
Intersection Prohibited Turn
West Drive and Route NJ 35 Left turn from westbound on West Drive
to southbound on Route NJ 35
(9) Parking prohibited during certain hours. No person other than employees of
businesses situated in The Grove shall park a vehicle on The Grove property:
Property Hours Location
The Grove At
Shrewsbury
Between 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
All roadways and parking lots
(10) All signs, posts, bolts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police Department to ensure
that installations meet state and federal specifications, and all signing shall
conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
B. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a fine not exceeding $200 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, vehicular traffic and the parking of motor vehicles in
the shopping center area known as "The Treasure Island Shopping Center," Broad
Street, having exits on Broad Street, shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) No other vehicle or other vehicle shall be operated in the area at a speed greater
than 15 miles per hour.
(2) No motor vehicle shall be parked in any of the lots between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(3) Parking is permitted in the spaces provided and delineated by lines painted
upon the surface of the parking area.
(4) Handicapped parking spaces are hereby designated as restricted parking areas
for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle identification cards
by the Division of Motor Vehicles or the temporary cards issued by the Chief
of Police. No other persons shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
(5) Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
pedestrian walkway or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
B. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a fine not exceeding $200 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 10 days.
§ 90-44 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-45.1
90:57
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, vehicular traffic and the parking of motor vehicles in
the commercial property located at 674-682 Broad Street (Block 27.01, Lot 2), and
684-688 Broad Street (Block 27.01, Lot 1), shall be subject to the following
regulations:
(1) No motor vehicle or other vehicle shall be operated in the area at a speed
greater than five miles per hour.
(2) No vehicle shall be parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow
of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area,
or pedestrian walkways or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard.
(3) Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal flow of
traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, or
pedestrian walkways or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
(4) All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(5) All signs, posts, bolts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the property owner(s). Work shall be checked by the Police Department
to ensure that the installations meet state and federal specifications, and all
signs shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
B. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a fine not exceeding $200 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 10 days.
§ 90-45.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-45.1
90:58
ARTICLE XVIII
Shrewsbury Business Center
[Added 12-8-1997 by Ord. No. 742]
§ 90-46. Regulations; violations and penalties.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, vehicular traffic and the parking of motor vehicles in
the office complex known as the "Shrewsbury Business Center" on Shrewsbury
Avenue, having exits in Shrewsbury Avenue, shall be subject to the following
regulations:
(1) No motor vehicle or other vehicle shall be operated in the area at a speed
greater than 15 miles per hour.
(2) No motor vehicle other than the motor vehicles of employees of businesses
situated in the area shall be parked therein between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m.
(3) All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the lines
provided.
(4) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the site plan,
and signed within R7-8 (reserved parking sign and penalty plate) in the
designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped
parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
(5) All signs, posts, bolts or other necessary materials shall be installed and paid
for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police Department to ensure
that the installations meet state and federal specifications and all signs shall
conform to the current Manual on Traffic Control Devices.
B. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a fine not exceeding $200 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 10 days.
§ 90-46 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-46
90:59

ARTICLE XIX
Shrewsbury Village
[Added 12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 77044]
§ 90-47. Regulations; violations and penalties.
A. General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described below:
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
All roads Both All Entire length
(3) No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Lot B South 10 minutes As indicated on site plan45
(4) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached
site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and
Penalty Plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who have been
issued the handicapped parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
B. Through streets; stop intersections.
(1) Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated
as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each
street intersecting the through street, except where yield signs are provided for
in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Road A Entire length
Roads B, E and G Entire length
Road I Entire length
(2) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein:
44. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Art. XIX, Penalties, as Art. XX and former Art. XX,
Severability; Repealer; Short Title, as Art. XXI.
45. Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 90-47 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-47
90:61
Intersection Stop Sign On
Patterson Avenue and Road I Road I
C. One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road C East (counter-clockwise) Entire length
Road D East Entire length
Road E East (counter-clockwise) Entire length
Road F North (counter-clockwise) Entire length
D. Speed limits.
(1) The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking lot(s) shall be 15
miles per hour.
(2) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following roadways are:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Limits
All roads 15 Entire length
(3) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the
above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
E. Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic, block entrances or exitways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area,
pedestrian walkway or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed
by towing the vehicle at the owner's expense.
§ 90-47 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-47
90:62
F. Turn prohibitions. No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the
manner described:
Intersection
Turn
Prohibition Movement Prohibited
Shrewsbury Avenue (C.R.
13) and Road A
Left From westbound on Road A to
southbound on Shrewsbury
Avenue (C.R. 13)
G. Loading zone(s). The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones.
No person shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading and unloading of goods and materials:
Name of Street Time Sides Location
Road F All North As indicated on site plan46
H. All signs, posts or other necessary materials be installed and paid for by the
applicant. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
I. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every person
convicted of a violation of this article or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $200 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days,
or both.
46. Editor's Note: Said site plan is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 90-47 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-47
90:63

ARTICLE XX
Shrewsbury Municipal Complex
[Added 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 81347]
§ 90-48. Regulations.
A. General parking.
(1) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the lines provided.
(2) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described below, except in areas covered by other parking restrictions.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All roads All All As indicated on site plan
(3) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on the attached
site plan48 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P (Reserved Parking Sign and
Penalty Plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who been issued the
handicapped parking permit by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
B. Reserved parking. All vehicles that are granted specialty parking in this section,
such as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc., must be properly identified and
the reserved parking spaces must be shown on the attached site plan.
C. Through streets; stop intersections.
(1) Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated
as through streets; stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each
street intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided for
in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Road "A" — Road "A" Extension Entire length
D. One-way streets. The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Road "B" South Entire Length
Road "A" Extension South (counterclockwise)
Beginning at the southwest curbline
of Road "B" to its intersection with
the northeast curbline of Road "A"
Road "C" East Beginning at the northeast curbline
of parking Lot No. 2 to its
intersection with Route NJ 35
47. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Art. XX, Penalties, as Art. XXI and former Art. XXI,
Severability; Repealer; Short Title, as Art. XXII.
48. Editor's Note: The site plan is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 90-48 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-48
90:65
E. Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a normal
flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area
pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
F. Authorized vehicles only. The following streets or parts of streets shall be
designated for use by authorized vehicles only. No vehicle other than an authorized
vehicle shall enter upon the below roadway:
Name of Street Limits
Road "C" Entire length
G. Signing. All signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
§ 90-48 SHREWSBURY CODE § 90-48
90:66
ARTICLE XXI
Impoundment of Vehicles; Municipal Impound Facility
[Added 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 100049]
§ 90-49. Prohibition of unregistered vehicles in parking yards and parking places.
Unless authorized by a sworn law enforcement officer, no person shall operate, park,
leave or be in possession of a motor vehicle which is unregistered or has a suspended
registration in any parking yards (lots) and parking places, which are open to the public
or to which the public is invited, whether owned or maintained by governmental entity or
in conjunction with any business or enterprise, whether public, quasi-public or private.
§ 90-50. Exemptions.
Section 90-49 shall not apply to:
§ 90-51. Impoundment of vehicles in violation.
Any vehicle found in violation of § 90-49, and not being exempted by § 90-50, may be
impounded and towed by the Borough Police Department to an area designated by the
Borough, and the vehicle shall be returned to its owner upon payment of reasonable costs
of towing and storage and proof of registration and shall be subject to the provisions of
impoundment of vehicles and disposal of vehicles by the Police Department.
§ 90-52. Violations and penalties.
The violation of this article shall subject the person, firm or corporation so convicted or
pleading guilty to a fine of $100. Each day shall be considered to be a separate violation.
A. Private property to which the public is not invited, such as residential lots.
However, private and quasi-public property, such as apartment complex and mobile
home park parking areas, shall be subject to the prohibition if agreed upon by the
property owner.
B. Motor vehicles that are exempt from registration under Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes, such as car dealer inventory.
49. Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Art. XXI, Penalties, as Art. XXII, and former Art. XXII,
Severability; Repealer; Short Title, as Art. XXIII.
§ 90-49 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-52
90:67

ARTICLE XXII
Penalties
[Amended 12-12-1977 by Ord. No. 414; 10-2-1989 by Ord. No. 599; 3-12-1990 by
Ord. No. 605; 12-9-1991 by Ord. No. 632; 8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 649; 12-8-1997 by
Ord. No. 742; 12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 770; 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 813]
§ 90-53. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein or by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any supplement thereto
shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 90-53 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-53
90:69

ARTICLE XXIII
Severability; Repealer; Short Title
[Amended 10-2-1989 by Ord. No. 599; 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 605; 12-9-1991 by
Ord. No. 632; 8-10-1992 by Ord. No. 649; 12-8-1997 by Ord. No. 742; 12-6-1999 by
Ord. No. 770; 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 813]
§ 90-54. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are for any reason held to be invalid, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 90-55. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Shrewsbury are hereby repealed, and all
ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the
prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of
any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 90-56. Title.
This chapter may be known and cited as "Vehicles and Traffic."
§ 90-54 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 90-56
90:71

Chapter 94
ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
§ 90-56 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 90-56
94:1

ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 94-1.1. Title. [Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
This chapter consists of an ordinance to amend the Code of the Borough of Shrewsbury,
New Jersey, to create a unified Land Use Board pursuant to the provisions of New
Jersey Statutes Annotated (N.J.S.A.) 40:55D-1 et seq., providing for the powers and
duties of said Board; fixing the procedures and standards governing development review
applications to said Board and appeals therefrom; and providing for the adoption of
planning and development regulations.
§ 94-1.2. Short title.
This chapter shall hereafter be cited or referred to for purposes of amendment or
otherwise as the "Land Use and Development Regulations of the Borough of
Shrewsbury, Monmouth County, New Jersey."
§ 94-1.3. Intent and purpose.
This chapter is enacted with the intent and purpose to:
A. Guide the appropriate use or development of all lands within Shrewsbury Borough
in a manner which will promote the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare and protect the environment.
B. Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made disasters.
C. Provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. Ensure that the development of Shrewsbury Borough does not conflict with the
development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the county and the
state as a whole.
E. Promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and concentrations
that will contribute to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods, communities and
regions and preservation of the environment.
F. Encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by the
coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of agricultural,
residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open space, both
public and private, according to their respective environmental requirements in
order to meet the needs of all New Jersey citizens.
H. Encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will promote the
free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such facilities and routes which
result in congestion or blight.
I. Promote a desirable visual environment through creative development techniques
and good civic design and arrangements.
§ 94-1.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-1.3
94:3
J. Promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space, energy
resources and valuable natural resources in the state and to prevent urban sprawl
and degradation of the environment through improper use of land.
K. Encourage developments which incorporate the best features of design and relate
the type, design and layout of residential, commercial, industrial and/or recreational
development to the particular site.
L. Encourage senior citizen housing construction.
M. Encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures and activities
shaping land development with a view of lessening the cost of such development
and to the more efficient use of land.
N. Promote the conservation of energy through the use of planning practices designed
to reduce energy consumption and to promote the utilization of renewable energy
sources. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
O. Promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of solid and liquid wastes
and encourage the implementation of state, county and Borough recycling
programs.
§ 94-1.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-1.3
94:4
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 94-2.1. Other applicable definitions.
Wherever a term is defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the Municipal Land Use Law,
and/or N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., the state Uniform Construction Code Act, and used
in this chapter, such term is intended to include and have the meaning set forth in the
definition of such term found in said statute and code in addition to the definition for
such term which may be included in this article, unless the context clearly indicates a
different meaning.
§ 94-2.2. Word usage.
§ 94-2.3. Terms defined.
Certain words, phrases and terms in this chapter are defined for the purpose herein as
follows:
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING — A subordinate use or building, the purpose of
which is incidental to that of a main use or building on the same lot.[Amended 6-8-1992
by Ord. No. 644]
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER—[Amended 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 585; 8-18-2003
by Ord. No. 811; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
A. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms or words used herein shall be
interpreted or defined as follows: Words used in the present tense include the
future; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular; the word
"lot" includes the word "plot," and the word "building" includes the word
"structure"; the word "zone" includes the word "district"; the word "occupied"
includes the word "designed" and the phrase "intended to be occupied"; the word
"shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" indicates a permissive
action; the word "abut" shall include the words "directly across from," "adjacent"
and "next to"; and the word "used" shall include "arranged," "designed,"
"constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased" or "intended to be used";
the term "such as," where used herein, shall be considered as introducing typical or
illustrative, rather than an entirely exclusive or inclusive designation of, permitted
or prohibited uses, activities, establishments or structures. [Amended 6-8-1992 by
Ord. No. 644]
B. Words or word groups which are not defined below shall have the meanings set
forth in the Municipal Land Use Law or as given in Webster's unabridged
dictionary.
A. The Borough Clerk for all matters before the Borough Council.
The Clerk of the Land Use Board for all matters pertaining to applications, minutes
and other administrative matters involving the Land Use Board.
B.
The Tax Assessor in matters involving § 94-3.3D(13) pertaining to issuance of the
official list of adjacent property owners for required notices.
C.
§ 94-2.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:5
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having a substantial or significant portion
of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or viewing on premises by uses
of motion picture devices or any coin-operated means, and other periodicals which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical area," or an
establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such
material.[Amended 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 925]
ALLEY — A secondary thoroughfare less than 30 feet in width dedicated for the public
use of vehicles and pedestrians affording access to abutting property.
ALLUVIAL SOILS — Soils consisting of material deposited in land by streams and
other water bodies. These soils are hydrologically connected with the adjacent water
body. "Alluvial soils" found in the Borough of Shrewsbury are the Freneau and
Manalapan soil series as mapped by the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service.
ALTERATIONS — As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in
the structural supports; or a change in the exterior appearance; or a change in height,
width, or depth; or moving a building or structure from one location or position to
another; or changing, adding to or removing from or otherwise affecting the exterior
appearance of a building or structure.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage
The Land Use Officer in matters involving issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to
§ 94-3.4 and in matters involving enforcement of this chapter pursuant to § 94-3.6.
D.
In matters involving review of applications for completeness and for compliance,
the "administrative officer" shall be the Clerk of the Land Use Board, in
conjunction with the Land Use Board, in matters involving the Land Use Board.
E.
In matters involving § 94-3.5 pertaining to records maintenance, the "administrative
officer" shall be the Clerk of the Land Use Planning Board in matters involving the
Land Use Board and matters involving the issuance of a zoning permit or action
taken pursuant to complaints regarding the enforcement of this chapter.
F.
"Specified sexual activities" is defined as:
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or
female breast;
(3)
A.
"Specified anatomical areas" is defined as:
Less than completely and opaquely covered: I) human genitals, pubic region,
II) buttock and III) female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
(2)
B.
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:6
or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.[Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 780]
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT CENTER — Any commercial establishment engaged
in the cultivation and/or distribution of medical marijuana, including cannabis-derived
oils, tinctures, and lotions; and related paraphernalia.[Added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No.
1041]
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — Any place of business containing more than three
amusement devices.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine, contrivance or device, which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into a slot, crevice or other opening or
by the payment of any price, is operated or may be operated by the public generally for
use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score, and shall
include, but not be limited to, such devices as Pac-Man or other types of electronically
operated game devices, skillball, mechanical games, operations or transactions similar
thereto, by whatever name they may be called, and shall not include pool or billiard
tables.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic
waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals),
wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals.[Added 4-9-1990
by Ord. No. 606; amended 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 780]
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a multifamily building access to which may be
through interior hallways shared with other dwelling units.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development or for a permit
required in accordance with this chapter.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT—The application form and all accompanying
documents required by this chapter for approval of a subdivision plat, site plan, planned
development, conditional use, zoning variance or direction of the issuance of a permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or 40:55D-36.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Borough Land Use Board, unless a different
agency is designated by this chapter when acting pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or VO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet;
a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; and the velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
ARTERIAL STREET OR ROAD—A roadway so designated on the circulation plan of
the Master Plan.
ART GALLERY — A building or portion thereof in which sculpture, paintings or other
artistic work is displayed but not for sale.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE (ALR)—A facility for which a certificate of need as
an assisted living residence has been obtained, which provides apartment-style housing
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:7
and congregate dining for four or more adult persons unrelated to the proprietor and
further provides such assisted living services as are required and/or permitted by the
regulations of the New Jersey Department of Health. Services provided by an ALR shall
promote and encourage: each resident's choice, dignity, independence, individuality and
privacy in an environment where sense of family and community pervade and in which
each resident's preferred lifestyle, habits and use of personal belongings is supported and
encouraged; and independence in the mobility, transferring, walking, grooming, bathing,
dressing and undressing, eating and toileting of each resident. An ALR shall provide
separate apartments or units for residents in accordance with § 94-10.6A(5).[Added
8-3-1998 by Ord. No. 751]
AUCTION MARKET — Any premises on which are held, at periodic times, auction
sales of merchandise or personal property.[Added 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR — The general engine rebuilding or reconditioning of motor
vehicles or collision service, such as body repair, frame or fender straightening and
repair or overall painting of motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOP — The same as "motor vehicle repair garage."
AUTOMOBILE SALES AGENCY — A place of business where the primary purpose
is the sale of new motor vehicles, having a building with either showrooms, office space,
repair and/or maintenance facilities with or without outside sales on the same business
premises or immediately adjacent thereto.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — The same as "motor vehicle service station."
BACKHAUL NETWORK—The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to one
or more cellular telephone switching offices and/or long-distance providers or the public
switched telephone network.[Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 780]
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION—The elevation, based on mean sea level, of a flood that
has a 1% or greater chance of occurrence in any given year as established by the Federal
Insurance Administration of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and as
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps of the Federal Insurance Administration.
BASEMENT — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its height
above the average level of the finished grade.
BEDROOM — A room or portion of a structure with the principal function of serving
as sleeping quarters.
BILLBOARD —A structure utilized for advertising an establishment, activity, product,
service or entertainment, which is sold, produced, manufactured, available or furnished
at a place other than on the property on which said sign is located.
BLOCK — The length of a street between two street intersections.
BOARDINGHOUSE or LODGING HOUSE — Any dwelling for hire in which more
than two persons are housed or lodged, with or without meals. This definition
notwithstanding, a certificate of occupancy issued by the Construction Official is
required for any dwelling for hire.
BODY ART — The practice of adorning the body with tattoos, piercings, brandings or
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:8
scarifications.[Added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1041]
BOROUGH ENGINEER — The licensed New Jersey professional engineer appointed
by the Borough in accordance with Chapter 5, Article IX, Borough Engineer, of the
Borough Code.[Amended 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
BOROUGH SURVEYOR — The licensed New Jersey professional land surveyor
appointed by the Mayor to render surveying services and advice, including maintenance
and certification of tax maps pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:8-36, 45:8-41, 45:8-43, and
46:23-9.9 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 13:40-5.1.[Amended 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
BREAKAWAY WALLS — Any type of walls, whether solid or lattice and whether
constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building
material, which are not part of the structural support of the building and which are so
designed as to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without damage to
the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which
they might be carried by floodwaters.
BUFFER AREA SCREENING — A strip of land which separates multifamily-,
commercial-, office- or industrial-type districts or uses from adjoining residential
districts or uses so as to allow adequate screening of view, noise or activity taking
place within these districts from adjoining residences. Within any such buffer area, no
building, structure, driveway, parking or loading area or other use of the land shall be
permitted unless otherwise provided in § 94-8.6 of this chapter.
BUILDABLE AREA — That central portion of any lot between required yards and/or
setback lines.
BUILDING—A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to permanent,
temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING AREA—The total of areas of outside dimensions on a horizontal plane and
ground level of the principal building and all accessory buildings, exclusive of unroofed
porches, terraces or steps having vertical faces, which at all points are less than three feet
above the level of the ground.50
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the existing grade as
defined herein, or the finished grade authorized by the approving authority, to the ridge
of the roof, measured from that point of the property around the structure that has the
lowest elevation.[Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
BUILDING LINE (SETBACK LINE) — The line beyond which a building shall not
extend unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit used for the alteration or erection of a building or
structure in accordance with the provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A structure in which is conducted the principal use of
the site on which it is situated. In any district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a
"principal building" on the lot on which it is located.
BULKHEAD—A structure separating land and water areas, primarily designed to resist
earth pressures.
50. Editor's Note: The former definition of "building coverage," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed
6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 644.
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:9
BULK STORAGE — The stockpiling or warehousing of materials, which may or may
not be enclosed within a structure, including but not limited to sand, gravel, dirt, asphalt,
lumber, pipes, plumbing supplies, metal, concrete and insulation.
BUSINESS OFFICE — A business establishment which does not offer a product or
merchandise for sale to the public but offers a service to the public. However, personal
services, such as barber- and beauty shops, and repair services, such as radio and
television repair shops, are not to be included within the definition of "business office."
CABLE TELEVISION COMPANY—A cable television company as defined pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-3, the Public Utilities Law.[Added 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or a major
construction project.
CARPORT —A covering or roof to allow the parking of automobiles underneath. With
the exception of supports, the carport shall have no sides unless such sides are the
exterior wall of an adjacent building.
CAR WASH — A facility for the washing and cleaning of automobiles and other motor
vehicles using production-line methods with a conveyor, blower and other mechanical
devices and/or providing space, material and equipment to individuals for self-service
washing and cleaning of automobiles.
CELLAR—A story wholly or partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its clear
height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS — A certificate issued by the administrative
officer (Land Use Board Clerk) after all required submissions have been made in proper
form, certifying that an application for development is complete.[Amended 12-7-2020
by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMANCE — A document issued by the Land Use
Officer for a nonconforming use or structure existing at the time of passage of this
chapter or any amendment thereto which, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48, may be
continued upon the lot or in the building so occupied. Such certificate may be obtained
at the owner's request upon any change of ownership for a nonconforming use, structure
or lot.[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate provided for in N.J.S.A.
52:27D-133, indicating that the construction authorized by the construction permit has
been completed in accordance with the construction permit, the State Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119) and any ordinance implementing said
code.[Amended 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811]
CHANGE IN USE —
A. Any change from an industrial use to any other industrial use.
Any increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure which would result in
two or more total units.
B.
Any change from any nonresidential use to any other use for which any standard set
forth in this chapter is greater or more restrictive.
C.
D. Any change from a residential use to any nonresidential use.
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:10
CHURCH — See "place of worship."
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the movement
of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means as streets, highways,
railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and conduits and the handling of people and
goods by such means as terminals, stations, warehouses and other storage buildings or
transshipment points.
CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE — The clear sight distance measured along a line
perpendicular to the midpoint of a window sill and 60° radial from that line at the
window sill in all directions vertical and horizontal forming a cone of vision.
CLINIC — A facility for the diagnosis and treatment of outpatients and/or a group
practice in which several physicians work cooperatively.
CLUBHOUSE — A building to house a club or social organization not conducted for
profit and which is not an adjunct to or operated by or in connection with a public tavern,
cafe or other public place.
COASTAL AREA FACILITIES REVIEW ACT (CAFRA) PERMIT—A permit issued
for specific development within the coastal area of New Jersey in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq. and in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder in the New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C.) 7:7-1.1 et seq., Coastal
Permit Program Rules.[Amended 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
COASTAL WETLANDS — The coastal wetlands designated by the New Jersey
Wetlands Act (N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq.).
COLLECTOR STREET OR ROAD — A roadway so designated on the circulation
element of the Master Plan.
COMMERCIAL PARKING FACILITY—The same as "parking area, public;" also see
"garage, public.[Amended 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a site designated
as a development and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development. Common open space may contain such complementary
structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment
E. Any change in use from any existing or permitted use to any conditional use.
Any change from any existing or permitted use to any permitted use which can be
classified as being in a category lower on the following list than the original use:
(1) Single residential.
(2) Multifamily residential.
(3) Professional office.
(4) Other office.
(5) Retail business.
(6) Other business and commercial, except industrial.
(7) Industrial.
F.
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:11
of residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED — Any
community residential facility housing licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11B-1 et seq.
providing food, shelter and personal guidance under such supervision as required, not
to exceed 15 developmentally disabled persons who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live independently in the community. Such residences shall
not be considered health care facilities within the meaning of the Health Care Facilities
Planning Law (N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.) and shall include, but not be limited to, group
homes, halfway houses, supervised apartment living arrangements and hotels.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any
shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified pursuant to standards
and procedures established by regulation of the Department of Human Services pursuant
to P.L. 1979, c. 337 (N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et seq.), providing food, shelter, medical care,
legal assistance, personal guidance and other services to not more than 15 persons
who have been victims of domestic violence, including any children of such victims,
who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to protect their physical or
psychological welfare.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application for development which complies in all
respects with the appropriate submission requirements set forth in this chapter.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon
a showing that such use in a specified location will comply with the conditions and
standards for the location or operation of such use as contained in Article IX of this
chapter, and upon the issuance of an authorization thereof by the Land Use
Board.[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
CONDOMINIUM—An ownership arrangement, not a land use; therefore, it is allowed
in any zone and under the same restrictions as the residential land uses that it comprises.
A condominium shall not negate lot nor other requirements intended to provide adequate
light, air and privacy. A "condominium dwelling unit" is a dwelling unit which has all of
the following characteristics:
CONGREGATE CARE DEVELOPMENT — A residential facility for four or more
elderly (age 62 or older) within which is provided living and sleeping facilities, meal
preparation, laundry services and room cleaning. Such facilities may also provide other
services, such as transportation for routine social and medical appointments and
counseling.[Added 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
CONVENIENCE SHOPPING FACILITY—A retail store which provides the essential
daily household needs.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT—Development which complies with the full lot
size and other provisions of this chapter.
The unit (the interior and associated exterior areas designated for private use in the
development plan) is owned by the occupant.
A.
B. The unit may be any permitted dwelling type.
All or a portion of the exterior open space and any community interior spaces are
owned and maintained in accordance with the provisions for open space, roads or
other development features as specified in this chapter.
C.
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:12
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association which entitles the holder of
a share or membership interest thereof to possess and occupy for dwelling purposes a
house, apartment or other structure owned or leased by said corporation or association
or to lease or purchase a dwelling constructed or to be constructed by said corporation or
association.
CORNER LOT — A lot on the junction of and abutting two or more intersecting streets
where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed 135°. (Lots which exceed 135°
shall be considered interior lots.)
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Comprehensive Plan or Master Plan
for the physical development of Monmouth County with the accompanying maps, plats,
charts and descriptive and explanatory matter adopted by the County Planning Board
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-2 and 40:27-4.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD—The Planning Board of the County of Monmouth as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.1.
COURT or COURTYARD — An unoccupied open space on the same lot with a
building, which is bounded on three or more sides by the exterior walls of a building or
by exterior walls and lot lines.
COVERAGE — The same as "lot coverage."
CURB GRADE OR LEVEL — The officially established grade of the curb in front of
the midpoint of the front lot line. Where no curb grade has been established, the Borough
Engineer shall establish such curb level or its equivalent for the purpose of this chapter.
DAY CAMP — A licensed, organized and supervised daytime facility used for
recreational purposes.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A state certified facility which provides care for children.
DAY(S) — Calendar day(s).
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land to be
developed and includes the number of dwelling units per gross acre of residential land,
including streets, easements and open space portions of a development.
DESIGN STORM—A twenty-four-hour storm used to develop the size of the detention
facility to accommodate the post-development stormwater runoff from the site.[Added
7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 735]
DETENTION BASIN — An embankment and associated space for impoundment of
water or, alternatively, the space for impoundment partially or entirely created by
excavation rather than by embankment, in either case designed to temporarily retain
stormwater runoff.[Added 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 735]
DETENTION BASIN, WET — A detention basin designed to retain some water on a
permanent basis.[Added 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 735]
DETENTION FACILITY — A detention basin or alternative structure designed to
temporarily retain stormwater runoff.[Added 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 735]
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option or
contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:13
land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement
of any building or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use
or change in the use of any building or other structure or land or extension or use of land
for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and this
chapter.
DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED — Experiencing a disability which originates
before 18 years of age, which has continued or is expected to continue indefinitely,
which constitutes a substantial handicap and which is attributable to mental retardation,
cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism or other conditions found by the Commissioner of
Human Services to give rise to an extended need for similar services in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2.
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — In addition to the definition of development in the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, the activity must satisfy Subsection A or
B below:
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION—This chapter, the Official Map Ordinance or other
municipal regulation of the use and development of land or an amendment thereto
adopted and filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
DISCHARGE RATE—The quantity of stormwater which passes a point over a specific
time frame.[Added 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 735]
DISCHARGE VOLUME — The total quantity of stormwater which is
discharged.[Added 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 735]
DISTRICT — The same as "zone" or "zoning district."
DIVISION — The Division of State and Regional Planning in the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains,
grading or other means and including the control of runoff during and after construction
or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation, to assure the adequacy of
existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to induce water recharge into the ground
Any site plan or subdivision plan or amended site or subdivision plan that will
ultimately cover land with a total of one or more acres of impervious surfaces;
which shall include but not be limited to roadways, driveways, ponds and other
bodies of water.
A.
Any construction of one or more of the following uses:
Pipelines, storage, or distribution systems for petroleum products or
chemicals;
(1)
Storage, distribution or treatment facilities (excluding individual on-site
sewage disposal systems) for liquid waste. [Added 7-14-1997 by Ord. No.
735]51
(2)
B.
51. Editor's Note: Former definition of "development permit," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed
8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811.
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:14
where practical, to lessen non-point pollution and to maintain the integrity of stream
channels for their biological functions, as well as for drainage, and the means necessary
for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY —The lands required for the installation of stormwater
sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or watercourse to provide
for drainage as defined above.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT —The same as "restaurant, drive-in."
DRIVEWAY—A defined paved or unpaved surface providing vehicular and pedestrian
access to a street and connecting a house, building, garage, accessory building or parking
area with the street.[Amended 11-5-2007 by Ord. No. 904]
DWELLING—Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for one or
more dwelling units.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building designed for or containing three or more
dwelling units, which are entirely separated from each other by vertical walls or
horizontal floors unpierced except for access to the outside or a common cellar.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY—A detached building designed for or containing one
dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building designed for or containing two
dwelling units, which are entirely separated from each other by vertical walls unpierced
except for access to the outside or a common cellar.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or part thereof having cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities designed for or occupied by one family and which is entirely separated from
any other dwelling unit in the building by vertical walls or horizontal floors unpierced
except for access to the outside or a common cellar.
EARTH ANTENNA or GROUND TERMINAL—Any apparatus or device, commonly
known as an "earth terminal antenna," "earth terminal," "earth station," "satellite
communications antenna," "satellite antenna," "microwave dish antenna" or "dish
antenna," and including as part of such apparatus or device the main reflector,
subreflector, feed, amplifier and support structure which is designed for the purpose
of transmitting and/or receiving microwave, television, radio, satellite or other
electromagnetic energy signals into or from space, but not including conventional
personal television and radio and amateur radio antennas.[Added 4-9-1990 by Ord. No.
606]
EARTH TERMINAL — An earth terminal intended solely for the reception of radio
and/or television signals from a satellite.[Added 4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 606]
EASEMENT — The right of the Borough, county, state, Sewerage Authority or other
public or quasi-public agency, their agents, servants and employees to use the land
subject to the easement for the purposes specified on the plat or in the document granting
the easement.
EDUCATIONAL USE—Public, parochial or private elementary or secondary schools,
duly licensed by the State of New Jersey, attendance at which is in sufficient compliance
with the compulsory education requirements of the state. Summer day camps shall not
be considered as educational uses or accessories to such uses. Duly accredited colleges
and universities shall also be considered "educational uses."
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:15
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE—An electronic device that can be used to deliver
nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the device, including, but not
limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, or pipe.[Added 10-3-2017 by Ord.
No. 1041]
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — The Shrewsbury Borough Environmental
Commission, a municipal advisory body, created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT (EIR) — A compilation of studies, reports,
documents and finding of fact prepared by an applicant as part of and for a development
application. Said "EIR" shall be consistent with and shall contain all that information,
data and documentation contained in § 94-8.15. An "environmental impact statement,"
meeting the requirements of N.J.S.A. 13:10-1 et seq., the Coastal Area Facility Review
Act,52 and specifically outlined in N.J.A.C. Section 7 of said rules and regulations
promulgated in compliance with said Act, may be accepted in lieu of the "EIR."
EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT — The delineation of floodplain limits so
that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of conveying a proportionate
share of flood flows. This is determined by considering the effect of encroachment on the
hydraulic efficiency of the floodplain along both sides of a stream for significant reach.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind,
ice and/or gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan which fully indicates
necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule of the timing for their
installation, which will effectively minimize soil erosion and sedimentation. Such
measures shall be equivalent to or exceed standards adopted by the New Jersey State Soil
Conservation Council and administered by the Freehold Soil Conservation District in
conformance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 et seq.[Amended 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
ESCROW—A deed, bond, money, or piece of property delivered to a third person to be
delivered by him to the grantee only upon fulfillment of a condition.[Added 8-18-2003
by Ord. No. 811]
ESCROW ACCOUNT — Any fees deposited by a developer to pay for municipally
incurred expenses in the review of an application or inspections of a project under
development, and the accounting entries used to keep track of expenditures.[Added
8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811]
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Underground gas, electrical, telephone, telegraph, sanitary
sewer collection systems or water transmission or distribution systems, including mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables and normal aboveground appurtenances such as
fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, light standards, poles, traffic signals and hydrants,
and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by public utilities or municipal or
other government agencies for the public health or safety or general welfare. Essential
services shall not be deemed to include wireless telecommunications towers and
antennas.[Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 780]
EXCAVATION or CUT — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried,
uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
52. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 et seq.
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:16
EXCAVATION WORK — The excavation, removal, replacement, repair, construction
or other disturbance of any portion of the public improvements within a public street or
drainage right-of-way. These public improvements include, but are not limited to, curb,
sidewalk, driveway and driveway aprons, drainage structures and conduits, pavements,
base courses, gutters, retaining walls, channels, headwalls, railings, guardrails or any
other public improvement existing within the public right-of-way. For the purposes of
this chapter, that work which is being performed outside of the public right-of-way but
which requires the storage of materials or the operation of equipment within the public
right-of-way, in such a manner as may cause damage, will also be deemed "excavation
work." "Excavation work" shall also include the construction, addition, installation or
other provision of the whole or portions of the improvements within a public street,
drainage right-of-way or other public way or public grounds by persons other than those
exempted from the provisions of this chapter, including privately sponsored construction
of cable television, curbing, sidewalks, pavement extensions, aprons, drainage or any
other portions of the public improvements.[Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT — Site plan and/or subdivision approval shall not be
required prior to issuance of a zoning permit for the following:[Amended 8-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 811]
Construction, additions or alterations related to single-family detached dwellings or
their accessory structures on individual lots.
A.
Interior alterations which do not increase the required number of off-street parking
spaces and which conform to the performance standards of this chapter.
B.
C. Any change in occupancy which is not a change in use, as herein defined.
Individual applications for accessory mechanical equipment, accessory storage
structures and accessory uses not exceeding 500 square feet in area, whose
operation and location conforms to the design and performance standards of this
chapter and whose installation is on a site already occupied by an active principal
use for which site plan approval is not otherwise required.
D.
Sign(s) in which installation is on a site already occupied by a principal use for
which site plan approval is not otherwise required, provided that such sign(s)
conform to the applicable design and zoning district regulations of this chapter.
E.
Construction of a parking lot or an addition to an existing parking lot, provided that
the new lot or the proposed addition contains three spaces or less whose location
and design conforms to the standards and zoning district regulations of this chapter.
F.
The division of property and conveyances so as to combine existing lots, which are
not considered to be subdivisions in accordance with the definition of "subdivision"
contained within this article.
G.
Farm and accessory farm buildings and structures, provided that such buildings
and structures are located on, operated in conjunction with and necessary to the
operation of a "farm" as defined by this article.
H.
Demolition or removal of any building or structure other than those designated on
the Master Plan as historic or those located within the Shrewsbury Historic District.
[Added 4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 607]
I.
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:17
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.[Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 780]
FAMILY — One or more persons living together as a single entity or nonprofit
housekeeping unit, as distinguished from individuals or groups occupying a hotel, club,
fraternity or sorority house. The "family" shall be deemed to include necessary servants
when servants share the common housekeeping facilities and services.
FAMILY DAY CARE—Child-care services within a private residence approved by the
New Jersey Department of Human Services.[Added 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
FARM — Any parcel of land, three acres or larger in size, which is used for gain in the
raising of agricultural products, livestock or dairy products.
FAST-FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A retail food service operation in
which a limited or specialized list of quickly prepared or preprepared food items utilizing
mechanized, standardized preparation and packaging techniques is offered for on and
outside the premises consumption, or any retail food service operation offering drivein
or outside ordering and service, including but not limited to any refreshment stand,
snack bar, carry-out bar, any hamburger or hot dog stand where food is served into
automobiles parked on the premises by employees or where customers order inside
a building and take out food for consumption in cars or off the premises, regardless
of whether or not additional seats or counter service is provided within a building;
provided, however, that if outside service by employees represents more than 50% of the
volume of business transactions of the operation, the use shall not be considered a "fastfood
service establishment" and is specifically prohibited.
FCC—The Federal Communications Commission.[Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 780]
FENCE — A structure constructed of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal or any other
manufactured material or combination of materials serving as an enclosure, barrier or
boundary.
FENCE, OPEN — A fence in which 2/3 of the area, between grade level and the top
cross member (wire, wood or other material), is open.
FILLING AND EXPRESS FILLING STATION—A retail establishment supplying and
selling gasoline or other fuel or oil directly for motor vehicles.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Land Use Board taken on a
preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all conditions, engineering
plans and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required
improvements have been installed, guaranties have been properly posted for their
completion or approval has been conditioned upon the posting of such
guaranties.[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the site plan or subdivision, which
is presented to the Land Use Board for final approval in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and which is approved and shall be filed with the proper county recording
officer.[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
FLEA MARKET — An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or in a
structure where individual sellers offer goods and services for sale to the public.[Added
10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL — The susceptibility of a floodplain use at a
particular site to damage by potential floods at that site, as well as increased off-site
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:18
flooding or flood-related damages caused by such floodplain use.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD FREQUENCY — The average frequency, statistically determined, for which it
is expected that specific flood level or discharge may be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA OBSTRUCTION — Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment,
levee, dike, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge conduit,
culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along,
across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or regulatory flood hazard area which
may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of
water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS — The floodway and flood fringe areas as determined by
the Department of Environmental Protection under Section 3 of the Flood Hazard Area
Control Act (P.L. 1979, c. 359 as amended).53[Added 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 735]
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the
risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided in which the Federal
Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary -
Floodway Maps and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN — The flood hazard areas of delineated streams. For nondelineated
areas, the floodplain shall be that area which is inundated by the 100-year flood.[Added
7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 735]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2 foot.
FLOOR — A story of a building.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floor or
several floors of a building measured within the perimeter of the outside face of exterior
walls.[Amended 6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 644]
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The sum of the gross horizontal area of the floor
or several floors of a dwelling measured between the inside face of exterior walls or
from the center line of walls separating two dwelling units, having a clear ceiling height
of seven feet four inches or greater, but not including any unfinished attic, cellar or
accessory building space, but including the floor area of roofed porches, balconies,
terraces and patios. (Also, see "habitable room.")
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or structures
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
53. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:19
compared to the total area of the site.[Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
FLOOR AREA, SALES — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floor or several
floors of a commercial building, which are used for display of merchandise to the general
public and including any areas occupied by counters, showcases or display racks and any
aisles, entranceways, arcades or other such public areas.
FUNERAL HOME or MORTUARY — A funeral home or mortuary operated by a
licensed mortician in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:7-32 et seq. A "funeral home" or
"mortuary" shall not be considered a professional office.[Amended 10-5-2020 by Ord.
No. 1076]
GARAGE — A detached accessory building or portion of a main building for the
parking or temporary storage of automobiles of the occupants of the main building to
which the garage is accessory.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or part thereof, other than a private garage, used
for the storage, care or repair of motor vehicles for profit, including any sale of motor
vehicle accessories, or where any such vehicles are kept for hire. The rental of storage
space for more than two motor vehicles not owned by occupants of the premises shall be
deemed a "public garage."
GAS STATION — The same as "motor vehicle service station."
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of
Shrewsbury.[Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
GRADE, EXISTING — The existing undisturbed elevation of land, ground and
topography preexisting or existing on a lot, parcel or tract of land at the time of the
adoption of this chapter.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surface of lawns, walks and roads brought to
grade(s) as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto or as existing if no plans
or designs have been approved.
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room within a building used for the purpose of sleeping,
eating, preparation of food, offices, selling of merchandise, public gatherings or
assembly lobbies. All habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall have natural light,
ventilation and heat. Garages, bathrooms, closets, storage areas, hallways and stairs are
not considered to be "habitable rooms." (Also see "floor area, habitable.")
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Includes, but is not limited to, inorganic mineral acids
of sulfur, fluorine, chloride, nitrogen, chromium, phosphorus, selenium and arsenic
and their common salts; lead, nickel and mercury and their inorganic salts or metalloorganic
derivatives; coal tar acids, such as phenols and cresols, and their salts; petroleum
products; and radioactive materials.
HIGH-WATER LINE — A line showing the upper inland wetlands boundary (a
biological "high-water line") on a series of maps prepared by the State of New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection for Parker's Creek and Little Silver Creek and
their tributaries in accordance with the provisions of the Wetlands Act (N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1
et seq.), said line being established from photographs and each of these maps being on
file in the office of the County Clerk, Monmouth County, New Jersey.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or surrounding
property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and character of the historic
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:20
site or sites.
HISTORIC SITE OR STRUCTURE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural
object or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which have been
formally designated in the Master Plan54 as being of historical, archeological, cultural,
scenic or architectural significance.[Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily conducted for profit entirely within
a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental
and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change
the character thereof, provided that no article is sold or offered for sale except such as
may be produced by members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling, and
provided further that no machinery or equipment is used which will cause electrical or
other interference with radio and television reception in adjacent residences or cause
offensive noise or vibration. Such activities as clinics, hospitals, barbershops, beauty
parlors, tearooms, tourist homes, animal hospitals, nursery schools and music or dancing
schools, other than for individual instruction, shall not be deemed "home occupations"
under the terms of this chapter.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An incorporated, nonprofit organization
operating under a recorded land agreement through which:
HOME PROFESSION — The practice of a profession within a "professional office,"
as defined by this article, conducted entirely within a dwelling which is the bona fide
residence of the principal practitioner.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any natural or man-made surface which does not permit
infiltration of water and which causes surface runoff All buildings, parking areas,
driveways, roads, sidewalks and any areas in concrete and asphalt shall be considered
"impervious surfaces" within this definition. In addition, other areas determined by the
engineer to be impervious within the meaning of this definition will also be classed
as "impervious surfaces." For purposes of building and impervious surface coverage
calculations required in this chapter, porous asphalt and concrete shall be deemed to be
an "impervious surface."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — A measure of the intensity of use of a piece of
land. It is measured by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces within the site
by the net buildable site area.
IMPROVABLE — Land which is not prevented from having buildings, pavement
or decking constructed on it due to development restrictions intended to protect
environmental features such as wetlands, floodplains, ponds or other water
bodies.[Added 11-13-1996 by Ord. No. 708]
Each lot owner, condominium owner, stockholder under a cooperative development
or other owner of property or interests in the project shall be a member;
A.
Each occupied dwelling unit is subject to a charge for a proportionate share of
the expenses for the organization's activities and maintenance, including any
maintenance costs levied against the association or the municipality; and
B.
C. Each owner and tenant has a right to use a common property.
54. Editor's Note: The Master Plan is on file in the Borough Hall.
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:21
IMPROVED STREET — A street curbed and paved in accordance with the standards
set forth in this chapter for new streets or, alternately, a street which has been improved
to the standards specified by the Borough Engineer upon approval and acceptance by the
Borough Council, Monmouth County or the State of New Jersey.
INFILTRATION BASIN — A detention facility designed to infiltrate retained water to
the subsurface.[Added 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 735]
INTERESTED PARTY —
INTERIOR OR INSIDE LOT — A lot bounded by a street on one side only and lots
which face on street intersections where the interior angle of the intersection exceeds
135°.
INTERNAL STREET OR ROAD — A street used for internal vehicular circulation
within a tract or development. "Major internal streets" are those internal streets which
have an entrance and/or exit on the access street or right-of-way frontage of the tract.
Internal streets may be private and not dedicated or deeded to the public, subject
to approval by the Land Use Board upon recommendation of the Borough
Engineer.[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
JUNKYARD or SALVAGE YARD — The use of any area and/or structure for keeping
or the abandonment of junk, including scrap metal, glass, paper, cordage or other scrap
material, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of structures, automobiles
or other vehicles, equipment and machinery or parts thereof; provided, however, that this
definition shall not be deemed to include any of the foregoing uses which are accessory
and incidental to any agricultural use permitted in any zone. The term "junkyard," as
herein defined, includes automobiles salvage or wrecking yards.
LAND — Any ground, soil or earth, including marshes, swamps, drainageways and
areas not permanently covered by water, within the municipality. Such term also
includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the surface.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading, transporting,
filling of land and any other activity which causes land to be exposed to the danger of
erosion.
LANDSCAPE or LANDSCAPING — The orderly, planned arrangement of shrubs,
ground cover, flowers, trees and other plant material, including incidental use of berms
and decorative mulches, gravel and similar materials to produce an aesthetically pleasing
appearance, to satisfy ground stabilization requirements and/or to provide a visual
screen, all arranged and implemented in accordance with good landscaping and
horticultural practices and the requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to
§ 94-8.21.
A. In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State of New Jersey.
In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative proceeding
before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing within or without the
municipality, whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected
by any action taken under this chapter and/or pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. or under any other law of this state or of the United States have
been denied, violated or infringed by an action or failure to act under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. or this chapter.
B.
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:22
LAND USE BOARD — The Borough of Shrewsbury Planning Board established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, which shall exercise, to the same extent and subject to
the same restrictions, all the powers of a board of adjustment, as provided by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-25c. The term "Planning Board" or "Land Use Board," as used in this chapter,
also means the Zoning Board of Adjustment when it is acting pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-76.[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
LAND USE BOARD ENGINEER — The licensed New Jersey professional engineer
specifically retained by the Land Use Board or assigned by the Borough Engineer, with
the consent of the Board, to render engineering services and advice to the Board. In
the absence of the specific appointment of a Land Use Board Engineer, the Borough
Engineer may assume the duties of the office.[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-1077]
LIGHT CARE; ASSISTED CARE — Supportive personal care and health services
to enable residents to maintain independence, individuality, privacy and dignity in an
apartment-like setting.[Added 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 708]
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The fabrication, assembly or processing of goods or
materials or the storage of bulk goods and materials where such activities or materials
create no hazard from fire or explosion or produce toxic or corrosive fumes, gas, smoke,
obnoxious dust or vapor, offensive noise or vibration, glare, flashes or objectionable
effluent.
LIQUID NICOTINE — Any solution containing nicotine which is designed or sold for
use with an electronic smoking device.[Added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1041]
LIQUID NICOTINE CONTAINER — A bottle or other container of liquid, wax, gel,
or other substance containing nicotine, where the liquid or other contained substance is
sold, marketed or intended for use in a vapor product but does not include containers
prefilled and sealed by the manufacturer and not intended to be opened by the
consumer.[Added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1041]
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or
contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle
while loading or unloading merchandise or materials. Such space must have a clear
means of ingress and egress to a public street at all times.
LOCAL UTILITY — Any sewerage authority created pursuant to the Sewerage
Authorities Law, N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq.; any utilities authority created pursuant to
the Municipal and County Utilities Authority Law, N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1 et seq.; or any
utility, authority, commission, special district or other corporate entity not regulated by
the Board of Public Utility Commissioners under Title 48 of the Revised Statutes that
provides gas, electricity, heat, power, water or sewer service to a municipality or the
residents thereof.[Added 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise
as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a unit. A "lot" is land
occupied or to be occupied by a building, structure or permitted accessory use or by
a dwelling and its accessory uses, together with such open spaces as are specified and
required under the provisions of this chapter, having not less than the minimum area
required by this chapter for a lot in the zone district in which such a lot is situated and
have the required frontage on a street.
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:23
LOT AREA — The acreage and/or square footage of a lot contained within the lot
lines of the property. Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall not
be included in calculating lot area. Portions of lots encumbered by easements shall be
included in calculating lot area.
LOT, CORNER — Any lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more intersecting
streets.
LOT COVERAGE — The area of a lot covered by buildings and structures and
accessory buildings or structures and expressed as a percentage of the total lot area.
"Lot coverage" shall include all parking areas and automobile access driveways and
internal roadways, whether covered by an impervious or pervious material, and all
other impervious surfaces except for the following:[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-1077]
LOT DEPTH—The shortest distance between the front lot line and a line drawn parallel
to the front lot line through the midpoint of the rear lot line, provided that, in triangular
lots having no rear lot line, the distance shall be measured to the midpoint of a line
parallel to the front lot line, which shall be not less than 10 feet in length measured
between its intersections with the side lot lines. On corner lots, one side lot line shall be
considered a rear lot line for the purpose of determining lot depth only.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance of lot lines or portions thereof which are
coexistent with a street line. In the case of a street of undefined width, said lot lines shall
be assumed to parallel the center line of the street at a distance of 50% of the statutory
street right-of-way width therefrom. Only continuous, uninterrupted lot lines shall be
accepted as meeting the frontage requirements.
LOT LINE — Any line designating the extent or boundary of a lot, which shall further
be defined as follows:[Amended 6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 644]
LOT WIDTH — The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at
right angles to its depth and at a point which constitutes the rear line of the required front
yard space. Lot width shall not be less than the minimum required lot frontage.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by the
Borough for the maintenance of any improvements required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. and this chapter, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit under
the circumstances specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5 and cash.[Amended 12-13-1993
by Ord. No. 670]
Exterior walkways and plazas designed exclusively for pedestrian use as part of
a commercial, industrial or office development and which are part of an overall
landscaping plan acceptable to the Land Use Board.
A.
Unroofed patios, terraces, decks and pedestrian walks which are accessory to a
single-family dwelling.
B.
A. FRONT LOT LINE — A lot line which separates a lot from an adjoining street.
REAR LOT LINE — A lot line which separates adjoining lots at the interior of a
block along a course generally parallel to the street.
B.
SIDE LOT LINE — A lot line which separates adjoining lots along a course
generally perpendicular to the street.
C.
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:24
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan or exempt site
development.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.
MANUFACTURING — The treatment or processing of raw products and the
production of articles or finished products from raw or prepared materials by giving
them new forms or qualities.
MARINE ACTIVITIES—Any facilities or activities associated with fishing or boating,
either for sport or for commercial gain.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals for the
development of the Borough as set forth in and adopted by the Planning Board on March
28, 1984, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28, and including all subsequent amendments
thereto.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
MENTALLY ILL PERSON — A person who is afflicted with a mental disease, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-27.2, to such an extent that a person so afflicted requires care
and treatment for his own welfare, the welfare of others or of the community but shall
not include a person who has been committed after having been found not guilty of a
criminal charge or unfit to be tried on a criminal charge by reason of insanity.[Amended
10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan for one or more lots which are subject to
development and which:
A. Require site plan approval.
Meet the requirements set forth in § 94-6.6 of this chapter and contain the
information needed to make an informed determination as to whether the
requirements established by this chapter for approval of a minor site plan have been
met.
B.
Meet the following conditions:
(1) The construction of drainage facilities is not required either on site or off site.
New building construction and/or building additions do not exceed 1,000
square feet of gross floor area.
(2)
The proposed development does not increase parking requirements by more
than three spaces nor entail or propose the construction of a total of more than
five parking spaces.
(3)
The proposed development conforms to the floodplain management standards
set forth in § 94-5.27 of this chapter.
(4)
The proposed development conforms to the performance standards set forth in
§ 94-5.28 of this chapter.
(5)
(6) The proposed development will not require the issuance of a CAFRA permit.
(7) The proposed development does not involve planned development.
C.
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:25
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land for the creation of not more than
two lots, plus the remainder of the original lot, provided that such subdivision does
not involve a planned development, any new street or the extension of any off-tract
improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42, and
provided that the municipal agency or the Subdivision Committee of the Land Use Board
finds that all the following conditions have been met:[Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord.
No. 670; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGE — A building or portion of a building or land
or portion thereof which is not primarily devoted to the retail sale of gasoline or new or
used automobiles or trucks, in which auto bodywork or the overhauling or replacement
of automobiles, automobile parts or any portion thereof is conducted as a business for
profit.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including structures
thereon, which is used for the retail sale of gasoline or any other motor vehicle fuel
stored only in underground tanks and oil and other lubricating substances, including
any sale of motor vehicle accessories, and which may include facilities for lubricating,
washing or minor servicing of motor vehicles, except that automobile rebuilding and
auto bodywork of any nature and retail sales unrelated to motor vehicle uses shall
be prohibited. When the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels or oil is
incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public
garage, motor vehicle wrecking yard or junkyard.
The proposed development does not involve any new street or the extension of
any existing street.
(8)
The proposed development does not involve the extension or construction of
any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
(9)
The curbs and sidewalks have been installed, or the developer agrees to install and
post performance guaranties for curbs and sidewalks, or curbs and sidewalks are
not required due to specific conditions in the area.
A.
The subdivision does not require the extension of municipal facilities at the expense
of the municipality.
B.
The subdivision and construction resulting therefrom will not adversely affect
drainage patterns of the basin in which the lots are situated.
C.
The subdivision will not adversely affect the development of the remainder of the
parcel or the adjoining property.
D.
The subdivision is not in conflict with any provision or portion of the Master Plan,
Official Map or this chapter or appropriate variances have been obtained (or must
be obtained as a condition of approval).
E.
In the event that a drainage fund has been established by the Borough or Monmouth
County, an assessment has been charged to the lots and has been paid.
F.
No portion of the lands involved have constituted a part of a minor subdivision
within three years preceding the application.
G.
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:26
MULCHING — The application of plant residue or other suitable materials to the land
surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place and aid in establishing plant cover.
MULTIFAMILY BUILDING — Any building containing two or more dwelling units,
including townhouses, within a lot. Dwelling units within a multifamily building are
classified as multifamily dwellings.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Land Use Board or Borough Council of the Borough
of Shrewsbury, when acting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and this
chapter.[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Shrewsbury.
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW—N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. (Chapter 291 of the Laws
of New Jersey 1975, as amended).
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such
adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason
of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE—A use or activity, which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to conform to the requirements
of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NON-POINT-SOURCE POLLUTION—Pollution from any source other than from any
discernible, confined and discrete conveyances and shall include, but not be limited to,
pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and
urban runoff sources.
NURSERY SCHOOL — A school designed to provide daytime care of three or more
children from two to six years of age, inclusive, and operated on a regular basis.
OCCUPANCY — The specific purpose for which land or a building is used, designed
or maintained.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — The same as "certificate of occupancy."
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, which changes and additions thereto are
adopted and established, from time to time, by resolution of the Board of Chosen
Freeholders of Monmouth County pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance by the governing body pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within the property
of which the lot is a part, which is the subject of a development application or contiguous
portion of a street or right-of-way.
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:27
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a development
application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OPEN PORCH OR STEPS — A porch or steps with a fixed roof no larger than six feet
wide by four feet deep and with no sidewall other than the wall of the structure to which
it is attached.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and
set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or
for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring
such open space, provided that such areas may be improved with only those buildings,
structures, streets and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land. Impervious surfaces within open space areas shall be
limited to improvements associated with recreation and drainage facilities and
underground utilities. "Open space" may include farmland set aside in perpetuity
intended for the preservation of the farming use. Improved sidewalks, paved paths or
other pedestrianways within an open space area, which exceed four feet in width, shall
be deducted in determining the open space area.
OPEN SPACE RATIO — A measure of the inverse intensity of land use. It is arrived at
by dividing the total amount of open space within the site by the site area.
OWNER — Any individual, family group, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership
or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in land which is the subject of a
development proposal.
PARKING AREA — An open area used for the open storage of motor vehicles and
includes any driveways and access drives, as well as accessory incidental structures or
improvements, such as curbing, drainage, lighting and signing.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — An area, other than a street, which is intended for the
same use as a private garage, is accessory to a residential or nonresidential building or
use and is not used by the general public.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — An open area, other than a street, which is used for the
temporary parking of not fewer than four automobiles and is available for public use,
whether free, for compensation or as an association for clients or customers.
PARKING GARAGE — The same as "garage, public."
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space provided for the parking of a motor vehicle,
exclusive of driveways or access drives, either within a structure or garage, in the open
or as may be otherwise defined in this chapter.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any applicant
for development, the owners of the subject property and all owners of property and
government agencies entitled to notice under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
PATIO — An area of land which is not used for receiving and storing material, where
the ground has been surfaced with construction material, such as brick, stone, cement or
lumber, which does not project above grade level and which is entirely uncovered by a
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:28
roof or any superstructure.
PAWNSHOP — A business establishment which engages in the practice of offering
secured loans in exchange for commercial property held as equivalent collateral; or
displays for sale unredeemed personal property from a pawn broker.[Added 10-3-2017
by Ord. No. 1041]
PEEP SHOW — Any establishment showing to patrons in private or semiprivate
viewing areas the live or photographical or magnetically recorded depictions of persons
engaged in the presentation and exploitation of illicit sex, lust, passion, depravity,
violence, brutality, nudity, immorality and other obscene subjects.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security, which may be accepted by the
Borough, including, but not limited to, surety bonds, letters of credit under the
circumstances specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5 and cash.[Amended 12-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 670]
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or
other legal entity.[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
PERSONAL CARE AMENITIES — Services supportive to residents' care and comfort
including, but not limited to, assistance with activities of daily living such as, by way of
example and not by way of limitation, fitness centers, wellness centers, beauty salons,
gift shops, luncheonettes, and the sale of sundries.[Added 8-3-1998 by Ord. No. 751]
PERSONAL CARE FACILITIES—Services supportive to resident's care and comfort,
including but not limited to assistance with activities of daily living.[Added 11-13-1995
by Ord. No. 708]
PERSONAL SERVICE — An act by which skills of one person are utilized for the
benefit of another, provided that no function involves manufacture, cleaning, repair,
storage or distribution of products or goods, except for cleaning and repairing of clothing
and similar personal accessories.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building or group of buildings, congregations, places
of public worship, including cathedrals, chapels, churches, meeting houses, mosques,
synagogues, temples and similarly used buildings as well as accessory uses, such as
Sunday schools, social halls, parish houses and similar-type buildings.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum contiguous
size as specified by this chapter to be developed according to a plan as a single entity
containing one or more structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate
commercial or office uses or both and any residential or other uses incidental to the
predominant use as may be permitted by this chapter.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT—An area to be developed according to a plan as a single
entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant common areas.[Amended
11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 708]
PLANNED SENIOR CITIZEN DEVELOPMENT — One or more parcels of land
forming a combined and contiguous land area to be used as housing for older persons
in accordance with the Federal Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1988 (PL. 100-430),
and through its corporation, association or owners, restrict the use of the property and
dwelling units therein through bylaws, rules, regulations and restrictions of record for
housing of older persons, the occupancy of which shall be by at least one person 55 years
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:29
of age or older per unit, and further provided that no child who has not attained the age
of 18 years shall be domiciled therein. 55 [Added 8-3-1998 by Ord. No. 751]
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PLAT, FINAL — The map or maps of all or a portion of the development prepared and
submitted to the approving authority for final approval. "Final plat" shall also include
and be synonymous with the term "final site plan."
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The plat prepared and submitted to the approving authority
as a part of the application for preliminary approval. "Preliminary plat" shall also include
and be synonymous with the term "preliminary site plan."
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-46, 40:55D-48 and 40:55D-49 prior to final approval after specific elements
of a development plan have been agreed upon by the Land Use Board and the
applicant.[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural drawings
prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a project, illustrating in
a schematic form its scope, scale, relationship to its site and immediate environs and
exterior colors and finishes.
PREMISES — A lot or tract of land or any combination thereof held under a single
ownership or control.
PRIMARY OR PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or principal purpose for which a
building, structure or lot is used.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized profession, as
hereinafter indicated, when conducted on a residential property, shall be conducted by a
member or members of the residential family entirely within a residential building and
shall include only the offices of doctors, ministers, architects, professional engineers,
lawyers, real estate brokers and such similar professional occupations. The practice of
such occupation shall in no way adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment
of property rights in any zone in which it is located to a greater extent than for the
professional activities listed herein. The issuance of a state or local license for regulation
of any gainful occupation shall not be deemed indicative of professional standing.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE BUILDING — A building, the occupancy of which is
limited to professionals, such as doctors, dentists, ministers, architects, engineers,
lawyers, real estate brokers, accountants or such other similar professional occupations
which may be so designated by the municipal agency, upon finding that such occupation
is truly professional in character by virtue of the need for similar training and experience
as a condition for practice.
PROHIBITED USE — That use which is not specifically allowed or permitted in a
particular zone and for which the granting of a variance of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d would
be necessary in order to provide that use in that particular zone.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign, other than a facade sign, suspended from or attached
to a building or wall in a manner which is other than parallel to said building or wall,
55. Editor's Note: The definitions of "Planning Board" and "Planning Board Engineer," which immediately followed this
definition, were revised to "Land Use Board" and "Land Use Board Engineer." See those definitions earlier in this
section.
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:30
including a sign hung under the canopy.
PUBLIC AREAS —
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A Master Plan, capital improvement
program or other proposal for land development adopted by the appropriate public body
or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or watercourse
for preserving the biological as well as drainage function of the channel and providing
for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and
erosion and to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical and to lessen non-point pollution.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any public utility regulated by the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners and defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.[Added 12-13-1993 by Ord.
No. 670]
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal agency.
RADIOACTIVE USE — Any natural or artificially produced substance or combination
of substances which emits radiation spontaneously.
REACH — A hydraulic engineering term to describe longitudinal segments of a stream
or river. A "reach" will generally include the segment of the flood hazard area where
flood heights are influenced by a man-made or natural obstruction. In an urban area, the
segment of a stream or river between two consecutive bridge crossings would typically
constitute a "reach."
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.[Added 7-14-1997
by Ord. No. 735]
RECYCLING AND RESOURCE RECOVERY — The separation and reuse of solid
waste materials, including paper, cardboard, glass, aluminum, metals, used motor oil,
used rubber tires, used clothing and rags and used household items or other materials as
designated by law.56[Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity according to
a plan containing residential housing units which have a common or public open space
area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, NET —The number of dwelling units which may be or are
developed per acre of land, exclusive of areas used for streets, easements and/or open
space portions of a development.
Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other open
space areas conveyed or dedicated to the Borough or any other public body for
recreation or conservation use;
A.
B. Other public open spaces;
C. Scenic and historic sites; and
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
56. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 210, Art. II, Recycling.
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:31
RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA — Any natural area or feature containing natural
resources protected by this chapter, where improvement and/or alteration may be
restricted or prohibited or where conservation is required. "Resource protection areas"
may include wooded areas, floodplains, natural drainage areas, watercourses, ponds,
lakes, stream corridors, riparian lands, wetlands, marshland, wildlife habitats,
archaeological sites and steep slopes.
RESTAURANT — Any establishment, however designated, at which food is sold for
consumption on the premises, normally to patrons seated within an enclosed building.
However, a snack bar at a public or community playground, playfield or park operated
solely by the agency or group operating the recreation facilities and for the convenience
of patrons of the facility shall not be deemed to be a "restaurant."
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment where the majority of the patrons
purchase food, soft drinks, ice cream and similar confections for takeout or consumption
on the premises but outside the confines of the principal building or in automobiles
parked upon the premises, regardless of whether or not, in addition thereto, seats or other
accommodations are provided for the patrons.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots
within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to law or the
alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new streets within any subdivision
previously made and approved or recorded according to law, but does not include
conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or by other instrument.
RETAINING WALL — A structure more than 18 inches high erected between lands of
different elevation to protect structures and/or to prevent the washing down or erosion of
earth from the upper slope level.
REVETMENT—A facing of stone, concrete, etc., built to protect a scarp, embankment
or shore structure against erosion by wave action or current.
ROOMING HOUSE — The same as "boardinghouse" or "lodging house."
SCHOOL — The same as "educational use."
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH LABORATORY — A building or group of buildings in
which activities are limited to experiment, testing and other forms of research, such as
product design and development, provided that the use shall not include any processing
or manufacturing except as may be incidental to the research or testing process. There
shall be no commercial production of goods, materials or any other substances for sale,
except as may be produced by a small pilot facility necessary to the research activity.
SECONDARY USE — The same as "accessory use."
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being
transported or has been moved from its site or origin by air, water or gravity as a product
of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION—The transport or deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a product of
erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier or dam built at suitable locations to retain rock, sand,
gravel, silt or other materials.
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:32
SERVICE ACCESS — That portion of any required yard area which is set aside for the
sole purpose of access from the road adjoining the premises to the loading or unloading
area on the premises to service the building erected for the use conducted thereon.
SETBACK — The horizontal distance between a building or structure and any front,
side or rear lot line, measured perpendicular to such lot lines at the point where the
building is closest to such lot lines.
SETBACK LINE (BUILDING LINE) — The line beyond which a building shall not
extend unless otherwise provided in this chapter.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of
Shrewsbury, established pursuant to the Code of the Borough of Shrewsbury.57
SHOPPING CENTER — An integrated development of such uses as retail stores
and shops, personal service establishments, professional and business offices, banks,
post offices and auditoriums, housed in an enclosed building or buildings, utilizing
such common facilities as customer parking, pedestrian walkways, truck loading and
unloading space, utilities and sanitary facilities and having a minimum total floor area of
30,000 square feet.[Amended 3-9-1992 by Ord. No. 640]
SIDEWALK — A private or public pedestrian walkway designed in accordance with
§ 94-8.33.
SIGHT TRIANGLE—The triangular area intended to remain free of visual obstructions
to prevent potential traffic hazards formed by two intersecting street lines and at
driveway entrances and exits or the projection of such lines, which border a corner
property, and by a line connecting a point on each such line located a designated distance
from the intersection of the street or driveway lines.[Amended 11-5-2007 by Ord. No.
904]
SIGN — A name, identification, description, display, illustration or any other device
observable from out of doors, which is affixed to, painted on or represented directly or
A commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers
for sale, rental, or display any of the following: books, magazines, periodicals
or other printed material, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides or other visual representations which depict or describe a “specified sexual
activity” or “specified anatomical area”; or still or motion-picture machines,
projectors or other image-producing devices which show images to one person per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by
the depiction of a “specified sexual activity” or “specified anatomical area”; or
instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection
with a “specified sexual activity”; or
A.
A commercial establishment which regularly features live performances
characterized by the exposure of a “specified anatomical area” or by a “specified
sexual activity,” or which regularly shows films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or other photographic representations which depict or describe a “specified
sexual activity” or “specified anatomical area.”
B.
57. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 9, Art. II.
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:33
indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land or which is placed in any manner
over any public or private street and which directs attention to an object, product, place,
activity, person, institution, organization or business, regardless of whether such device
is located indoors or outdoors. Lighting used to outline any part of a building shall be
deemed to be a "sign." However, a "sign" shall not include any display of official court
or public office notice, any official traffic control device nor any flag, badge or insignia
of any public, quasi-public, civic, charitable or religious group.[Amended 10-2-1989 by
Ord. No. 598]
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity or
service conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises where the sign is
located.
SIGN AREA — The area defined by the outside edge of the frame surrounding the sign
or by the edge of the sign if no frame exists. Where no frame or edge exists, the "area"
shall be defined by a projected, enclosed, four-sided (straight lines) geometric shape
which most closely outlines the sign.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or profession
conducted on or to a commodity service or entertainment sold or offered upon the
premises where such sign is located.
SIGN FACADE — Any sign placed or inscribed upon the face of a building.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any sign supported by uprights or braces placed upon the
ground and not attached to any building.
SITE — Any plot, parcel or parcels of land.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown the
existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including, but not necessarily limited to,
topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and waterways; the location
of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of
ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs,
lighting, and screening devices; and any other information that may be reasonably
required in order to make an informed determination pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter requiring review and approval of site plans by the Land Use Board adopted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin and overlies
bedrock and which can be readily excavated.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Freehold Soil Conservation District, a
governmental subdivision of the state which encompasses Shrewsbury Borough and
which was organized in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:24-2 et seq.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A system and all associated equipment that converts
solar energy into usable electrical energy, heats water or produces hot air or other similar
function through the use of solar panels.[Added 9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 966]
SOLAR PANELS — A structure containing one or more receptive cells, the purpose of
which is to convert solar energy into usable electrical energy by way of a solar energy
system.[Added 9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 966]
SOLID WASTE — Municipal, dry sewage sludge, bulky materials, dry hazardous
chemicals and substances, dry nonhazardous chemicals and substances, animal and
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:34
food processing, oil spill cleanup and nonchemical industrial wastes. Municipal wastes
include garbage, refuse, rubbish debris, bulky and other discarded materials.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Standards, requirements, rules and regulations
adopted by this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d regulating noise levels, glare,
earth-borne or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors,
toxic matters, explosive and flammable matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste
discharge, screening of unsightly objects or conditions and such other similar matters as
may be reasonably required by the Borough or required by applicable federal or state
laws.
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS — The Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction as promulgated and revised by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
STEEP SLOPES — Areas where the average slope exceeds 8%, which, because of this
slope, are subject to high rates of stormwater runoff and erosion.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from
precipitation.[Added 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 735]
STORY — That part of a building between the surface of any floor and the next floor
above it or, in its absence, then the finished ceiling or roof above it. A "split-level story"
shall be considered a secondary story if its floor level is six feet or more above the level
of the line of the finished floor next below it, except a cellar. Any floor under a sloping
roof at the top of a building, which is more than two feet below the top plate, shall be
counted as a story, and, if less than two feet below the top plate, it shall be counted as
a half story, provided that not more than 60% of the floor area is used for rooms, baths
or toilets. Otherwise, it shall be counted as that fraction of a story which its floor area in
rooms, baths or toilets bears to the entire floor area.
STORY, HALF — That portion of a building under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the
wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet
above the floor of such half story. A basement shall also be included as a "half story."
STREAM CORRIDORS — Those areas which include the floodway and permanent
channel of brooks and streams.
STREET — Any street, highway, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, alley,
drive or other way which is an existing state, county or Borough roadway; which is
shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; which is approved by official
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock
or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or
A.
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered.
The fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered human genitals,
pubic region, buttock or female breast; or
A.
Any actual or simulated act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate
sexual intercourse.
B.
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:35
action as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D; or which is shown on a plat duly filed and
recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a
Land Use Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes
the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise
pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within
the street lines. Streets are classified by function and type by § 94-8.40.[Amended
12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
STREET, IMPROVED — A street surfaced with an all-weather pavement which meets
the criteria for street design and construction contained in § 94-8.40 of this chapter.
STREET LINE — The line which separates the publicly owned or controlled street
right-of-way from the private property which abuts upon the street as distinct from a
sidewalk line, curbline or edge-of-pavement line. On a street or highway shown on the
adopted Master Plan of the Borough of Shrewsbury, the "street line" shall be considered
to be the proposed right-of-way line for the street. Where a definite right-of-way has not
been established, the "street line" shall be assumed to be at a point 25 feet from the center
line of the existing pavement.
STREET, UNIMPROVED — A street that does not have an all-weather pavement
in accordance with § 94-8.40, Street design and construction. An unimproved street
could be constructed of loose gravel, any type of loose stone or, generally, any type
of material that is not solidified and will not repel water or maintain a stable cross
section. In the event that the Construction Official or other Borough official has any
question as to whether a road is improved, unimproved or potential drainage problems
exist with regard to the issuance of a zoning permit, building permit or certificate of
occupancy, such official shall contact the Borough Engineer for his evaluation and
written determination.[Amended 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811]
STRIPPING — Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs vegetated or
otherwise stabilized soil surface, including clearing and grubbing operations.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS — The same as "alterations."
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy,
use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the surface of a parcel
of land, and including, among other things, display stands, fences and walls, gasoline
pumps, gates and gateposts, mobile dwellings, outdoor bins, pergolas, platforms, pools,
porches, reviewing stands, sales' stands, signs, stadiums, staging, standpipes, tanks of
any kind, tents, towers of any kind, including radio and television towers, and antenna
trellises. The word "structure" shall be construed as though followed by the words "or
part thereof."
SUBDIVIDER — Any person or legal entity commencing proceedings under this
chapter to effect the subdivision of land hereunder.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.[Amended 12-7-2020
by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
The following shall not be considered "subdivisions" within the meaning of this
chapter if no new streets are created:
(1) Divisions of land found by the Land Use Board or Subdivision Committee
A.
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:36
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three Land Use Board
members appointed by the Chairman of the Board for the purpose of classifying
subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and having such further
duties relating to land subdivision as may be conferred on this Committee by the
Board.[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged
and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition,
"substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration effects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
SURGICAL CARE FACILITIES — Ambulatory surgical centers, acute hospital
services, emergency services, inpatient and outpatient rehab services, and diagnostic
imaging and other services where it's usual and customary for said services to be
performed in a community hospital. The definition of "surgical care facility" shall not
include any ancillary services typically or usually performed by a physician or specialist
as a component of their services provided within their offices.[Added 12-15-2008 by
Ord. No. 925]
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL — A swimming pool that is operated for profit
and open to the public or to a limited number of members and their guests, upon payment
of an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, annual or other fee or operated as a service.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE—A swimming pool located on a single-family lot with
thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all
resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size.
(2) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Divisions of property upon court order, including, but not limited to,
judgments of foreclosure.
(3)
(4) Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned
by the same person or persons, and all of which are found and certified by
the administrative officer to conform to the requirements of the development
contained in this chapter and which are shown and designated as separate lots,
tracts or parcels on the Official Tax Map of the Borough.
(5)
B. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local
health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the
State Inventory of Historic Places, as an historic building or structure in accordance
with this chapter.
B.
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:37
a residence on it and used as an accessory to the residence, and said pool is utilized with
no admission charges and not for the purpose of profit.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — The same as "swimming pool, commercial."
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate provided for in
State Uniform Construction Code indicating the Construction Official has issued a
temporary certificate of occupancy, in accordance with the State Uniform Construction
Code and any ordinance implementing said code, that allows a building or structure
or part thereof to be occupied when the work covered by the construction permit shall
have been substantially completed and when the unfinished items do not adversely affect
health or safety.[Added 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811]
TEMPORARY PRODUCE SALES' STRUCTURE—A portable or semiportable table,
platform or structure from which fruits, vegetables or similar agriculture products are
intended to be sold at retail to passing motorists or pedestrians.
TIDE LANDS — Lands which are washed by tidal flows in accordance with the New
Jersey Department of Environment Protection (NJDEP) Tideland Council maps, which
are on file with the New Jersey Department of Environment Protection and the Borough
Clerk.
TOWER — See "wireless telecommunications tower."[Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No.
780]
TOWER HEIGHT — When referring to a wireless telecommunications tower or other
structure, tower height is the distance measured from the finished grade to the highest
point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna. (See also
the definition of "building height.")[Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 780]
TRACT—A designated parcel or area of land, including a lot, which is the subject of an
application for development and which includes any contiguous portions of street rightsof-
way in which the developer has property rights.[Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No.
708]
TRACT AREA, GROSS — The total area of land, determined by a certified boundary
survey, excluding any public rights-of-way and/or lands shown as part of another
previously approved or designated permanent open space.
TRACT AREA, NET or NET TRACT AREA — The gross tract area less the total of
any areas within the tract contained in:
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record or reproduction thereof of the
proceedings of the municipal agency.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE — The New Jersey State Uniform Construction
Code, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
A. Riparian lands, tidelands, tidal wetlands and nontidal wetlands.
B. The 100-year floodplain.
C. Lakes and ponds.
D. Stream corridors and floodways.
E. Steep slopes in excess of 15%.
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:38
USE — The specific purposes for which a parcel of land or a building or a portion of
a building is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained. The term "permitted
use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to include any nonconforming use.
UTILITIES — Essential services, including but not limited to sewers, water, electricity,
gas, telephone and cable television, regulated by the State of New Jersey or by the
federal government.
VAPOR PRODUCT — Any noncombustible product containing nicotine that employs
a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical, or
mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, to produce vapor from nicotine in a
solution or any form, including any electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any vapor cartridge or other
container of nicotine in a solution or other form intended to be used with, or in, any such
device.[Added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1041]
VARIANCE—Permission to depart from the literal requirements of zoning regulations
of this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40b, 40:55D-70c and 40:55D-70d.
WAREHOUSE — Any structure designed for or utilized primarily for the storage
of goods and materials. The term shall include self-storage, mini or other forms of
commercial warehouse activities.
WETLANDS, FRESHWATER — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation"; provided,
however, that the Department of Environmental Protection in designating a wetland shall
use three-parameter approach (that is, hydrology, soils and vegetation) enumerated in
the "Federal Manual for Identifying and Delineating Jurisdictional Wetlands" and any
subsequent amendments thereto, incorporated herein by reference.[Added 7-14-1997 by
Ord. No. 735]
WETLANDS, NONTIDAL — Areas known as "marshes," "swamps" or other saturated
lowlands, wherein standing water is retained for 24 or more consecutive hours and to
which vegetation unique to such marshes, swamps or wetlands has become adapted. This
definition shall include, but is not limited to, all the mapped New Jersey State wetlands
or wetlands as defined in accordance with the New Jersey Coastal Permit Program Rules
(N.J.A.C. 7:7-1.1 et seq.), the Freshwater Wetlands Act of 1987 (N.J.A.C. 7:7A) or by
the United States Army Corps of Engineers in accordance with § 404 of the Clean Water
Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.).[Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 10-5-2020 by
Ord. No. 1076]
WETLANDS, TIDAL—An area that is inundated or saturated by fresh or saline waters
under tidal influence at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for
life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."[Added
7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 735]
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure that is designed
and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for
telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone
§ 94-2.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-2.3
94:39
towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The term includes the structure and any
support thereto.[Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 780]
WOODED AREAS — Any area within a tract covered by trees, woods or forests,
including closely grouped or stands of 10 or more mature or specimen trees of six-inch
caliper or greater, individual shade and specimen trees of twelve-inch caliper or greater
or individual ornamental trees of four-inch caliper or greater.
YARD — An open space which lies between a principal building or building group,
for the full length of the lot and the nearest lot line. A "yard" is to be unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except as herein permitted. All "yards" will be
identified as either "front yard," "side yard" or "rear yard."
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between
the front line of the lot and the nearest line of the building. The depth of the "front yard"
shall be measured at right angles to the front line of the lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and lying between
the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the building. The depth of a "rear yard"
shall be measured at right angles to the rear of the lot in the same manner as specified
herein for the measurement of lot depth.
YARD, SIDE — An open unoccupied space between the side line of the lot and the
nearest line of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard or, in the
absence of either of such yards, to the front or rear lot lines as the case may be. The width
of a "side yard" shall be measured at right angles to the side line of the lot.
ZONE or ZONING DISTRICT — Any part of territory of the Borough of Shrewsbury
which is designated as a "zone" or "zoning district" on the Official Zoning Map58 on file
with the Borough Clerk and to which certain uniform regulations and requirements of
this chapter apply.59
ZONING OFFICER — The official of Shrewsbury designated to enforce the provisions
of this chapter. The "Zoning Officer" shall also be the administrative officer in matters
pertaining to §§ 94-5.28A(4) and B, 94-5.29, 94-6.2 and 94-8.27H.[Amended
7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 695]
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer which:[Amended
8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811]
Is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or
the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a
structure or building; and
A.
Acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of
this change or variance therefrom duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 and 40:55D-70.
B.
58. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
59. Editor's Note: The definitions of "Zoning Board of Adjustment" and "Zoning Board of Adjustment Engineer," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077. See now the definitions of "Land
Use Board" and "Land Use Board Engineer."
§ 94-2.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-2.3
94:40
ARTICLE III
Administrative Procedures
§ 94-3.1. Land Use Board. [Amended 6-22-1989 by Ord. No. 590; 12-10-1990 by
Ord. No. 617; 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 708; 10-5-2020
by Ord. No. 1076; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
A. Establishment. The Land Use Board presently in existence pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23 is hereby continued, to consist of nine members of the following four
classes and four alternates. The Land Use Board shall exercise, to the same extent
and subject to the same restrictions, all the powers of a board of adjustment.
Notwithstanding, any application pending before the Borough of Shrewsbury
Zoning Board of Adjustment at the time Ordinance No. 2020-1077 becomes
effective and for which testimony has been presented to that Board shall be heard
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, after which, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be abolished. All applications for which testimony has not been presented to
the Board of Adjustment shall be transferred to the Land Use Board.
(1) Class I: the Mayor, or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
(2) Class II: one of the officials of the Borough, other than a member of the
Borough Council, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that, if there is an
Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental Commission
who is also a member of the Land Use Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
shall be deemed to be the Class II Land Use Board member if there is both a
member of the Land Use Board and a member of the Board of Education
among the Class IV members.
(3) Class III: a member of the Borough Council, to be appointed by it.
(4) Class IV: six other citizens of the Borough, to be appointed by the Mayor. The
members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office position, except that
one may be a member of the Board of Education. A member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Land Use Board as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV Land Use Board member
unless there is among the Class IV or alternate members of the Land Use
Board a member of the Board of Education, in which case the member of the
Environmental Commission shall be deemed to be the Class II member of the
Land Use Board. For the purpose of this section, membership on a Borough
board or commission whose function is advisory in nature, and the
establishment of which is discretionary and not required by statute, shall be
considered the holding of municipal office.
(5) Alternates. The Mayor shall also appoint four alternate members who shall
meet the qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate members shall be
designated by the Mayor at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1,"
"Alternate No. 2," "Alternative No. 3," and "Alternative No. 4."
B. Terms.
(1) The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to the Mayor's
official tenure, or, if the member is the Mayor's designee in the absence of the
§ 94-3.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.1
94:41
Mayor, the designee shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor during the
Mayor's official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and
Class III shall be for one year or shall terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member
who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The term of a
Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the Environmental
Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the completion of his/
her term of office as a member of the Environmental Commission, whichever
comes first.
(2) The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Education shall terminate whenever he/she is no longer a member of such
other body or at the completion of his Class IV term, whichever occurs first.
(3) The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this chapter and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable
extent, the expiration of such terms shall be evenly distributed over the first
four years after their appointment; provided, however, that no term of any
member shall exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall
affect the term of any present member of the Land Use Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which they were
appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of
four years, except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from
January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
(4) The terms of alternate members shall be two years, except that the terms of the
alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one alternate
member shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance
shall the terms of the alternate members first appointed exceed two years. A
vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
appointing authority for the unexpired term only. Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member
is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
(5) Class I and Class III members shall not participate in the consideration of
applications for development which involve relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d) and § 94-3.1J(2)(d) below.
C. Conflicts. No member or alternate member of the Land Use Board shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which he/she has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest.
D. Lack of quorum. If the Land Use Board lacks a quorum because any of its regular
or alternate members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23b or 40:55D-23.1 from
acting on a matter due to the member's personal or financial interest therein, the
Land Use Board shall publicly invoke the Doctrine of Necessity.
E. Vacancies. If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
term, it shall be filled by appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired term.
§ 94-3.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.1
94:42
F. Removal. Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he/she
requests one, may be removed by the Borough Council for cause.
G. Organization of Board. The Land Use Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from the members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either
a member of the Land Use Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
H. Land Use Attorney. There is hereby created the office of Land Use Attorney. The
Land Use Board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree upon the
rate of compensation of the Land Use Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than
the Borough Attorney.
I. Expenses, experts and staff. The Borough Council shall make provisions in its
budget and appropriate funds for the expenses of the Land Use Board. The Land
Use Board may employ or contract for the services of experts and other staff and
services as it may deem necessary. The Land Use Board shall not, however, exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Borough Council for its
use.
J. Powers and duties.
(1) The Land Use Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In
the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply. The Land Use Board shall have the following
powers and duties:
(a) To prepare and, after public hearing, adopt or amend a Master Plan or
component parts thereof to guide the use of lands within the Borough in
a manner which protects public health and safety and promotes the
general welfare in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28
and to prepare and adopt a Reexamination Report of the Master Plan and
Zoning and Land Development Regulations in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-89.
(b) To administer site plan and land subdivision reviews in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 through
40:55D-59.
(c) To grant exceptions from certain requirements for subdivision and site
plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51.
(d) To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
(e) Prior to the adoption of a development regulation, including this chapter,
revision or amendment thereto, to make and transmit to the Borough
Council, within 35 days after referral, a report including identification of
any provisions in the proposed development regulations revision or
amendment which are inconsistent with the Master Plan and
recommendations concerning these inconsistencies and any others as the
§ 94-3.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.1
94:43
Land Use Board deems appropriate. The Borough Council, when
considering the adoption of a development regulation, revision or
amendment thereto, shall review the report of the Land Use Board and
may disapprove or change any recommendations by a vote of a majority
of its full authorized membership and shall record in its minutes the
reasons for not following such recommendations. Failure of the Land Use
Board to transmit its report within the thirty-five-day period shall relieve
the Borough Council from the requirements of this subsection in regard
to the proposed development regulation, revision or amendment thereto
referred to the Land Use Board. Nothing in this section shall be construed
as diminishing the application of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 to any Official
Map or amendment or revision thereto, or of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62a to any
zoning regulation or any amendment or revision thereto.
(f) To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required
by state or federal law or regulations.
(g) To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuing planning
process.
(h) Variances.
[1] When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant:
[a] Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
[b] Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainageway, flood-control basin or public area
reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
[c] Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
[2] Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of a
hearing on the application for development shall include reference
to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit as
the case may be.
[3] Any variance hereafter granted by the Land Use Board permitting
the erection or alteration of any structure or structures shall expire
by limitation unless such construction or alteration has been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance,
or unless such development has actually been commenced within 12
months from the date of publication of the notice of the judgment or
determination of the Land Use Board; except, however, that the
running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled
from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Land Use
Board to a court of competent jurisdiction, until the termination in
any manner of such proceeding. The Land Use Board may, for good
cause, extend the time period for a period not to exceed six months.
§ 94-3.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.1
94:44
In no case shall the Board grant more than two such extensions.
Where subdivision or site plan approval is required, the period of
time for commencement of the development specified by the Land
Use Board shall be the same as the period of time for which other
rights are conferred upon the applicant by such subdivision or site
plan approval pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(i) To review capital projects pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31.
(j) To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the Borough Council for the aid and assistance of the
Borough Council or other Borough bodies, agencies or officers.
(2) The Land Use Board shall further have the power to:
(a) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62
through 40:55D-68.
[1] Appeals to the Land Use Board may be taken within the 20 days
prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72 by filing a notice of appeal with
the officer from whom the appeal was taken, together with three
copies of said notice with the Secretary of the Land Use Board. Said
notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for said appeal. The
officer from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to
the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken. A developer may file an application
for development with the Land Use Board for action under any of its
powers without prior application to an administrative officer.
[2] An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in
respect of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the
officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Land Use
Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that,
by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such cases,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Land Use Board or by the Superior
Court of New Jersey on application or notice to the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
[3] The Land Use Board may, in conformity with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from and make such other requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made and, to that end, have all the
powers of the administrative officer from whom the appeal was
taken.
(b) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or zoning
§ 94-3.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.1
94:45
provisions of this chapter adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62
through 40:55D-68 or for decisions upon other special questions upon
which such Board is authorized by this chapter to pass.
(c) Grant, upon an application or an appeal, relief from regulations pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 through 40:55D-68, except those departures
enumerated in Subsection J(2)(d) below (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d) or where
the proposed development requires approval by the Land Use Board of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use, in conjunction with which the
Land Use Board has power to review a request for a variance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47a, where:
[1] The strict application of such regulation would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue
hardship upon the developer of a property for any of the following
reasons:
[a] By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of
a specific piece of property;
[b] By reason of exceptional topographic conditions or physical
features uniquely affecting a specific piece of property; or
[c] By reason of an extraordinary and exceptional situation
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the structures
lawfully existing thereon; or
[2] The purposes of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. would be advanced by a
deviation from the requirements of this chapter, and the benefits of
the deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment.
(d) Variances.
[1] The Land Use Board has the power to grant, upon an application or
an appeal, in particular cases and for special reasons, by affirmative
vote of at least five members, a variance to allow departures from
regulations pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 through 40:55D-68 to
permit the following:
[a] A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such
use or principal structure.
[b] An expansion of a nonconforming use.
[c] Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to
a conditional use pursuant to Article IX of this chapter.
[d] An increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in
§ 94-2.3 of this chapter and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4.
[e] An increase in the permitted density as defined in § 94-2.3 of
this chapter and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one- or two-
§ 94-3.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.1
94:46
dwelling-unit buildings, which lot or lots are either an isolated
undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision.
[f] A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or
10% the maximum height permitted in the district for a
principal structure.
[2] If an application for development requests one or more variances,
but not a variance for a purpose enumerated in Subsection
J(2)(d)[1][a] through [f] of this section, the decision on the requested
variance or variances shall be rendered under Subsection J(2)(c) of
this section.
[3] No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d unless such variance or other relief can be
granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and this
chapter. An application under this section may be referred to any
appropriate person or agency, provided that such reference shall not
extend the period of time within which the Land Use Board shall act.
(3) The Land Use Board shall have the power to grant, to the same extent and
subject to the same restrictions as the Land Use Board, subdivision or site plan
approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 through 40:55D-59 or conditional
use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67, whenever the proposed
development requires approval by the Land Use Board of a variance pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. The developer may elect to submit a separate
application requesting approval of the variance and a subsequent application
for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The
separate approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon the grant of all
required subsequent approvals by the Land Use Board. No such subsequent
approval shall be granted unless such approval can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial impairment of
the intent and purpose of the zone plan and this chapter. The number of votes
of the Board members required to grant any such subsequent approval shall be
as otherwise provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. for the approval in
question, and the special vote pursuant to the aforesaid Subsection d of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 [§ 94-3.1J(2)(d) above] shall not be required.
(4) The Land Use Board shall have the power to direct issuance of a permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a building or structure in the bed of a
mapped street or public drainageway, flood-control basin or public area
reserved on the Official Map. The Land Use Board shall not exercise the
power otherwise granted by this subsection if the proposed development
requires approval by the Land Use Board of a subdivision, site plan or
conditional use in conjunction with which the Land Use Board has power to
direct the issuance of a permit pursuant this chapter and to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60b.
(5) The Land Use Board shall have the power to direct issuance of a permit
pursuant N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a building or structure not related to a street.
§ 94-3.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.1
94:47
The Land Use Board shall not exercise the power otherwise granted by this
subsection if the proposed development requires approval by the Land Use
Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with which
the Land Use Board has power to direct the issuance of a permit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60c.
(6) The Borough Council may, by ordinance, provide for the referral of any
matters or class of matters to the Land Use Board before final action thereon
by a municipal body or municipal officer having final authority thereon. The
Land Use Board shall have made a recommendation regarding a matter
authorized by ordinance to another municipal body. Such recommendation
may be rejected only by a majority of the full authorized membership of such
other body.
K. Citizens' Advisory Committee. The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a
Citizens' Advisory Committee to assist or collaborate with the Land Use Board in
its duties, but such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other
action required by the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
L. Environmental Commission. Whenever the Environmental Commission has
prepared and submitted to the Land Use Board an index of the natural resources of
the municipality, the Land Use Board shall make available to the Environmental
Commission an informational copy of every application for development to the
Land Use Board. Failure of the Land Use Board to make such informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding.
M. Simultaneous review. The Land Use Board shall have the power to review and
approve or deny conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for
subdivision approval without the developer being required to make further
application to the Land Use Board or the Land Use Board being required to hold
further hearings. The longest time period for action by the Land Use Board, whether
it be for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply. Whenever
approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer, notice of the hearing on
the plat shall include reference to the request for such conditional use.
N. Conditional uses. The Land Use Board shall grant or deny an application for a
conditional use within 95 days of submission of a complete application by a
developer to the administrative officer or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. The review by the Land Use Board of a conditional
use may also include site plan review. The time period for approval by the Land
Use Board of conditional uses shall apply to such site plan review.
O. Failure to act. Failure of the Land Use Board to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute approval of the application, and a certificate of the administrative
officer (Land Use Board Clerk) as to the failure of the Land Use Board to act shall
be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required and shall be so accepted
by the County Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
P. Periodic reexamination.
§ 94-3.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.1
94:48
(1) The Borough Council shall, at least every six years, provide for a general
reexamination of the Borough Master Plan and Land Use and Development
Regulations by the Land Use Board, which shall prepare and adopt by
resolution a report on the findings of such reexamination. A copy of said report
and resolution shall be sent to the Monmouth County Land Use Board and the
Municipal Clerks of each adjoining municipality. The next reexamination shall
be completed by August 1, 1988. Thereafter, a reexamination shall be
completed at least once every six years from the previous reexamination. The
reexamination report shall state:
(a) The major problems and objectives relating to land development in the
Borough at the time of the adoption of the last reexamination report.
(b) The extent to which such problems and objectives have been reduced or
have increased subsequent to such date.
(c) The extent to which there have been significant changes in the
assumptions, policies and objectives formed; and the basis for the Master
Plan and Development Regulations as last revised, with particular regard
to the density and distribution of population and land uses, housing
conditions, circulation, conservation of natural resources, energy
conservation and changes in state, county and Borough policies and
objectives.
(d) The specific changes recommended for the Master Plan or Development
Regulations, if any, including underlying objectives, policies and
standards, or whether a new plan or regulations should be prepared.
(2) The absence of the adoption by the Land Use Board of a reexamination report
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-89 shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that
the Borough Development Regulations are no longer reasonable.
Q. The Land Use Board shall have the power to approve planned developments in
order to encourage and promote flexibility and economy in layout and design in
accordance with this chapter and pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39
and to grant approvals to general development plans consistent with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45. Prior to granting approval to any planned development, the
Land Use Board shall find the following facts and conclusions:
(1) That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to the Zoning Ordinance
standards pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c.
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open
space are reliable and the amount, location and purpose of the common open
space are adequate.
(3) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed development for
public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the amenities
of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment are adequate.
(4) That the proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably adverse
§ 94-3.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.1
94:49
impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established.
(5) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates construction over
a period of years, that the terms and conditions intended to protect the interests
of the public and of the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are adequate.
R. Referral. Any application to the Land Use Board may be referred by the Land Use
Board to any appropriate person or agency, including the Shade Tree Commission
and the Environmental Commission, for consideration and report; provided,
however, that such referral shall not exceed the time within which the Land Use
Board is required to act.
(1) If such reports are not received by the Land Use Board within 45 days from
the date or dates of such referral, the Land Use Board may proceed to act
without further delay and without reference to such reports, should they be
received after the expiration of such forty-five-day period.
(2) When such a report is received from the Land Use Board within 45 days, the
Land Use Board shall take no action inconsistent therewith except by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the fully authorized membership of the Land
Use Board.
(3) The report of the Shade Tree Commission, Environmental Commission or any
other person or agency shall be advisory only.
S. Expiration of variance. Any variance hereafter granted by the Land Use Board
permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or structures or permitting a
specified use of any premises shall expire by limitation unless such construction or
alteration shall have been actually commenced on each and every structure
permitted by said variance, or unless such development has actually been
commenced within 12 months from the date of publication of the notice of the
judgment or determination of the Land Use Board; except, however, that the
running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of
filing an appeal from the decision of the Land Use Board to a court of competent
jurisdiction, until the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding. The
Land Use Board may, for good cause, extend the time period for a period not to
exceed six months. In no case shall the Board grant more than two such extensions.
Where subdivision or site plan approval is required, the period of time for
commencement of the development specified by the Land Use Board shall be the
same as the period of time for which other rights are conferred upon the applicant
by such subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
T. Appeals of use variances. An appeal from the granting of a use variance under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d [§ 94-3.1J(2)(d) of this chapter] by the Land Use Board shall
be taken to a court of competent jurisdiction (New Jersey Superior Court), provided
that such appeal shall be made within 45 days of the date of publication of such
final decision of the municipal agency. Such appeal shall be made in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17.
U. Annual report on applications and appeals. The Land Use Board shall, at least once
a year, review its decisions on applications and appeals for variances and prepare
§ 94-3.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.1
94:50
§ 94-3.2. (Reserved)61
§ 94-3.3. Administrative provisions applicable to municipal agencies. [Amended
12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-1077]
and adopt by resolution a report, on its findings on Zoning Ordinance provisions
which were the subject of variance requests and its recommendations for zoning
regulation and map amendment or revision, if any. The Land Use Board shall send
copies of the report and resolution to60
A. Meetings.
(1) Every municipal agency shall, by its rules, fix the time and place for holding
its regular meetings for business authorized to be conducted by such agency.
Regular meetings of the municipal agency shall be scheduled not less than
once a month and shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process.
(2) The municipal agency may provide for special meetings, at the call of the
Chairman or at the request of any two of its members, which shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with municipal regulations
and N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
(3) No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being present.
(4) All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as otherwise
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32, 40:55D-34, 40:55D-62, 40:55D-63 and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17e, 40:55D-26a and b and 40:55D-70d. Failure of a motion
to receive the number of votes required to approve an application for
development shall be deemed an action denying the application. Nothing
herein shall be construed to contravene any act providing for procedures for
governing bodies.
(5) All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the public.
Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the requirements
of the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
(6) An executive session for the purpose of discussing and studying any matters
to come before the agency shall not be deemed a regular or special meeting
within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
B. Minutes. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the municipal agency and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the municipal agency, the
findings, if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office of
the administrative officer (Land Use Board Clerk). Any interested party shall have
60. Editor's Note: So in original.
61. Editor's Note: Former §§ 94-3.1 and 94-3.2, which provided separate provisions for the Planning Board and the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, were consolidated into a single section with provisions for a Land Use Board. See § 94-3.1.
§ 94-3.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.3
94:51
the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceedings concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party
may be charged a reasonable fee for reproduction of the minutes in an amount
sufficient to cover the cost of such reproduction of the minutes for his use.
C. Hearings.
(1) Required hearings. The Land Use Board shall hold a hearing on each
application for development.
(2) Rules for conducting hearings. The Land Use Board shall make rules
governing the conduct of hearings before such body, which rules shall not be
inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or this chapter.
(3) Filing of documents. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought
at a hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the office of the
administrative officer (Land Use Board Clerk). The applicant may produce
other documents, records or testimony at the hearing to substantiate or clarify
or supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
(4) Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may designate
shall have the power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence, including
witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the
County and Municipal Investigations Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq., shall
apply.
(5) Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding officer,
and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all interested parties
through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if not represented, subject
to the discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as to
time and the number of witness.
(6) Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing,
but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence.
(7) Verbatim recording. The municipal agency shall provide for the verbatim
recording of the proceedings by either a stenographer or by mechanical or
electronic means. The municipal agency shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate
recording in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at his expense.
(8) Transcript charge. The municipal agency, in furnishing a transcript of the
proceeding to an interested party at his expense, shall not charge such
interested party more than the maximum permitted in N.J.S.A. 2B:7-4, as
amended. Said transcript shall be certified in writing by the transcriber to be
accurate.
(9) Requirements for a certified shorthand reporter. A certified shorthand reporter
shall be provided by an applicant at his expense for a major subdivision, major
§ 94-3.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.3
94:52
site plan or use variance application before a municipal agency. The applicant
shall provide a certified copy of the transcript of the proceedings to the
municipal agency at his expense. In the event that an applicant shall provide
a certified shorthand reporter for any other type of application before a
municipal agency, the applicant shall provide a copy of the transcript to the
municipal agency if requested or in the event of a court case.
(10) Voting eligibility. A member or alternate member of a municipal agency who
was absent for one or more of the meetings at which a hearing was held shall
be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted,
notwithstanding his or her absence from one or more of the meetings;
provided, however, that such Board member or alternate member has available
to him or her the transcripts or recordings of all of the hearings from which he
or she was absent and certifies in writing to the municipal agency that he or
she has read such transcript or listened to such recording.
D. Notice requirements for hearing. Whenever public notice of a hearing is required
on an application for development, the applicant shall give notice thereof at least 10
days prior to the date of the hearing in accordance with the following;
(1) Public notice of a hearing on an application for development shall be given for
all of the following:
(a) Appeal or variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
(b) Directive for issuance of a building permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-34 or 40:55D-36.
(c) Conditional uses pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
(d) Preliminary major subdivision plats.
(e) Preliminary major site plans.
(2) Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the
Borough, if there is one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Borough.
(3) Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to Subsection D(1) above
shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the current tax
duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all directions of the property
which is the subject of such hearing, provided that this requirement shall be
deemed satisfied by notice to the condominium association, in the case of any
unit owner whose unit has a unit above or below it, or horizontal property
regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above
or below it. Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the owner, as
shown on said current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the property or
by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his address
as shown on said current tax duplicate. A return receipt is not required. Notice
to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a
corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice president,
secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to accept
§ 94-3.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.3
94:53
service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium association,
horizontal property regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located within 200 feet
of the property which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same
manner as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners, co-owners
or homeowners on account of such common elements or areas. Notice of a
hearing requiring public notice pursuant to Subsection D(1) shall be given to
public utilities and cable television companies in accordance with Subsection
D(8) of this section.
(4) Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving property
located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be given by personal
service or certified mail to the Clerk of such municipality, which notice shall
be in addition to the notice required to be given pursuant to § 94-3.3D(3) of
this chapter to the owners of lands in such adjoining municipality which are
located within 200 feet of the subject premises.
(5) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on all applications for development of property
adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on the Official
County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining other county land or
situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
(6) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the Commissioner
of the New Jersey Department of Transportation of a hearing on any
application for development of property adjacent to a state highway.
(7) Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the State Planning
Commission of any hearing on an application for development of property
which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice shall include a
copy of any maps or documents required to be on file with the administrative
officer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
(8) Notice to public utilities.
(a) Notice of hearings on applications for approval of a major subdivision or
a site plan not defined as a minor site plan requiring public notice
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 shall be given in the case of a public
utility, cable television company or local utility which possesses a rightof-
way or easement within the Borough and which has registered with the
Borough in accordance with Subsection D(8)(b) below, by serving a copy
of the notice on the person whose name appears on the registration form
on behalf of the public utility, cable television company or local utility or
mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the person whose name
appears on the registration form at the address shown on that form.
(b) Every public utility, cable television company and local utility interested
in receiving notice pursuant to Subsection D(8)(a) above and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12h may register with the Borough if the public utility, cable
television company or local utility has a right-of-way or easement in the
Borough. The registration shall remain in effect until revoked by the
public utility, cable television company or local utility or by its successor
§ 94-3.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.3
94:54
in interest.
(c) The Tax Assessor shall adopt a registration form and shall maintain a
record of all public utilities, cable television companies and local utilities
which have registered with the Borough pursuant to Subsection D(8)(b)
of this section. The registration form shall include the name of the public
utility, cable television company or local utility and the name, address
and position of the person to whom notice shall be forwarded, as required
pursuant to Subsection D(8)(a) above. The information contained therein
shall be made available to any applicant, as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12c.
(d) A registration fee of $25 shall be paid by any public utility, cable
television company or local utility which registers to receive notice
pursuant to Subsection D(8)(b) above.
(9) The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the municipal
agency holding the hearing on the application for the development in the event
that the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12
and this subsection.
(10) Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be deemed to
be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-14.
(11) Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of this
chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the
matters to be considered and identification of the property proposed for
development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers
as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Borough Tax Assessor's office and
the location and times at which any maps and documents for which approval
is sought are available for public inspection as required by law.
(12) Notice pursuant to Subsection D(4) through (8) of this section shall not be
deemed to be required, unless public notice pursuant to Subsection D(1) and
(2) and notice pursuant to Subsection D(3) of this section are required.
(13) List of property owners furnished. Upon written request of an applicant, the
administrative officer (Tax Assessor) shall, within seven days, make and
certify a list from said current tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners
to whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to Subsection D(3)
of this section. In addition, the Tax Assessor shall include on the list the
names, addresses and positions of those persons who, not less than seven days
prior to the date on which the applicant requested the list, have registered to
receive notice pursuant to Subsection D(8) of this section. The applicant shall
be entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list, and failure to
give notice to any owner or to any public utility, cable television company or
local utility not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding. A fee
of $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater, shall be charged for such list.
E. Decisions. Each decision on any application for development shall be reduced to
writing and shall include findings of facts and conclusions based thereon.
§ 94-3.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.3
94:55
(1) Reduction to writing shall be accomplished through a resolution adopted at a
meeting held within the applicable time period for taking action on the
application for development or a resolution adopted at a meeting not later than
45 days after the date of the meeting at which action to grant or deny approval
was taken memorializing said action. Where the agency fails to adopt a
resolution, any interested party may apply to the Superior Court in a summary
manner for an order compelling the agency to reduce its findings and
conclusions to writing within a stated time, and the cost of the application,
including attorneys' fees, shall be assessed against the Borough.
(2) The following members shall be eligible to vote on the resolution:
(a) Where the action taken resulted from the failure of a motion to approve
an application pursuant to § 94-3.3A(4) of this chapter, those members
voting against the motion for approval shall be the members eligible to
vote on the resolution.
(b) In all other circumstances, only the members who voted for the action
taken shall be eligible to vote on the resolution.
(3) The following shall apply to adoption of the resolution:
(a) The vote on a resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of the
action of the municipal agency and not to be an action of the municipal
agency.
(b) The vote of a majority of those eligible members who are present at the
meeting at which the resolution is presented for adoption shall be
sufficient to adopt the resolution.
(c) The date of the adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date of the
decision for purposes of the mailings, filings and publications required.
(4) Copies of the decision shall be distributed by the administrative officer (Land
Use Board Clerk) as follows:
(a) A copy shall be mailed within 10 days of the date of decision to the
applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney, without separate charge.
(b) A copy shall be filed in the office of the administrative officer and shall
be made available for public inspection during reasonable hours.
(c) A copy shall be made available to any interested party for a reasonable
fee in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of such copy.
(5) A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official newspaper(s) of
the Borough.
(a) Such publication shall be arranged, and proof of publication shall be
obtained, by the administrative officer (Land Use Board Clerk). Nothing
herein shall be construed as preventing the applicant from arranging such
publication if he so desires. The period of time in which an appeal of the
decision may be made shall run from the first publication of the decision.
§ 94-3.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.3
94:56
(b) Such notice shall be published within 30 days of the date of decision or
20 days of the date of mailing of a copy of the decision by the
administrative officer (Land Use Board Clerk), whichever is later, or
within such other appropriate period as may be determined by the
municipal agency at the time of decision.
(c) Failure of an applicant to publish as herein required shall render any
approvals null and void.
F. Conditional approvals.
(1) In the event that a developer submits an application for development proposing
a development that is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, by legal action
instituted by any state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect
the public health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state
agency, political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the
public health and welfare, the municipal agency shall process such application
for development in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. and this chapter; and if such application for development complies with
the provisions of this chapter, the municipal agency shall approve such
application conditioned on removal of such legal barrier to development.
(2) In the event that development proposed by an application for development
requires an approval of a governmental agency other than the municipal
agency, the municipal agency shall, in appropriate instances, condition its
approval upon the subsequent approval of such governmental agency,
provided that the municipal agency shall make a decision on any application
for development within the time period provided in this chapter and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. or within an extension of such period as has been agreed to
by the applicant unless the municipal agency is prevented or relieved from so
acting by the operation of law.
(3) Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning Board
is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, in the case of a subdivision, or N.J.S.A.
40:27-6.6, in the case of a site plan, the municipal agency shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the
application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning
Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
(4) The municipal agency may impose such other conditions, including but not
limited to those enumerated in Article VI of this chapter, as it deems
appropriate.
(5) In all cases, the municipal agency shall include a condition of approval setting
forth the time within which all conditions of approval must be satisfied by the
applicant. Failure of the applicant to meet all conditions of approval within the
time specified or within such extensions thereof as the municipal agency may,
from time to time, grant upon the request of the applicant shall render any
approvals null and void.
G. Tolling of running of period of approval. In the event that, during the period of
approval heretofore or hereafter granted to an application for development, the
§ 94-3.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.3
94:57
developer is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the
development otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted
by any state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public
health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency, political
subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health or welfare
and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to proceed with said
development, the running of the period of approval shall be suspended for the
period of time said legal action is pending or such directive or order is in effect.
H. Payment of taxes. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65,
every application for development submitted to the Land Use Board shall be
accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due
or delinquent on the property which is the subject of such application; or if it is
shown that taxes or assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or
other relief granted by the Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt
payment of such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate provision for the
payment thereof in such manner that the Borough will be adequately protected.
I. Appeals to Borough Council. Any interested party may appeal to the Borough
Council any final decision of the Land Use Board approving an application for
development pursuant to § 94-3.1J(2)(d) and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. Such appeal
shall be made within 10 days of the date of publication of such final decision in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17.
J. Time for decision. After the date an appeal is taken from the decision of a municipal
officer or the submission of a complete application for development to the
administrative officer, the approving authority shall render its decision within the
maximum number of days as specified below or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Where more than one type of application is involved,
the longer time period shall apply.
Type of Application
Time Period
(days)
Site plans, minor 45
Preliminary approval (site plans)
10 acres or less or 10 units or less 45
More than 10 acres or 10 units 95
Final approval (site plans) 45
Subdivisions, minor 45
Preliminary approval (subdivisions)
10 lots or less 45
More than 10 lots 95
Final approval (subdivisions) 45
Conditional use authorization 95
Variance 120
§ 94-3.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.3
94:58
§ 94-3.4. Certificates and permits. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670;
8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811; 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-1077]
Type of Application
Time Period
(days)
Appeal from the decision of a municipal officer 120
Direction for issuance of a building permit 120
K. Separation of applications. A developer whose proposed development requires a
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit may elect to submit a separate
application requesting the variance or direction of the issuance of a permit and a
subsequent application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or
conditional use. The separate granting of the variance or direction of the issuance
of a permit shall be conditioned upon the granting of all required subsequent
approvals by the same approving authority. No such subsequent approval shall be
granted unless such approval can be granted without substantial detriment to the
public good and without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the
zone plan and this chapter. The number of votes of the Board members required to
grant any such subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in the chapter
for the approval in question, and any special vote shall not be required. In the event
that the developer elects to submit separate consecutive applications, the time
period for granting or denying each separate application shall be as provided in
Subsection J above.
A. Zoning permit.
(1) Zoning permits shall hereafter be secured from the administrative officer
(Zoning Officer) prior to:
(a) The filing of or recording of a deed of or resubdivision of any land; a
subdivision application; and/or an application for and/or issuance of any
building permit.
(b) The erection, construction, alteration, repair, remodeling, conversion,
removal or destruction of any building or structure.
(c) Application for and/or issuance of any permit for a new or expanded or
relocated sign.
(d) Application for and/or issuance of any permit for erection of a fence in
conjunction with any nonfarm use.
(e) Any change in use or occupancy (as herein defined) of any building,
structure or land.
(f) Any alteration exceeding 5,000 square feet in the natural condition of any
undeveloped parcel of land, including, but not limited to, the alteration of
drainage patterns, removal of soil, regrading and removal of trees and
ground cover; provided, however, that such alterations located on and
§ 94-3.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.4
94:59
necessary to the operation of a farm, as defined in this chapter, shall not
require a zoning permit.
(g) Any use of any portion of any parcel of land for any activity regulated by
this chapter.
(h) The construction of any site improvement either above or below ground.
(i) The issuance of any certificate of occupancy where no building permit
was previously required.
(j) The excavation, removal or addition of soil or fill to or from any site
exceeding 10 cubic yards.
(2) Prior to issuance of a zoning permit, the applicant shall have, where applicable,
secured other required permits, including, but not limited to:
(a) An access permit from the New Jersey Department of Transportation and/
or Monmouth County Engineering Department.
(b) A drainage permit from the New Jersey Department of Transportation.
(c) A stream encroachment permit from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(d) A Coastal Area Facilities Review Act (CAFRA) permit from the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(e) A wetlands permit from the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
(f) A riparian construction permit from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
(g) The required permits from the United States Army Corps of Engineers
and United States Coast Guard.
(h) A sewerage and/or industrial waste treatment permit from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
(i) A land disturbance permit from the Freehold Area Soil Conservation
District.
(j) A New Jersey state floodplain encroachment permit.
(k) A letter of approval from the Monmouth County Sewerage Authority.
(3) Prior to the issuance of a zoning permit, the applicant shall have secured all
approvals required by this chapter and shall have met any and all conditions of
any municipal agency approval.
B. Certificates as to approval of subdivision of land.
(1) The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision, or which formed part
§ 94-3.4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.4
94:60
of such a subdivision three years preceding the effective date of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., may apply, in writing, to the administrative officer for
issuance of a certificate certifying whether or not such subdivision has been
approved by the Land Use Board. Such application shall contain a diagram
showing the location and dimensions of the land to be covered by the
certificate and the name and the owner thereof.
(2) The administrative officer (Land Use Board Clerk) shall make and issue a
certificate within 15 days after receipt of such written application and the
required fees therefor as set forth in § 94-3.14 of this chapter. Said officer shall
keep a duplicate copy of each certificate, consecutively numbered, including a
statement of the fee charged, in a binder as a permanent record of his office.
(3) Each such certificate shall be designated as a "certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land" and shall certify:
(a) Whether there exists in the Borough a duly established Land Use Board
and whether there is an ordinance controlling subdivision of land and
adopted under the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(b) Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Land Use Board and, if so, the date
of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof, showing that the
subdivision of which the lands are a part is a validly existing subdivision.
(c) Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(4) The administrative officer shall be entitled to demand and receive for such
certificate issued a reasonable fee not in excess of those provided in N.J.S.A.
54:5-14 and 54:5-15. The fees so collected by such official shall be paid to the
Borough.
(5) Any person who shall acquire for a valuable consideration an interest in the
lands covered by such certificates of approval of a subdivision in reliance upon
the information therein contained shall hold such interest free of any right,
remedy or action which could be prosecuted or maintained by the Borough
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-55.
(6) If the administrative officer designated to issue any such certificate fails to
issue the same within 15 days after receipt of an application and the fees
therefor, any person acquiring an interest in the lands described in such
application shall hold such interest free of any right, remedy or action which
could be prosecuted or maintained by the Borough pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-55.
(7) Any such application addressed to the Borough Clerk shall be deemed to be
addressed to the proper designated officer, and the Borough shall be bound
thereby to the same extent as though the same was addressed to the designated
official.
§ 94-3.4 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.4
94:61
C. Building permit. No building or structure shall be erected, restored, added to or
structurally altered until a permit therefor has been issued by the Construction
Official. All applications for such permits shall be in accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey State Uniform Construction Code. No building
permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall have first secured a zoning permit.
D. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) Zoning permit required. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the use
of any building, structure or land unless a zoning permit shall have first been
issued for the use of such building, structure or land.
(2) New uses. No building, structure or land shall be occupied or used until such
time as a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Construction Official. Such
certificates shall be issued upon application by the owner, prospective
occupant or purchaser only after the Construction Official determines that the
facts represented on the application are correct and that the building, structure
or use is in conformance with the provisions of the Uniform Construction
Code and other codes and ordinances affecting construction and occupancy. A
temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter for any structure or use for which site plan approval has been
secured but not all conditions of approval have been complied with.
(3) Existing uses at the time of passage of this chapter. Upon written request from
the owner, tenant, occupant or purchaser under contract, the Construction
Official, after inspection, shall issue an occupancy permit for a use legally
existing at the time this chapter is made effective, certifying the extent and
kind of use and whether any such existing use conforms to the provisions of
this chapter.
(4) Change of use. Whenever there occurs a change in the occupancy or use (as
herein defined) of a nonresidential building, structure or land, a new certificate
of occupancy shall be applied for, to ensure compliance with all applicable
codes and ordinances. The Construction Official may issue such certificate if
the administrative officer determines that such change in occupancy or use is
not a change in use as herein defined and determines, therefore, that a zoning
permit is not required, provided that the applicant has met the requirements of
the applicable regulations.
(5) Scope of certificate of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy shall contain
sufficient information as to the extent and kind of use or uses, such that any
future investigation of the premises would disclose the extent to which a use
was altered. It shall also indicate whether such use is a permitted or
nonconforming use and the extent to which the use does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter.
(6) Improvement required. No permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until all required improvements have been installed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued
to permit occupancy for a period not to exceed one year. If, at the end of that
period, the required improvements have not been completed, the occupancy
permit becomes null and void, and the owner may be subject to the penalties
§ 94-3.4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.4
94:62
§ 94-3.5. Records. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 8-18-2003 by Ord. No.
811; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
§ 94-3.6. Enforcement officials. [Amended 11-14-1988 by Ord. No. 585]
herein defined by this chapter.
E. Soil erosion and sediment control plan certification. Where required, a soil erosion
and sediment control plan certification shall be obtained from the Freehold Area
Soil Conservation District prior to subdivision or the erection of any structure or the
alteration of the existing grade on any lot. No such certification shall be valid until
a zoning permit shall have first been issued for the subdivision, building, structure
or use.
A. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all applications, all
actions of the municipal agencies, all complaints, all violations noted and a record
of any action taken thereon, and all zoning permits issued, together with a notation
of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep all copies of all
plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of his office and shall
be available for the use of the Borough Council and of other officials of the
Borough.
B. The Zoning Officer shall prepare a monthly report for the Borough, summarizing
for a period since the last previous report all zoning permits issued and all
complaints of violations and the action taken consequent thereon. A copy of each
such report shall be filed with the Borough Clerk, Tax Assessor, Land Use Board,
Code Enforcement Officer, Construction Official and Engineer at the same time it
is filed with the Borough Council.
A. The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter is hereby
conferred upon the administrative officer (Zoning Officer), who shall have such
powers as are conferred by this chapter and as reasonably may be implied. The
administrative officer (Zoning Officer) shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Borough Council. In no case shall a zoning permit be
granted for a subdivision or the construction of or alteration of any building or site
where the proposed construction, alteration or use thereof would be in violation of
any provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the administrative officer
(Zoning Officer) to cause any building, plans or premises to be inspected or
examined and to order, in writing, the remedying of any conditions found to exist
in violation of this chapter, and the officer shall have the right to enter any buildings
or premises during the daytime or other normal business hours of the premises in
the course of performing these duties. [Amended 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 696;
8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811]
B. The duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter is also hereby conferred upon
the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall have such powers as are conferred by this
chapter and as reasonably may be implied. It shall be the duty of the Code
Enforcement Officer to cause any building or premises to be inspected or examined
and to order, in writing, the remedying of any conditions found to exist in violation
of this chapter, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall have the right to enter any
building or premises during the daytime or other normal business hours of the
§ 94-3.4 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.6
94:63
§ 94-3.7. Interpretation.
In the application and interpretation of this chapter, all provisions hereof shall be held to
be minimum standards or requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, convenience and general welfare of the Borough. Whenever the requirements of
this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules,
regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive or those imposing the higher standard shall
govern.
§ 94-3.8. Repealer.
Chapters 81 and 9462 of the Code of the Borough of Shrewsbury are hereby repealed in
their entirety, and any portions of other ordinances which contain provisions inconsistent
with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency, except as
provided by § 94-5.1 and except that any building permit, variance, special use permit,
occupancy permit or other permit validly issued pursuant to any such ordinance shall
remain valid and effective and shall continue to be governed by the terms and conditions
of such ordinance.
§ 94-3.9. Violations and penalties.
premises in the course of performing these duties.
A. For any and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the applicant,
subdivider, developer, owner, general agent or contractor of a building or premises
where such violation has been committed or shall exist and the lessee or tenant of
an entire building or entire premises where such violations have been committed or
shall exist and the owner, general agency, contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of
a building or premises in which part such violation has been committed or shall
exist and the general agent, architect, building contractor or any other person who
commits, takes part or assists in such violation or who maintains any building or
premises in which any such violation shall exist shall, for each and every day that
such violation shall exist and for each and every day that such violation continues,
be subject to a maximum of $2,000 fine, 90 days' imprisonment and/or 90 days of
community service. [Amended 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
B. Subdivision of land.
(1) If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person transfers or
sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an agreement expressly
conditioned on final subdivision approval, as owner or agent, any land which
forms a part of a subdivision for which municipal approval is required by this
chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., such person shall be subject to
a penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made may be
deemed a separate violation.
(2) In addition to the foregoing, the Borough may institute and maintain a civil
action:
62. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 555, in adopting current Ch. 94, repealed former Ch. 94, Zoning, adopted 9-27-1973 by
Ord. No. 345, as amended.
§ 94-3.6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.9
94:64
§ 94-3.10. Amendments. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
(a) For injunctive relief; and
(b) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract of sale, provided that a certificate has not been issued in
accordance with § 94-3.4B of this chapter.
(3) In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a
lien upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was made that
remains in the possession of the developer or his assigns or successors to
secure the return of any deposits made or purchase price paid and, also, a
reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any
such action must be brought within two years after the date of the recording of
the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land or within six years,
if unrecorded.
C. If, after final approval, it is discovered that there was any misrepresentation of any
statements or proofs contained in any plat or in any application for approval or in
any representations made to induce approval, the municipal agency or the Borough
Council may, in addition to such other sanctions as are available in the law, revoke
the approval of any plat and proceed as if final approval had not been obtained.
D. If the developer or agent of the developer shall, after notification by certified mail
from the Borough Engineer to cease the construction of improvements, cease the
use of certain construction methods and procedures or cease the use of or lack of
use of site maintenance methods and procedures which may result in hazards to life,
health or property or continue to carry on the activities specifically included in
cessation order(s) from the Borough Engineer, then any such developer or agent of
such developer shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000 or to imprisonment
for not more than 90 days or to community service for not more than 90 days, or
any combination thereof. Each and every day that a developer or agent of a
developer operates in violation of this chapter after issuance of a cessation order by
the Borough Engineer shall be considered a separate and specific violation.
[Amended 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
A. All amendments to this chapter and to the Zoning Map and Schedule, which form a
part hereof,63 shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented. The map and schedule of area,
yard and building requirements may be amended and supplemented by description
and reference thereto, without reproduction of the entire Zoning Map or detailed
text of the schedule.
B. A protest against any proposed amendment or revision of a zoning ordinance may
be filed with the Borough Clerk, signed by the owners of 20% or more of the area
either of the lots or land included in such proposed change, or of the lots or land
extending 200 feet in all directions therefrom inclusive of street space, whether
within or without the Borough. Such amendment or revision shall not become
63. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map and Schedule of Zoning District Regulations are included as attachments to this
chapter.
§ 94-3.9 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.10
94:65
§ 94-3.11. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this chapter shall be
adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph,
subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder of this chapter shall be
deemed valid and effective.
§ 94-3.12. Effect on pending and new applications.
§ 94-3.13. Filing of regulations with county.
Upon adoption of this chapter or other development regulations, except for an Official
Map, and any amendments thereto, the Borough Clerk shall file a copy of this chapter
and any amendments thereto with the Monmouth County Planning Board as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-16. Development regulations, except for an Official Map, shall not take
effect until a copy thereof shall be filed with the Monmouth County Planning Board. A
effective following the filing of such protest except by the favorable vote of 2/3 of
all the members of the Borough Council.
A. After the effective date of the ordinance adopting this chapter, all new applications
for development shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. Within 45 days
of submission of any application for development, the administrative officer shall
notify the developer in writing if an application for development is found to be
incomplete, or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted and constitute a complete
application 45 days after the submission. If a developer is notified that an
application for development is incomplete, the administrative officer shall further
notify the developer within 45 days of submission of all the additional plans and
supporting documentation requested if an application for development is still found
to be incomplete, or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted and constitute a
complete application 45 days after submission of all the additional plans and
supporting documentation requested.
B. All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this chapter may
be continued, subject to the following;
(1) The time limits for approval by the municipal agency set forth within this
chapter shall not apply unless the developer shall notify the municipal agency,
in writing, that he desires the application to be considered within such time
limits. Such letter of notification from the developer shall constitute the filing
of a new application for development subject to the provisions of Subsection
A of this section and all other provisions of this chapter.
(2) If the developer does not notify the municipal agency that he desires the
application for development to be considered within the time limits set forth in
this chapter, such application for development shall be processed and acted
upon pursuant to the procedures heretofore in effect at the time of such
application.
(3) All approvals granted after the effective date of this chapter shall confer upon
the applicant all the rights set forth in this chapter.
§ 94-3.10 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.13
94:66
land use and development (zoning) ordinance or amendment or revision thereto which,
in whole or in part, is inconsistent with or not designed to effectuate the land use plan
element of the Borough Master Plan shall not take effect until a copy of the resolution
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 shall be filed with the Monmouth County Planning
Board. An Official Map shall not take effect until filed with the County Recording
Officer. Copies of all development regulations and any revisions or amendments thereto
shall be filed and maintained in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 94-3.14. Fees. [Amended 7-8-1991 by Ord. No. 626; 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670;
7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 697; 7-15-1995 by Ord. No. 707; 11-13-1995 by Ord. No.
708; 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811; 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 913; 10-5-2020 by Ord. No.
1076; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated: [NOTE: The parentheses following a definition indicate the source of the
definition.]
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development or a
permit required in accordance with this chapter. (§ 94-2.3)
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by this chapter for approval of a subdivision
plat, site plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning variance, or
direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or 40:55D-36
(MLUL). (§ 94-2.3)
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS—A document issued by the Land Use
Board demonstrating its review of any alteration or addition to a designated historic
site, or to a property within the Historic District. (§ 94-2.3)
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land. (§ 94-2.3)
DEVELOPMENT — For the purpose of this chapter and article, the division
of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction,
conversion, structural alterations, relocation, or enlargement of any building or
structure for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. (MLUL). (§ 94-2.3)
DEVELOPMENT, PLANNED — Unit development, planned unit residential
development, residential cluster, planned commercial developments, or planned
industrial development. (RSIS)
ESCROW — A deed, bond, money, or piece of property delivered to the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough, to be delivered by him to the grantee only upon
fulfillment of a condition. (§ 94-2.3)
ESCROW ACCOUNT — Any fees deposited by an applicant to pay for the
municipally incurred expenses in the review of an application or inspection of
a property under development, and the accounting entries used to keep track of
expenditures. (§ 94-2.3)
§ 94-3.13 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.14
94:67
FEES — Fees to be charged an applicant for review of an application for
development by a municipal agency in accordance with this chapter and pursuant
to the MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.
MLUL — Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan. (RSIS)
SITE PLAN, MINOR — A development plan of one or more lots which:
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land for sale or development. The
following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of these rules if
no streets are created: divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
divisions of property upon court order, including, but not limited to, judgments of
foreclosure; consolidation of lots by deed or other recorded instrument of one or
more adjoining lots, tracts, or parcels of land owned by the same person or persons,
all of which are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the
requirements of the municipal development rules and are shown and designated as
separate lots, tracts, or parcels on the Official Tax Map of the Borough. The term
"subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision." (§ 94-2.3)
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR—Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.
(§ 94-2.3)
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land for the creation of a number of
lots specifically permitted by ordinance as a minor subdivision; provided that such
subdivision does not involve:
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including, but not limited to,
topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes, and waterways;
(1)
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces,
walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services,
landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, and screening devices; and
(2)
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to make
an informed determination pursuant to the ordinance requiring review and
approval of site plans by the Land Use Board adopted pursuant to MLUL
Article 6.
(3)
Proposes the development within the scope of development specifically
permitted by this chapter as a minor site plan;
(1)
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension of any
off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to the MLUL, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42; and
(2)
Contains the information reasonably required in order to make an informed
determination as to whether the requirements established by ordinance for
approval of a minor site plan have been met. (MLUL)
(3)
(1) A planned development;
§ 94-3.14 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.14
94:68
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of zoning
regulations of this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40b, 40:55D-70c and
40:55D-70d (MLUL). (§ 94-8.2-3)
ZONING LETTER — A document signed by the Zoning Officer prepared in
response to requests from homeowners, business owners, prospective purchasers,
attorneys, mortgage lenders, banks, etc., for zoning information related to property,
e.g., zone designation, zoning district regulations, permitted uses, and existing
zoning violations.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer:
(2) Any new street; or
The extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated
pursuant to the MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2.
(3)
Which is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement
of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or conversion
of a structure or building; and
(1)
Which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the
provisions of the Municipal Zoning Ordinance or variance therefrom duly
authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to the MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60
and 40:55D-70. (§ 94-2.3)
(2)
B. Policy. A copy of the Fee Ordinance, § 94-3.14, shall be furnished to any person
upon request and payment of a fee(s) in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection P, Document charges and reproduction fees. Exemption: Pursuant to the
MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8, a Board of Education shall be exempted from the
payment of any fee charged.
C. Application filing fees. Fees for documents signed by the Zoning Officer,
applications or for the rendering of any services by the Land Use Board shall be as
provided in Chapter 94, § 94-3.4. An applicant shall, at the time of filing an
application for development, as defined above in Subsection A, pay a
nonrefundable fee to the Borough of Shrewsbury by cash, certified check or bank
draft. Failure to submit payment or the submission of checks that are found to be
improperly drawn will cause an application to be deemed incomplete and a hearing
on the application to be delayed. The fee to be paid shall be the sum of the fees for
the component elements of the plat or plan. Proposals requiring a combination of
approvals, such as subdivision, site plan and/or variances, shall pay a fee equal to
the sum of the fee for each element. These fees are in addition to escrow fees
required in Chapter 94, § 94-3.15, Deposits and escrows.
D. Fees for documents issued by Zoning Officer.
(1) Zoning letter.
(a) Residential development: $65.
(b) Nonresidential development: $135.
(2) Zoning permit.
§ 94-3.14 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.14
94:69
(a) Residential development: $65.
(b) Nonresidential development: $135.
E. Fees for application for developments and other requests for approval by the Land
Use Board shall be as follows:
(1) Informal reviews: $290. (NOTE: Such fees to be a credit toward the fee for
any future applications for the same development proposal filed within one
year of the date of the informal review.)
(2) Application for certificate of appropriateness: $200. (NOTE: Such fee to be a
credit toward the fees for review of the application, issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness and for the preparation of a resolution memorializing the
findings of fact and conclusion of the Land Use Board.) (MLUL, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10).
(3) Subdivisions.
(a) Minor subdivision:
[1] Application fee: $575, plus $145 for each lot.
(b) Major subdivisions:
[1] Preliminary plat application fee: $575, plus $120 for each lot.
[2] Final plat application fee: $575, plus $60 for each lot.
(4) Site plans.
(a) Minor site plan application fee: $575.
(b) Major site plan:
[1] Preliminary minimum:
[a] Application fee: $860, plus:
[i] For each dwelling unit: $60 per unit.
[ii] Nonresidential: $1,150 plus total of applicable
components:
[A] For each 1,000 square feet of affected lot area:
First 50,000 square feet: $6 per 1,000 square feet.
Over 50,000 square feet: $3 per 1,000 square feet.
[B] For each full 1,000 square feet of proposed new gross
floor area:
First 50,000 square feet: $30 per 1,000 square feet.
Over 50,000 square feet: $12 per 1,000 square feet.
§ 94-3.14 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.14
94:70
[C] For each proposed new or additional parking space:
First 100 spaces: $20 per space.
Over 101 spaces: $6 per space.
[D] For each 1,000 square feet of remodeled existing
floor area: $10 per 1,000 square feet.
[E] For each reconstructed, resurfaced or improved
existing paved parking space: $6 per space.
[F] For each proposed freestanding sign: $6.
[2] Final approval for all uses: 50% of the fee for preliminary approval
as noted above.
F. Revised plats and site plans previously approved. Any proposed revisions to a plat
or site plan, including all supporting maps and documents, previously approved by
the Land Use Board, which approval is still in effect, shall require submission of a
revised plat and payment of fees in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Any proposed revisions to a previously approved plat or site plan where there
are minor changes in the plat proposed by the applicant or required by another
government agency, where approval was a condition of the Land Use Board
approval, which do not involve any additional building or parking or a
significant change in the design of the site or subdivision, an application fee
shall be required:
(a) Application fee: $250, along with sufficient copies of the plat
incorporating the changes as may be necessary for distribution.
(2) Where there are changes in the plat proposed by the applicant or required by
another governmental agency, where approval was a condition of the Land
Use Board approval, which involve additional building or parking or a
significant change in the design of the subdivision:
(a) An application fee shall be equal to 1/2 the fee for the initial submission,
along with sufficient copies of the plat incorporating the changes as may
be necessary for distribution.
(3) Where the proposed changes involve a change in use and/or major alteration
of the design concepts of the plat approval by the Land Use Board, it shall be
considered a new application and shall require the full payment of fees set
forth in this section for new applications for development.
(4) Where revisions in the plat only involve additional information required as a
condition of a previous approval, no additional fees shall be required.
G. Application for variances.
(1) Appeals of Zoning Officer's decisions: $290.
(2) Interpretations: $115.
§ 94-3.14 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.14
94:71
(3) Bulk "c" variance:
(a) Residential: $115, plus $30 per added variance.
(b) Other: $170, plus $65 per added variance.
(4) "d" variance:
(a) Proposed single- and/or two-family residential uses: $290.
(b) Uses other than Subsection G(4)(a), with floor areas totaling 5,000 feet or
less: $575.
(c) Uses other than Subsection G(4)(a), with floor areas totaling more than
5,000 feet: $860.
(5) Permit in conflict with Official Map or permit for lot related to a street: $345.
H. Conditional uses: $860, plus fees for site plan, variances or other fees listed above.
I. General development plan (GDP): $1,725.
J. Special meeting at applicant's request.
(1) Fees to be paid within seven days of receipt of notice of appeal meeting date:
$1,725.
K. Change of Master Plan or zone district.
(1) Application requests: $300, plus $60 per acre.
L. Environmental impact report (EIR).
(1) Fee for development applications for which an EIR is submitted pursuant to
§ 94-8.15: $300.
M. Certificates.
(1) Approval of subdivision: $120.
(2) Nonconforming use: $120.
N. Inspection fees.
(1) The developer shall reimburse the Borough for all reasonable fees paid to the
Borough Engineer for the inspection of improvements for major site plans and
subdivisions. The developer shall deposit such fees in an amount not to
exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of
the cost of improvements as estimated by the Borough Engineer based on
documented construction costs for public improvements prevailing in the
general area of the Borough.
(2) For those developments for which the inspection fees are less than $10,000,
fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in two installments. The initial
amount deposited by a developer shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When
the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount
§ 94-3.14 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.14
94:72
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the
Borough Engineer for inspection, the developer shall deposit the remaining
50% of the inspection fee.
(3) For those developers for which the inspection fees are $10,000 or greater, fees
may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four installments. The initial
amount deposited by a developer shall be 25% of the inspection fees. When
the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the
Borough Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make additional deposits
of 25% of the inspection fees.
(4) The Borough Engineer shall not perform any inspection if sufficient funds to
pay for these inspections are not on deposit.
§ 94-3.14 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.14
94:73
O. Tax Map revisions. Fees for Tax Map revision, where applicable, shall be placed in
the Borough Fund for Tax Map revisions to offset the cost of revisions.
(1) The applicant shall provide for a complete set of reproducible (Mylar) copies
of the approved plans and maps or maps filed with the Monmouth County
Clerk's office.
(2) The applicant shall provide a computer disc (CD) of all mapped subdivisions
in an electronic format, such as AutoCAD® or geographic information system
(GIS) shape file. (The actual cost for Tax Map revisions may be reduced if the
applicant's engineer furnishes a data disc of the filed subdivision that is
compatible with the Borough Engineer's computer system.)
(3) A nonrefundable Tax Map revision fee shall be placed in the Borough's Fund
for Tax Map revision to offset the cost of revisions. The Tax Map revision fees
shall be as follows:
(a) Multifamily or single-family lots, condominium units and commercial
units (minimum scale: one inch equals 100 feet):
[1] One to two lots: $250.
[2] Three to 25 lots: $750.
[3] Twenty-five to 100 lots: $1,250.
[4] 100 lots: $2,500.
(b) Commercial [B-1, B-2, B-3, HC/PO, AH-MF-8 (Affordable Housing
Multifamily) Zones].
[1] Revisions to existing Tax Map sheets: $350.
[2] New Tax Map sheet: $1,500.
NOTE: The actual cost for Tax Map revisions may be reduced if the
applicant's engineer can furnish data disks of subdivisions which are
compatible with the Borough Engineer's computer system.
P. Document charges and reproduction fees.
(1) N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., the Open Public Records Act (OPRA).
(a) In compliance with OPRA, government records shall be made accessible
for copying, with certain statutory exceptions. A request must be made in
writing and hand-delivered, mailed, transmitted electronically, or
otherwise conveyed to the Borough Clerk, the designated custodian of
public records.
(b) The custodian shall fulfill a request as soon as possible but not later than
seven business days after the request is received, provided that the record
is currently available and not in storage or archived. If the government
record is in storage or archived, the custodian shall so advise the requester
when the record will be made available.
§ 94-3.14 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.14
94:74
(c) Whenever the in-house municipal work force or available municipal
equipment is insufficient to duplicate or produce government records in a
timely fashion, the custodian may cause such duplication or production to
be accomplished by the Borough Engineer or Borough Planning Director
or outside vendors, such as copy centers or producers of engineer digital
images, or to be accomplished by other professionals. If the costs of such
duplication or production charged by such offices/vendors exceeds
charges set forth in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5 (OPRA), the actual cost of same,
without any additional surcharge for labor costs, shall be paid.
(d) Deposit/prepayment. A deposit shall be paid prior to filing where it is
estimated that the information requested will cost in excess of $5 to
reproduce. Prepayment is required when the request is voluminous,
unusual or requires the use of a vendor or services of a professional.
(e) Supplemental charges. Cost of any travel necessitated for the
reproduction of records shall be added for any and all records. Any
postage or shipping charges shall be added for any and all records to be
sent by mail or delivery service, if so requested.
(f) If the custodian is unable to comply with a request for access, the
custodian shall indicate the specific reason for denying access on the
request form and promptly return a copy to the requester.
(2) Fee schedule for reproductions and documents:
(a) The fees of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5 (OPRA) are hereby incorporated herein as
such fee schedule presently exists or as such fees might appear in future
modifications or amendments of the statute for copies of standard-sized
paper documents up to 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches in size:
[1] One page to 10 pages: $0.75 per page.
[2] Eleven pages to 20 pages: $0.50 per page.
[3] All over 21 pages: $0.25 per page.
(b) Standard-sized documents sent via email and/or facsimile transmission:
[1] One page to 10 pages: $0.75 per page.
[2] Eleven pages to 20 pages: $0.50 per page.
[3] All over 21 pages: $0.25 per page.
(c) Large-sized documents and maps:
[1] Fee for photocopy of a black-and-white document, 11 inches by 17
inches in size: $1.50 per page.
(d) Preprinted documents.
[1] Fees for printed books, manuals, periodicals, pamphlets,
supplements, and/or binders in hard or soft cover or spiral-bound
§ 94-3.14 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.14
94:75
shall be based on the actual cost charged to the Borough of
Shrewsbury.
[2] Preprinted documents include, but are not limited to: Shrewsbury
Administrative Code Books (General Legislation, Zoning and Land
Development), Master Plan, Environmental Resource Inventory
and/or printed pamphlets or supplements derived from same.
(e) Record of Borough meeting: $75 per meeting.
(f) Copy of electronic documents or database. The following fees cover the
cost of copying existing files to a floppy disk or CD-ROM sent via email.
Any requests for software conversions shall be subject to the special
service charge described below. For security reasons, the use of floppy
disks or CD-ROMs provided by the provider is prohibited.
[1] Floppy disks: $75 plus cost of disk ($0.50 each).
[2] CD-ROM: $75 plus cost of CD ($3 each).
(g) Cost of reproductions of GIS data. Topographic price list (based on 100
scale) of any GIS data owned by the Borough of Shrewsbury shall be as
follows:
[1] 8 1/2 by 11 photocopy, 21 acres: $252.
[2] 8 1/2 by 14 photocopy, 27 acres: $324.
[3] 11 by 17 photocopy, 43 acres: $516.
[4] 15 by 20 photocopy, 69 acres (1/2 sheet): $714.
[5] 20 by 30 photocopy, 138 acres (one full sheet): $1,090.
(h) Conversion of paper text to electronic form: $5 per page plus service
charge.
(i) Special service charges.
[1] A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual
cost of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner of
collation or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be
reproduced by ordinary copying equipment in ordinary business size
or where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time
and effort to accommodate the request. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special charge prior to it
being incurred.
[2] The actual cost (materials and supplies) of duplication or
reproduction, plus a special service charge of $35 per hour or the
actual direct cost of labor (if more), shall be imposed for each hour
of extraordinary time predicted to be utilized to respond to the
request.
§ 94-3.14 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.15
94:76
§ 94-3.15. Deposits and escrows. [Added 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811; amended
12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
Payments to professionals for review of subdivision, site plan and variance applications
before the Land Use Board.
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IN-HOUSE PROFESSIONALS — Engineers, planners, attorneys and other
professionals whose salary, staff support and overhead are provided by the Borough
of Shrewsbury.
OUTSIDE PROFESSIONALS — Engineers, planners, attorneys and other
professionals whose salary, staff support, and overhead are not provided by the
Borough of Shrewsbury. "Outside professionals" shall include, without limitation,
consultants who are not normally utilized by the Borough of Shrewsbury or the
reviewing board when an application presents issues which are beyond the scope
of the expertise of the professionals who normally serve the reviewing board or
Borough.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Time spent by a professional engineer,
professional planner, attorney, traffic expert or other professional in connection
with review of an application and/or review and preparation of documents in
regard to such application. In appropriate cases, such services shall include, without
limitation:
Review of plans, reports, relevant ordinance provisions, statutory law, case
law, and prior approvals for the same parcel.
(1)
Issuance of reports setting forth recommendations resulting from the review of
any documents submitted by the applicant.
(2)
Charges for any telephone conference or meeting requested by the applicant,
his attorney or any of his experts.
(3)
(4) Preparation for and attendance at special meetings.
(5) Inspections.
Preparation of resolutions, developer's agreements, review or preparation of
easements, deeds and/or other documents.
(6)
B. Professional review costs. Professional review costs for the attorney, planner,
engineer, or other professional or expert retained on behalf of the Borough of
Shrewsbury for the purpose of review, analysis, inspection or preparation of
documents shall be charged to and shall be paid by the applicant. The Shrewsbury
Chief Financial Officer shall make all of the payments to professionals for services
rendered to the Borough or approving authority for review of applications for
development, review and preparation of documents, inspections or other purposes
under the provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. Such fees or charges shall be based
upon the schedule of fees herein.
(1) Components of fees.
§ 94-3.15 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.15
94:77
(a) Each applicant shall pay to the Borough of Shrewsbury a review fee in
connection with:
[1] Each application for development;
[2] Each application for amendment to or extension of any development
approval;
[3] Any request for a zoning change or recommendation of a zone
change;
[4] Any request for amendment of the Master Plan; and/or
[5] Any request for concept review of a development approval.
(b) The review fee shall be equal to the sum of the following two
components:
[1] The dollar amount of all charges by outside professionals (as defined
herein) for professional services rendered to the Borough and/or the
reviewing board in connection with the application, plus all actual
out-of-pocket disbursements incurred in regard to such services. All
charges for services by each outside professional shall be billed at
the same rate as all other work of the same nature performed by such
professional for the Borough when fees are not reimbursed or
otherwise imposed on the applicant. Charges for professional
services of outside professionals shall be based upon a schedule of
fees established by resolution of the Borough Council, in the case of
professionals retained by the Borough. Such schedules shall be
subject to revision from time to time in the discretion of the Borough
Council; and
[2] The dollar amount of the hourly base salary of each in-house
professional (as defined herein), who has rendered professional
services to the Borough and/or the reviewing board in connection
with the application, which shall not exceed 200% of the sum of the
products resulting from multiplying: a) the hourly base salary, which
shall be established annually by ordinance of each of the
professionals, by b) the number of hours spent by the respective
professionals upon review of the application for development or
inspection of the developer's improvements, as the case may be.
(2) Limitations on scope of charges for professional services.
(a) All charges for professional services shall be reasonable and necessary
given the status and progress of the application. Such charges shall be
made only in connection with:
[1] An application which is presently pending before a reviewing board;
[2] Review of an applicant's compliance with conditions of approval;
and/or
§ 94-3.15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.15
94:78
[3] Review of an applicant's request for modification or amendment of
an application or approval.
(b) A professional shall not review items which are subject to approval by a
state governmental agency and which are not under municipal
jurisdiction, except to the extent that consultation with a state agency is
necessary due to the effect of a state approval on the applicant's
application.
(c) If the Borough or the reviewing board shall retain a different professional
in place of the professional originally responsible for review of an
application, the Borough or the reviewing board, as the case may be, shall
be responsible for all time and expenses of the new professional to
become familiar with the application. Neither the Borough nor the
reviewing board shall charge the applicant or the applicant's escrow
account for such services.
(d) Neither the Borough nor reviewing board shall bill an applicant, or charge
the applicant's escrow account, for any municipal clerical or
administrative functions, overhead expenses, meeting room charges or
other municipal costs and expenses, except as provided for in this
subsection, nor shall any professional add any such charges to his bill.
(3) Payment of escrow fees; payments to professionals for review of subdivision,
site plan and variance applications for review with the Land Use Board. At the
time of filing an application, the applicant shall pay the deposit in accordance
to the following schedule:
(a) Informal review.
[1] Fifteen minutes without professional review: $0.
[2] Any additional appearances and/or any appearance with professional
review: $1,000.
(b) Subdivision.
[1] Minor subdivision plat: $500 per lot.
[2] Preliminary major subdivision plat: $500 per lot.
[3] Final major subdivision plat: $250 per lot.
[4] Amended minor, amended preliminary major, and/or amended final
major subdivision plat: $250 per lot.
[5] Request for approval:
[a] With professional review: $100 per lot.
[b] Without professional review: $0.
(c) Site plan.
[1] Minor site plan, the greater of affected lot area:
§ 94-3.15 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.15
94:79
[a] Proposed building area: $2 per square foot.
[b] Proposed lot: $1 per square foot.
[2] Major site plan.
[a] Preliminary site plan:
[i] Nonresidential:
Proposed Building Area
(square feet) Amount
Up to 5,000 $5,000
5,001 to 10,000 $9,000
10,001 to 17,000 $13,900
17,001 to 25,000 $18,700
25,001 to 50,000 $26,200
50,001 to 100,000 $33,700
For every square foot over
100,000
Add $0.10 per square
foot
[ii] Residential.
Number of Units Amount
First 10 $300 per unit
Next 40 $200 per unit
Next 50 $100 per unit
Every unit over 100 $50 per unit
[iii] When no building improvements are proposed, the
required escrow fee per square foot of proposed lot
improvements shall be $1 per square foot.
[iv] Health care/institutional: $150 per bed.
[b] Final major site plat: 20% of preliminary fees.
[c] Amended site plans:
[i] Final site plan: 20% of preliminary fees.
[ii] Minor site plan: 75% of original fee.
[iii] Preliminary major site plan: 75% of original fee.
(d) Variances.
[1] Appeals: $1,000.
§ 94-3.15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.15
94:80
[2] Interpretations: $1,000.
[3] Dimensional or "c" variances:
[a] Residential without impervious coverage: $250.
[b] Residential with impervious coverage: $500.
[c] Nonresidential with site plan/subdivision plat: $50 each
variance.
[d] Nonresidential without site plan/subdivision plat: $500.
[4] "d" variances: $2,500.
(e) Other.
[1] General development plan (GDP): $5,000.
[2] Zoning permit: $500.
[3] Conditional use: $500.
[4] Request for Master Plan amendment: $2,000.
[5] Change of use (no site improvement): $1,000.
[6] Grading plan: $500.
(4) Custody of deposits; procedure for payments against deposits; submission of
vouchers; monthly statements.
(a) Custody of deposits. All review fee deposits shall be placed into an
escrow account, which account shall be maintained by the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough of Shrewsbury. The Chief Financial
Officer shall make all payments from the escrow account.
(b) Procedure for payments. All payments charged to an applicant's escrow
account shall be pursuant to vouchers from the professionals performing
professional services in connection with the application. All vouchers
shall identify the professional performing the services, the dates when
services were performed, the hours spent to one-quarter-hour increments,
the hourly rate, and the expense incurred.
(c) Submission of vouchers. All outside professionals shall submit vouchers
to the Chief Financial Officer on a monthly basis. A copy of the vouchers
shall be sent to the applicant simultaneously. All in-house professionals
shall submit to the Chief Financial Officer on a monthly basis a statement
containing the same information as the voucher of an outside
professional. A copy of the statement shall be sent to the applicant
simultaneously.
(d) Monthly statements. The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send
to the applicant on a monthly basis a statement providing an accounting
of the applicant's escrow account. The accounting shall include all
§ 94-3.15 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.15
94:81
deposits made, interest earned, disbursements made, and cumulative
deposit balance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if monthly charges to an
applicant's deposit are $1,000 or less, such statement may be provided by
the Chief Financial Officer on a quarterly basis.
(5) Replenishing of deposits.
(a) The determination of insufficiency shall be made by the Chief Financial
Officer based on the remaining work. Furthermore, as used herein, a
"reasonable time period" for the posting of additional funds to the escrow
account shall be not longer than 15 days after the date of the Chief
Financial Officer's insufficiency notice. The applicant shall be deemed to
agree to the terms of the insufficiency notice unless, within 15 days after
the date of such notice, the applicant shall deliver to the Chief Financial
Officer a written notice of objection.
(b) If the applicant timely files such an objection, the applicant shall have the
right to pay the amount requested under protest and the right to challenge
same in the Superior Court, Law Division, in an action in lieu of
prerogative writs filed within 45 days after the applicant's receipt of the
Chief Financial Officer's final accounting with respect to the applicant's
technical review fee deposit.
(c) If the applicant fails to timely pay (under protest or otherwise) the amount
requested, the Borough, the reviewing board, and all professionals shall
have the right to cease further work on the application immediately, and
the reviewing board shall have the right to deny without prejudice any
pending application, because of the applicant's failure to post additional
escrow fees needed for the proper review of such application. In no event
shall any approved plans be signed or delivered to the applicant, nor shall
any construction permits, certificates of occupancy, or other approvals or
authorizations be issued to an applicant, when there exists any deficiency
in the applicant's escrow account.
(6) Escrow closeout procedures; escrow account interest.
(a) Escrow closeout procedures.
[1] The following closeout procedure shall apply to all deposits and
escrow accounts established under the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. and shall commence after the approving authority
has granted final approval and signed the subdivision plat or site
plan in the case of application review escrows and deposits, or after
the improvements have been approved as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53 in the case of improvement inspection escrows and
deposits.
[2] The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough and the approving authority, and to
the relevant Borough professional, that the application or
improvements, as the case may be, are completed. After receipt of
such notice, the professional shall render a final bill to the Chief
§ 94-3.15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.15
94:82
Financial Officer within 30 days and shall send a copy
simultaneously to the applicant.
[3] The Chief Financial Officer shall render a written accounting to the
applicant on the uses to which the deposit was put within 45 days of
receipt of the final bill. Any balances remaining in the deposit or
escrow account, including interest in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1, shall be refunded to the developer along with the final
accounting.
(b) Escrow account interest.
[1] Whenever an amount of money in excess of $5,000 shall be
deposited by the applicant with the Borough for professional fees,
for inspection fees, or to satisfy the requirement for a performance
guaranty or the requirement for any maintenance guaranty pursuant
to this chapter, such money, until repaid, or applied for the purposes
for which it was deposited, including the applicant's portion of the
interest earned thereon, shall continue to be the property of the
applicant and shall be held by the Borough, except as otherwise
provided in this section.
[2] The Borough shall deposit such money in a banking institution or
savings and loan association located in the State of New Jersey and
insured by an agency of the federal government or in any other fund
or depository approved for such deposits by the State of New Jersey.
Such monies shall be maintained in an account bearing interest at the
minimum rate currently paid by such depository on a time or savings
account.
[3] The Borough shall notify the applicant in writing of the name and
address of the institution or depository in which such deposit is made
and the amount of the deposit. The Borough shall not be required to
refund an amount of interest paid on a deposit that does not exceed
$100 for any year; that entire amount shall belong to the applicant
and shall be refunded to the applicant by the Borough annually, or at
the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purposes for which it
was deposited, as the case may be. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary above, the Borough may retain for administrative expenses
a sum equal to 33 1/3% of the annual interest earned by such deposit.
The amount so retained shall be in lieu of all other administrative
and custodial expenses charged.
(7) Applicant notification on dispute of escrow charges; appeals: rules and
regulations.
(a) Applicant notification.
[1] An applicant shall notify the Borough Council in writing, with
copies to the Chief Financial Officer, the approving authority and
the professional, whenever an applicant disputes the charges made
by a professional for service rendered to the Borough in reviewing
§ 94-3.15 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-3.15
94:83
applications for development, review and preparation of documents,
inspection of improvements, or other charges made pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The Borough Council, or its designee,
shall, within a reasonable time period, attempt to remedy any
disputed charges.
[2] If the matter is not resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, the
applicant may appeal to the County Construction Board of Appeals
established under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. An applicant or his
authorized agent shall submit the appeal in writing to the Monmouth
County Construction Board of Appeals. The applicant or his
authorized agent shall simultaneously send a copy to the Borough
approving authority and any professional whose charge is the
subject of the appeal.
[3] An applicant shall file an appeal within 45 days from receipt of the
informational copy of the professional's voucher required by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2. An applicant may file an appeal for an
ongoing series of charges by a professional during a period not
exceeding six months to demonstrate that they represent a pattern of
excessive or inaccurate charges. An application making use of this
provision need not appeal each charge individually.
(b) Appeals: rules and regulations.
[1] During the pendency of any appeal, the Borough or approving
authority shall continue to process, hear and decide the application
for development, and to inspect the development in the normal
course, and shall not withhold, delay, or deny reviews, inspections,
signing of subdivision plats or site plans, the reduction or the release
of performance or maintenance guarantees, the issuance of
construction permits or certificates of occupancy, or any approval or
permit because of an appeal that has been filed or is pending under
this section.
[2] The Chief Financial Officer of the Borough may pay charges out of
the appropriate escrow account or deposit for which an appeal has
been filed. If a charge is disallowed after payment, the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough shall reimburse the deposit or
escrow account in the amount of any disallowed charge or refund the
amount to the applicant. If a charge is disallowed after payment to a
professional or consultant who is not an employee of the Borough,
the professional or consultant shall reimburse the Borough in the
amount of any such disallowed charges.
§ 94-3.15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-3.15
94:84
ARTICLE IV
Nonconforming Uses, Lots and Buildings
§ 94-4.1. Continuance of nonconforming uses and use of undersized lots.
[Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
§ 94-4.2. Abandonment.
§ 94-4.3. Restoration.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the lawful use of the land or a building
existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may be continued although such
use or building does not conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the
zone in which such land or building is located; provided, however, that:
(1) No nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size.
(2) No nonconforming building shall be enlarged, extended or increased unless
such enlargement is conforming.
(3) No nonconforming use may be expanded.
B. Certificate of nonconformance.
(1) The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee or any other person
interested in any land upon which a nonconforming use or structure exists may
apply in writing for the issuance of a certificate certifying that the use or
structure existed before the adoption of the ordinance which rendered the use
or structure nonconforming in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68. The
applicant shall have the burden of proof.
(2) Application pursuant hereto may be made to the administrative officer (Zoning
Officer) within one year of the adoption of the ordinance which rendered the
use or structure nonconforming or at any time to the Land Use Board. The
administrative officer (Zoning Officer) shall collect a fee for such certificates
in accordance with § 94-3.14 of this chapter. Denial by the administrative
officer shall be appealable to the Land Use Board in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-72 through 40:55D-75 and §§ 94-3.1 and 94-3.3 of this chapter.
A. A nonconforming use shall be deemed to be abandoned where there is:
(1) An intention to abandon; as well as
(2) An external act (or omission to act) by which such intention is carried into
effect.
B. It shall be prima facie evidence that a nonconforming use has been abandoned when
there occurs a cessation of such use on the part of a tenant or owner for a continuous
period of at least one year.
C. When a nonconforming use has been abandoned, such use shall not thereafter be
reinstated, and any structure shall not thereafter be reoccupied, except in
conformance with this chapter.
§ 94-4.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-4.3
94:85
§ 94-4.4. Reversion.
No nonconforming use shall, if once changed to a conforming use, be changed again to
a nonconforming use. No nonconforming use shall be changed to or substituted for any
other nonconforming use.
§ 94-4.5. Alterations and additions. [Amended 5-11-1998 by Ord. No. 748]
§ 94-4.6. Prior approved construction.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or designated
use of a building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued and the
construction of which shall have been diligently prosecuted within three months of the
A. If any nonconforming structure shall be more than partially destroyed, then the
structure may not be rebuilt, restored or repaired, except in conformity with this
chapter.
B. Destruction to the extent that rebuilding, repair or restoration requires removal or
demolition of any remaining portions of the damaged part of the structure, such that
the only major components of the original structure utilized in such building, repair
or restoration are the foundation or exterior walls, shall be prima facie evidence that
the structure has been more than partially destroyed.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring of any portion
of a structure which has been declared unsafe by the Construction Official.
A. Alterations, as applied to a nonconforming structure, shall only include a change or
rearrangement in the structural supports or a change in the exterior appearance of a
structure. A nonconforming structure may be altered, provided that the cost of
alterations does not exceed, in the aggregate, 50% of the assessed value of the
structure as recorded in the records of the Tax Assessor. More substantial
alterations are not permitted unless the structure is changed to conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
B. A nonconforming structure may not be enlarged, extended, increased in height,
width or depth, moved or relocated, modified in such a way so as to increase
habitable or usable space, number of dwelling units or number of bedrooms; unless
such structure is changed to a structure conforming to the requirements of this
chapter except that an existing one-family structure may be enlarged, extended or
added to, provided:
(1) The enlargement, extension or addition conforms to all zone requirements; or
(2) The portion of the enlargement, extension or addition which does not conform
to zone requirements consists entirely of the enclosure of existing side or rear
porches; or
(3) The portion of the enlargement, extension or addition which does not conform
to zone requirements is located entirely to the rear of the existing
nonconforming structure, has a side yard setback not less than the existing
nonconforming structure and conforms to all other bulk requirements.
§ 94-4.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-4.6
94:86
date of such permit, and the ground story framework of which, including the second tier
of beams, shall have been completed within six months of the date of the permit, and
which entire building shall be completed according to such plans as filed within one year
from the date of the adoption of this chapter.
§ 94-4.7. District boundary changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one
district to another district of a different classification, the provisions of this chapter shall
also apply to any nonconforming uses existing therein or created thereby.
§ 94-4.6 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-4.7
94:87

ARTICLE V
General Provisions and Regulations
§ 94-5.1. Relationship to other ordinances.
Any restrictions or requirements with respect to buildings or land, which appear in other
ordinances of the Borough or are established by law and which are greater than those set
forth herein, shall take precedence over the provisions of this chapter.
§ 94-5.2. Application of regulations.
Except as herein otherwise provided:
§ 94-5.3. Lot depths within existing street patterns.
Wherever the depth of lots is established by existing street patterns in any residential
zone, the depth requirements of the zone may be waived as long as all setback lines are
maintained.
§ 94-5.4. Frontage on improved street required.
A. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved,
structurally altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be designed,
used or intended to be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as specified
among the uses hereinafter listed as permitted in the zone district in which such
building or land is located and meeting the requirements as set forth in the
Schedule.64
B. No building shall be erected, no existing buildings shall be altered, enlarged or
rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or
reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the yard, lot area, building
location, percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking space and such other
regulations hereinafter designated in this chapter for the zone district in which such
building or open space is located.
C. No off-street parking area, loading or unloading area provided to meet the minimum
off-street parking, loading or unloading requirements for one use or structure shall
be considered as providing off-street parking, loading or unloading areas for a use
or structure on any other lot, unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
D. No subdivision may be approved unless each lot contained in said subdivision
complies with all the requirements of the zone district in which said lot is located,
or unless a variance has been granted therefrom.
E. No use shall be considered a permitted use or a conditional use in a zone district
unless included as such in the particular zone district.
A. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a public street
improved to meet the Borough requirements or for which such improvement has
been guaranteed by the posting of a performance guaranty pursuant to this chapter
64. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Zoning District Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-5.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.4
94:89
§ 94-5.5. Yard areas.
§ 94-5.6. (Reserved)65
unless relief has been granted under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
B. Where a building lot has frontage on a street, which the Master Plan or the Official
Map of the Borough indicates is proposed for right-of-way widening, the required
front yard setback shall be measured from such proposed right-of-way line.
A. No yard or other open space provided around any building for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a
yard or open space for any other buildings, and no yard or other open space on one
lot shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for a building on any other
lot.
B. All yards facing on a public street shall be considered front yards and shall conform
to the minimum front yard requirements for the zone in which located, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
C. Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed from its lowest level
to the sky, except for the ordinary projections allowed by the State Uniform
Construction Code, including but not limited to sills, belt courses, chimneys, flues,
buttresses, ornamental features and eaves; provided, however, that none of the
aforesaid projections shall project into the minimum required yards more than 24
inches, unless otherwise permitted by this chapter. Unroofed entrance porches or
terraces, which do not rise above the height of the floor level of the ground floor,
may extend into any yard, provided that the total area of all such porches, which
extend into such yards, does not exceed 1,000 square feet.
D. All residential lots shall provide a rear yard. Where a lot does not have a rear lot
line, the rear yard shall occupy a space between the side lot lines and required front
yard lines. The minimum depth of said yard shall be equal to the required minimum
rear yard depth, and the minimum width of said yard shall be equal to 1/2 the actual
lot width. [Added 6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 644]
E. Where an excessively narrow building envelope would result from multiple street
frontages where a lot dimension is less than 100 feet, the required front yard depth
shall be reduced as follows: [Added 6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 644]
(1) In the R-4 Zone, one yard may be reduced to 25 feet; and in the R-4.5 Zone,
one yard may be reduced to 20 feet; and in the R-5 Zone, one yard may be
reduced to 15 feet; or
(2) In any zone, the required front yard depth may be reduced to 50% of the lot
dimension, but in no case shall it be reduced to less than 20 feet.
F. The required front yard depth may be reduced where a zone which permits a lesser
depth adjoins a side lot line. The reduced depth shall apply for that portion of the
lot which lies within 100 feet of the zone line and lies on the same street. [Added
6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 644]
§ 94-5.4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.7
94:90
§ 94-5.7. Sight triangles at intersections.
§ 94-5.8. Accessory buildings and structures. [Amended 11-5-2007 by Ord. No.
904]
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, accessory buildings and structures shall
conform to the following regulations as to their use and locations on the lot:
A. Sight triangles shall be provided at the intersection of two or more streets, and no
hedge, fence, screening strip or wall higher than 30 inches above curb level, nor any
obstruction to vision, other than a post not exceeding one foot in diameter, shall be
permitted on any lot within the triangular area formed by two intersecting street
lines bounding said lot, or the projection of such lines, and by a line connecting a
point, on each line located 50 feet from the intersection of the street lines for
Borough streets and as required by Monmouth County for county roads and the
New Jersey Department of Transportation for state roads.
B. Sight triangle areas shall be maintained, trimmed or cleared in order to maintain
sight distance as required herein.
C. Sight triangle easements may be required in accordance with § 94-8.14C, Sight
triangle easements.
A. Uses of an accessory building or structure:
(1) The use of an accessory building or structure shall be incidental to the use of
the principal building.
(2) No accessory building shall be used for residence purposes except by domestic
employees of the owner or of the tenant of the principal building or premises.
(3) No accessory building that is intended to be occupied for dwelling purposes
shall be constructed before the principal building.
(4) An accessory building to be used to shelter vehicles shall be subject to the
provisions of § 94-8.19 regarding garages.
(5) A shed located in a residential zone may be used for the storage of
automobiles, equipment and materials incidental to the use of the principal
building but shall not be used for any business activity.
B. Location and other requirements for accessory buildings and structures:
(1) Accessory buildings and structures must be located on the same lot as the
principal use to which they are accessory.
(2) An accessory building or structure attached to a principal building shall
comply in all respects with the yard requirements of this chapter for the
principal building.
(3) Detached accessory buildings and structures, except for ornamental structures
as set forth in Subsection B(7) below, shall not be located in a front yard.
65. Editor's Note: Former § 94-5.6, Corner lots, was repealed 6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 644.
§ 94-5.7 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.8
94:91
§ 94-5.9. Building requirements. [Amended 6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 644]
(4) If located in a side or rear yard area, such buildings and structures containing
100 square feet or more shall be set back at least eight feet from all lot lines,
unless more specific provisions are set forth in the Schedule of Zoning
Regulations.66
(5) Storage sheds containing less than 100 square feet of floor area shall not be
located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line.
(6) Plantings are required within the required yard space between the shed and the
lot line.
(7) Ornamental structures may be constructed in the front yard, provided that such
structures do not exceed 30 inches in height and are no larger than three feet in
length and width and do not obstruct the area of the sight triangle at any
driveway from which vehicles exit.
(8) Lighting is subject to § 94-5.28.
(9) No more than four such structures are allowed for the entire frontage of the
property.
(10) Nothing herein shall amend or modify the provisions of § 183-9 of the Code
of the Borough of Shrewsbury regarding property maintenance and the height
of plantings.
(11) Structures shall not be located in a public right-of-way.
(12) Accessory buildings and structures may occupy not more than 25% of the rear
or side yard area in any residential zone.
(13) Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed 16 feet in height.
(14) No detached accessory building or structure, in any residential zone, shall be
less than five feet from the principal building.
(15) A shed shall have a roof and a secure door. The storage of equipment and
materials shall comply with the Uniform Fire Code.
(16) Plantings are subject to § 183-9 of the General Legislation of the Code of the
Borough of Shrewsbury.
A. Any lot utilized for single-family or two-family dwelling purposes shall not contain
more than one principal building.
B. The minimum gross floor area of buildings on any lot shall be as set forth in the
Schedule of Zoning District Regulations,67 except as follows:
(1) Any accessory building with less than 500 square feet of gross floor area shall
be excluded;
66. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
67. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Zoning District Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-5.8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.9
94:92
§ 94-5.10. Nonapplicability to underground utilities and essential services.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to customary underground essential
services, as defined in § 94-2.3, except that all facilities, such as pumping stations,
repeater stations and electric substations, which require a building above the ground or
any other aboveground appurtenance of any type more than 40 feet high, shall require
approval as a conditional use subject to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 94-5.11. Ownership of contiguous lots. [Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-1077]
Where two or more lots, created by the filing of a map pursuant to the Map Filing Law68
prior to establishment of the Land Use Board, have any contiguous lines and are in
single ownership and one or more of the lots is nonconforming in any aspect, the lots
involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter,
and no portion of said parcel shall be conveyed or divided except through the filing of
an approved subdivision in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 94-5.12. Height limitations. [Amended 4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 606; 12-7-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-1077]
No structure shall extend higher than the height limit provided in each zone except as
follows:
(2) Any cellar, garage, crawl space, unfinished attic area or unfinished space of
any nature shall be excluded; and
(3) Any finished space with a clear ceiling height of less than the minimum ceiling
height prescribed in the Building Code for the type of building concerned but
with a height of four feet or more shall be included, but such area may not
satisfy more than 10% of the requirement.
C. The maximum coverage of a lot by buildings shall be as set forth in the Schedule of
Zoning District Regulations and expressed as the percentage of total building area
to land area wherein:
(1) Total building area is the sum of all principal and accessory building areas as
measured within the perimeters circumscribing all above-grade enclosed
portions of each building; and
(2) Land area is the area of the lot less any area over which construction of
buildings or roadways is prohibited because of riparian lands, lakes, ponds,
tidelands, tidal wetlands, freshwater wetlands or the 100-year floodplain.
A. Projections from buildings are permitted as follows:
(1) The height limitations created hereunder shall not apply to ornamental
architectural features such as spires, belfries, cupolas or domes not used for
human occupancy or to parapets, walls or cornices extending not more than
four feet above the building height limit.
68. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 94-5.9 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.12
94:93
§ 94-5.13. Preservation of environmentally sensitive features. [Amended
12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 4-3-2006 by Ord. No. 866; 6-19-2006 by Ord. No. 874;
12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
(2) The height limitations created hereunder shall apply to architectural features
such as chimneys, skylights, stair towers and elevator towers, except that the
same may exceed said height limitations by not more than 15 feet but not more
than 25% of the height of the building. Such features shall not exceed, in total
coverage, 10% of the total roof area.
(3) The height limitations created hereunder shall apply to utilitarian features and
appurtenances such as heating and air-conditioning equipment, conventional
radio-television receiving antennas and ventilators and may exceed the height
limitation by no more than 10 feet but not more than 25% of the height of the
building. Such features shall not exceed, in total coverage, 10% of the total
roof area.
B. Freestanding structures are permitted as follows:
(1) All freestanding structures shall be set back from property lines a distance
equal to the height of said structures.
(2) Freestanding flagpoles may exceed the height limits created hereunder by not
more than 15 feet.
(3) Freestanding utilitarian features and appurtenances such as electrical
transformers, heating and air-conditioning equipment and radio-television
receiving antennas may not exceed three feet in height when located within
any required yard area. Such structures may not exceed 12 feet in height when
located within the allowable principal building setback lines.
(4) Amateur radio antennas may exceed the height permitted for principal
structures by 15 feet, provided that the diameter of the tower on which the
antenna is mounted does not exceed 10 inches. Amateur radio operators shall
submit a copy of their current FCC operator license and documentation of the
required antenna height and construction details for any antenna or tower to be
erected under this provision.
C. Accessory structures such as water towers and commercial radio and television
antennas may be erected to an additional height authorized by the Land Use Board
but only to such height which can be demonstrated is necessary to accomplish the
structure's intended function. Satellite dish antennas shall be subject to the
following:
(1) Demonstration by the applicant that compliance with height limitations would
result in the obstruction of the antenna's reception window and that,
furthermore, such obstruction is the result of obstructions which cannot be
removed by the applicant.
(2) Installations on or within 200 feet of property zoned or used residentially shall
not exceed 12 feet in diameter. Installations in other locations shall not exceed
12 meters in diameter.
§ 94-5.12 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.13
94:94
A. The purpose of this section is to provide for the reasonable control of development
in areas containing critical or sensitive environmental features, where improper
construction would result in negative or irreversible impact on the environment.
Development control shall be by means of special construction standards and
restrictions intended to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public
by minimizing adverse environmental impacts.
(1) The following natural features shall be considered environmentally sensitive
and shall be preserved in their natural state, unless specific approval is given
by the Land Use Board, based upon the recommendation of the Environmental
Commission, Shade Tree Commission, and Borough Engineer:
(a) Floodway or flood hazard areas as defined by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development Federal Insurance
Program Flood Rate Map, United States Army Corps of Engineers, and
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(b) Areas containing groupings of specimen trees of special historic or
ornamental value determined by the Environmental Commission or the
Shade Tree Commission.
(c) Existing blue-line streams, watercourses, ponds, marshes, and swamps.
(d) Freshwater wetlands and wetlands transition areas in accordance with the
New Jersey Wetlands Act of 1970, the Freshwater Wetlands Act of 1987,
and implementing regulations.69
(e) Flora and fauna on the New Jersey and/or Federal Endangered Species
Lists and trees included on the Unique Trees Map of the Shrewsbury
Borough Environmental Commission Natural Resources Inventory.
(2) Any construction activities proposed within any environmentally sensitive
areas outlined in § 94-5.13A(1) above shall be carried out in accordance with
applicable local, state, and federal regulations, only upon approval of the Land
Use Board. In considering development applications in these areas, the Board
may require the following:
(a) A complete site plan showing the location, development layout and
details, phasing, and method of construction. Special construction
methods to protect environmental features shall be identified.
(b) An environmental impact statement explaining the public need for the
facility, or the benefit to the community from the construction thereof,
along with the short- and long-range impacts on the environment.
(c) An alternatives analysis identifying what feasible alternatives may exist
to disturbances of environmentally sensitive lands or natural features.
B. Preservation of steep slope areas.
(1) Scope. These regulations apply to the disturbance of land and the construction
69. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 94-5.13 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.13
94:95
of permanent above- or below-grade structures, roads, driveways, parking
areas, and other physical improvements in regulated steep slope areas.
(2) Objective. The purpose of this subsection is to minimize stripping and grading
of steep slope areas as well as to minimize the disturbance of land and removal
of vegetative cover. Adherence to these regulations shall assist in the
preventing of soil erosion, siltation of streams, and other maintenance and
safety concerns.
(3) Definition and identification. A "regulated steep slope area" is defined as:
(a) Any land area that contains a naturally occurring slope that is greater than
or equal to 15% but less than 33.3%. Slope areas shall be identified based
upon a topographic survey of a site prepared by a professional land
surveyor, licensed in the State of New Jersey, using a maximum contour
interval of two feet.
(b) Any lands that contain naturally occurring or man-made slopes in excess
of 33.3%, as identified by the procedure outlined in Subsection B(3)(a)
above.
(c) Absent credible evidence verifying that existing slopes 15% and greater
are man-made, all slope areas of 15% and greater shall be considered
naturally occurring, and therefore regulated. Accepted forms of credible
evidence shall be limited to the following, which must be furnished at the
time of application:
[1] Previously approved site or subdivision plans as evidenced by a
resolution of the Land Use Board granting such approval.
[2] A grading plan specifically approved by the Borough Engineer.
[3] Historic aerial photographs of the site which demonstrate the
presence or absence of physical improvements or mature vegetation.
[4] Evidence of the absence of mature trees (greater than 12 inches in
diameter) in slope areas visible on aerial mapping of the site.
(4) Submission requirements. The below requirements shall be in addition to the
applicable submission checklists contained elsewhere in Chapter 94.70
(a) The applicant shall prepare a steep slope analysis by delineating on a
topographic map all lands with slopes equal to or greater than 15% but
less than 33.3%; and slopes 33.3% and greater, including identification of
the area(s) in square feet.
(b) If any limited or temporary disturbance is planned to a regulated steep
slope area, or if a steep slope area has been disturbed by prior land use, a
revegetation plan shall be provided. Permanent stabilization shall be
carried out in accordance with the standards for soil erosion in New
Jersey.
70. Editor's Note: The checklist for development applications is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-5.13 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.13
94:96
(5) Performance requirements. The following performance requirements
specifically apply to all lands which are the subject of an application for
development in the Borough of Shrewsbury:
(a) Any regrading of lands, including the placement of permanent above- or
below-grade structures, off-street parking areas, roadways, parking area
access drives, recreational facilities, or other physical improvements,
shall be prohibited in regulated slope areas, unless specifically permitted
elsewhere in this chapter.
(b) The regrading of lands to create slopes greater than 15% is prohibited,
except as specifically permitted elsewhere in the chapter, or by applicable
state or federal regulations, and contained in a site plan or subdivision
plan approved by the Land Use Board. Where the regrading of lands is
permitted at a slope greater than 15%, the area shall be stabilized in
accordance with standards for soil erosion and sediment control in New
Jersey.
(c) The use of retaining walls, not exceeding six feet in height, shall be
permitted as part of an overall site grading design, upon approval of the
Land Use Board. Where multiple retaining walls are proposed, the slope,
as measured from the top of a retaining wall to the top of an adjacent
retaining wall, shall not exceed 15%.
(d) An approved application for development on a property that contains
regulated slope areas shall provide a conservation easement for the
continued protection of the lands containing regulated slopes. The
conservation easement shall be perpetual, shall name the Borough of
Shrewsbury as beneficiary, shall prohibit the disturbance or regrading of
land or erection of any structures, including fences and walls, and shall
be confirmed by deed recorded with the County Clerk.
(e) Any disturbances to steep slope areas which are ancillary to a site
development plan that complies with the provisions of this chapter shall
be stabilized in accordance with the requirements of the Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey.
(6) Exceptions to performance requirements.
(a) Subsections B(5)(a) and (b) above do not apply if the aggregate total
disturbance of regulated steep slope area is under 500 square feet.
(b) Subsections B(5)(a) and (b) above do not apply if the disturbance is
needed for utility or drainage systems and no other alternative for their
location is available, in the opinion of the reviewing authority and based
on, among other considerations, the advice of the Board or Borough
Engineer.
(c) Subsections B(5)(a) and (b) above do not apply if the disturbance is due
to a drainage system and, in the opinion of the reviewing authority and
based on, among other considerations, the advice of the Board or
Borough Engineer, such system is beneficial in stabilizing the slope.
§ 94-5.13 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.13
94:97
§ 94-5.14. Riparian grants.
Whenever a person acquires title to the land underwater adjacent to his property by virtue
of a riparian grant from the State of New Jersey, then the grant area shall automatically
be zoned the same as the upland property adjacent to the grant; provided, however, that
any part of this grant not filled, graded and stabilized pursuant to a valid construction
permit shall not be applicable to meeting the minimum lot area for the governing zone.
§ 94-5.15. Easements.
Where applicable, the municipal agency shall require as a condition of subdivision or site
plan approval that the owner convey to the Borough, drainage easements, conservation
easements, sight triangle easements and/or shade tree and utility easements.
§ 94-5.16. Storage of solid waste. [Amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 574]
Solid wastes, if stored outdoors, shall be placed in metal or plastic receptacles with
tight-fitting covers. Such receptacles shall not be stored or placed within any front yard
area prior to the time at which solid wastes are permitted to be placed at the curbline
for collection. Such receptacles may be stored in either rear or side yard areas, but if
stored within a side yard area, they shall be screened from view of adjoining properties
and street areas with planting or fencing. Bulky household items, such as appliances,
furniture and mattresses, which are impractical to place in containers, are subject to the
same restrictions as other solid wastes. Solid wastes, including vehicle tires, which are to
be picked up shall conform to the requirements established by the Department of Public
Works for garbage and trash collection.
§ 94-5.17. Disposal of solid wastes.
The dumping of refuse, waste material or other substances is prohibited in all districts
within the municipality.
§ 94-5.18. Outdoor storage of materials.
No nonresidential use, with the exception of farms, shall store materials of any kind
outdoors in any district except in connection with the construction of a structure to be
erected on the premises unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
(d) Subsections B(5)(a) and (b) above do not apply to landscape berms or
detention basins, regulated under Chapter 94 or permitted by applicable
state regulations.
(e) The requirements of Subsections B(5)(a) and (b) above shall not apply to
site access driveways or streets, excluding parking areas, in such cases
where it can be adequately demonstrated that the literal enforcement of
the regulations would result in an undue hardship being exacted upon the
applicant and that no feasible alternative exists. The Land Use Board
shall review and approve or deny the request for such relief based upon,
among other considerations, advice of the Borough Environmental
Commission, Shade Tree Commission, and Borough Engineer.
§ 94-5.13 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.19
94:98
§ 94-5.19. Outdoor temporary display of goods. [Amended 9-14-1987 by Ord. No.
559]
§ 94-5.20. Professional office or home occupation.
§ 94-5.21. Appearance of nonresidential buildings. [Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-1077]
The exterior elevations shall be arranged and outer walls on nonresidential buildings
shall be faced with materials approved by the Land Use Board in conjunction with site
plan approval. The architecture of all buildings shall be compatible with structures on
adjacent lands and in the neighborhood.
§ 94-5.22. Storage of boats, travel trailers, recreational vehicles and storage vans.
[Amended 4-16-1996 by Ord. No. 713; 9-15-2003 by Ord. No. 815; 9-8-2009 by
Ord. No. 932]
A. Temporary sales and the outdoor display of goods may be permitted where the
goods displayed are the merchandise of a business included within a structure
located on the site. Such temporary sales and displays shall be in accordance with a
permit issued by the Zoning Officer. No business shall hold more than four such
sales per year, nor shall any one sale exceed three days in duration. Goods for sale,
displayed or stored outdoors, shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any street
right-of-way or 15 feet to any side or rear line. An applicant for a permit for a
temporary sales license shall be required to provide a diagram of the proposed
temporary sales and/or outdoor display of goods area and proof of liability
insurance for the proposed temporary sales and/or outdoor display of goods area.
The fee for the required permit is $25 per day.
B. Temporary flea markets and sales operated by nonprofit groups, such as churches,
may be permitted where the goods displayed are on a site which is already
developed as a principal use of the nonprofit group. Such sales shall be in
accordance with a permit issued by the Borough Clerk. No nonprofit group shall
hold more than four such sales per year, nor shall any one sale exceed three days in
duration. The fee for the required permit is $25 per day.
C. Coin-operated vending machines shall not be located farther than two feet from a
related business structure.
A. For approved dwellings with a professional office or home occupation and within
the designated area of a P-1 Zone District, no building with a professional office
shall be constructed or altered so as to be inharmonious to the character of
residential structures.
B. The types of construction not considered to be residential in character include
storefront types of construction, garage doors (larger than needed for passenger
vehicles or light commercial vehicles) and unfinished concrete blocks or cinder
block wall surfaces.
A. Residential properties. The outdoor storage of an unoccupied recreational vehicle,
storage van, motor home, travel trailer, camper or small boat shall be permitted on
§ 94-5.19 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.22
94:99
§ 94-5.23. Parking or storage of commercial vehicles.
single-family properties, provided that:
(1) A travel trailer, camper, storage van, or small boat shall not exceed 28 feet in
length and eight feet in width.
(2) Only one such travel trailer or camper, one storage van, and one small boat
shall be permitted to be stored outdoors at any single-family residence.
(3) Such storage shall not be located in any front yard. During the boating season
(April 1 to November 1) of each year, boats may be parked in the driveway of
designated areas.
(4) Any such vehicles stored in accordance with this section shall not be occupied
and shall not be provided with utility connections.
(5) Permanent or temporary overnight occupancy or use of a trailer, travel trailer,
motor home, boat or recreational vehicle is not permitted in any zone, except
that, in emergency situations, such occupancy or use may be permitted by the
Borough Council for a period not to exceed 60 days. For good cause shown,
the Council may extend the period of occupancy.
(6) Storage vans shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 60 days. For good
cause shown, this period may be extended by the Borough Council.
(7) Trailers of contractors actively engaged in construction work, pods, and
storage units being used for construction purposes, provided that said trailers,
pods and storage units are located on the property owned by the resident and
not in the Borough right of way or in any roadway, and are removed within 60
days of the completion of said construction.
(8) There shall be no more than two containers, trailers, pods, or dumpsters at any
one given time.
B. Nonresidential properties.
(1) A storage van shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 60 days. For good
cause shown, the Borough Council may extend the period of use.
(2) The Fire Marshal shall approve the location of the storage van.
C. Permit required.
(1) Permits for the following must be issued by the Zoning Officer prior to use:
(a) Temporary use of storage vans.
(b) Temporary occupancy of a recreational vehicle, camper trailer, motor
home or boat by a resident.
(2) There shall be a $25 fee for a permit and a $5 fee for each extension.
[Amended 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
A. No commercial motor vehicle having a rated maximum gross vehicle weight
§ 94-5.22 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.23
94:100
§ 94-5.24. Wetlands permit. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
No building, structure or use shall be permitted within areas defined as wetlands by
the New Jersey Wetlands Act of 1970 and the Freshwater Wetlands Act of 198771
and delineated on the wetlands maps prepared by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or delineated in accordance with regulations promulgated
under the Act, except in accordance with a permit issued under the Act.
§ 94-5.25. Soil erosion and sediment control.
§ 94-5.26. Noncommercial radio and television antennas.
§ 94-5.27. Floodplain management. [Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
Within a flood hazard area designated pursuant to Article X, § 94-10.13B, and regulated
pursuant to § 94-10.13, the following design standards shall apply to developments
requiring a floodplain encroachment permit:
(GVW) in excess of 10,000 pounds or having more than two axles shall be parked
or stored overnight on any occupied property which is primarily used for residential
purposes or on any vacant property in a residentially zoned area, except for vehicles
engaged in construction, parked or stored on an active construction site.
B. Not more than one motor vehicle with commercial motor vehicle registration,
having a rated maximum gross vehicle weight (GVW) of 10,000 pounds or less,
shall be parked or stored overnight on any occupied property which is primarily
used for residential purposes or on any vacant property in a residentially zoned area,
except for vehicles engaged in construction, parked or stored on an active
construction site. This provision shall not apply to passenger automobiles with
commercial motor vehicle registration.
C. The aforementioned regulations for commercial vehicle storage shall not apply to
vehicles located on and necessary to the operation of a farm.
A. A developer applying for site plan or subdivision approval pursuant to Article VI of
this chapter shall apply to and may be required to submit a soil erosion and sediment
control plan to the Freehold Soil Conservation District for conformance with the
New Jersey State Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
B. The applicant shall provide a copy of the district certification of approval or letter
of exemption.
A. Freestanding radio and television antennas shall only be placed in the rear yard area
and shall be located no closer than 15 feet to any property line.
B. Freestanding antennas over 20 feet in height or antennas extending 20 feet above
the point of attachment to a building shall be built to withstand winds of 100 miles
per hour.
A. Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
71. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 94-5.23 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.27
94:101
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(2) All new construction of substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them
or contamination from them during flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize
flood damage.
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce
exposure to flood damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other
proposed development which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres.
(5) In reviewing subdivision applications, § 94-5.13, Preservation of
environmentally sensitive features, and § 94-8.23, Lots, may be applied.
E. Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest structural member, including the
basement, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation.
F. Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
structural member, including the basement, elevated one foot above the base flood
elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capacity of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this
subsection are satisfied.
G. Additional conditions. In areas of special flood hazard, any or all of the following
§ 94-5.27 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.27
94:102
measures may also be required:
(1) Floodproofing, to include any or all of the following:
(a) Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and shutters or similar devices.
(b) Reinforced walls to resist water pressures.
(c) Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of water through
walls.
(d) Addition of weight to structures to resist flotation.
(e) Installation of pumps to lower water levels in structures.
(f) Pumping facilities, or comparable measures, for the subsurface drainage
system of buildings to relieve external foundation wall and basement
flood pressures.
(g) Construction that resists rupture or collapse caused by water pressure or
floating debris.
(h) Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains which will
permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of sewage or stormwaters
into the structure. Gravity drainage of basements may be eliminated by
mechanical devices.
(i) Location of all electrical equipment, circuits and installed electrical
appliances in a manner which will assure that they are not subject to
inundation and flooding.
(j) Adequate emergency electrical power supplies.
(2) Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed restrictions.
(3) Requirements for construction of dikes, levees and other protective measures.
(4) Installation of an adequate flood warning system on the project site.
(5) All fill and other earth work must be established according to the Freehold Soil
Conservation District.
H. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 94-10.13B
are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous
area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and
erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(1) Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements
and other development, are prohibited unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If Subsection G(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of § 94-5.27.
§ 94-5.27 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.27
94:103
(3) The placement of any structure in a floodway is prohibited.
(4) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data has been
provided and no floodway has been designated, the cumulative effect of any
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than 0.2 of a foot at any point.
I. Floodplains and resource protection areas. Site plan and subdivision layouts shall
comply with the following:
(1) No structure or parking area, including, but not limited to, commercial
businesses and residential buildings, or fill, will be allowed within 50 feet of
the 100-year floodplain of existing ponds, lakes, floodways, or stream
corridors, nor within wetlands, marshlands and riparian lands, unless a
regulated use permit has been issued in accordance with the procedure and
regulations of § 94-5.27 of this chapter.
(2) Impervious surfaces shall not exceed 20% of the area of the tract within 80 feet
of a floodplain, without a regulated use permit.
(3) Any other resource protection area, as herein defined, including, but not
limited to, marshlands (areas wherein standing water is retained for 24 or more
consecutive hours and to which vegetation unique to marshes, swamps or
wetlands has become adapted) and areas where conservation is required, shall
not be encroached upon if, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, through
consultation with the Environmental Commission, encroachment or
construction upon such resource area will constitute a hazard to existing
drainage patterns and to the balance of the natural environmental systems
within and adjacent to the area of the site.
J. Design waivers. The Land Use Board may grant waivers from the design standards
of this section. In reviewing requests for waivers, the Board shall consider the
following:
(1) Waivers may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to
be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by
lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided
that the standards of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing
the variance increases.
(2) Waivers may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of
structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State
Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in the
remainder of this section.
(3) Waivers shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(4) Waivers shall only be issued upon a determination that the waiver is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
§ 94-5.27 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.27
94:104
(5) Waivers shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the waiver would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; or
(c) A determination that the granting of a waiver will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public
expense; create nuisances; or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a waiver is granted shall be given written notice that
the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below
the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(7) In reviewing a request for a waiver, the Land Use Board may consider the
following:
(a) The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
(b) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or downstream
to the injury of others.
(c) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the insulation of
these systems from disease, contamination and unsanitary conditions
resulting from flooding.
(d) The susceptibility of the proposed use to flood damage and the effects of
such damage.
(e) The need for a waterfront location and the availability of alternate
locations not subject to flooding within the applicant's property.
(f) The duration, rate of rise, effects of wave action, velocity and sediment
transport of floodwaters expected at the site.
(g) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
(h) The extent to which the water-carrying capacity of the floodway or
channel would be disrupted.
(i) The degree to which the proposed use would serve the general public
health, safety and welfare.
(j) The degree to which any aspect of the food chain or plant, animal, fish or
human life processes would be affected adversely within or beyond the
proposed use area.
(k) Whether the proposed use provides adequate facilities for the proper
§ 94-5.27 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.27
94:105
§ 94-5.28. Performance standards.
handling of litter, trash, refuse and sanitary and industrial wastes.
(l) The degree to which the proposed activity would alter natural water flow
or water temperature.
(m) The degree to which archaeological or historic sites and structures are
endangered or rare species of animals or plants and irreplaceable land
types would be degraded or destroyed.
(n) The degree to which the natural, scenic and aesthetic values at the
proposed activity site could be retained.
(o) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
A. As a condition of approval and the continuance of any use, occupancy of any
structure and operation of any process or equipment, the applicant shall supply
evidence, satisfactory to the municipal agency, or to its designated representative,
that the proposed use, structure, process or equipment will conform fully to all of
the applicable performance standards.
(1) As evidence of compliance, the municipal agency may require certification of
tests by appropriate government agencies or by recognized testing
laboratories, any costs thereof to be borne by the applicant.
(2) The municipal agency may require that specific types of equipment,
machinery or devices shall be installed, or that specific operating procedures
or methods shall be followed if the government agencies or testing laboratories
examining the proposed operation shall determine that the use of such specific
types of machinery, equipment, devices, procedures or methods are required
in order to assure compliance with the applicable performance standards.
(3) Permits and certificates required by other government agencies shall be
submitted to the municipal agency as proof of compliance with applicable
codes.
(4) If appropriate permits, tests and certifications are not or cannot be provided by
the applicant, then the municipal agency or administrative officer (Zoning
Officer) may require that instruments and/or other devices or professional
reports or laboratory analysis be used to determine compliance with the
following performance standards for an existing or proposed use, and the cost
thereof shall be borne by the owner, applicant or specific use in question.
(5) Conditional permit.
(a) In the event that a determination cannot be made at the time of application
that a proposed use, process or piece of equipment will meet the standards
established in this section, the municipal agency may issue or may
recommend issuance of a conditional permit. The conditional permit
§ 94-5.27 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.28
94:106
would be based on submission of evidence that the proposed use, process
or equipment will meet the standards established herein after completion
or installation and operation.
(b) Within 30 days after a conditional permit is granted, a certificate of
occupancy shall be applied for and satisfactory evidence shall be applied
for and satisfactory evidence submitted that all standards established by
this section have been met.
B. Applicability and enforcement of performance standards.
(1) Applicability.
(a) Prior to construction and operation. Any application for a development or
building permit for a use which shall be subject to performance standards
shall be accompanied by submissions, attachments, certifications as
required by this section and a sworn statement filed by the owner of the
subject property or the operator of the proposed use that said use will be
operated in accordance with the performance standards set forth herein.
(b) For existing structures. Any existing structure or use which is, after the
effective date of this chapter, allowed to deteriorate or is modified so as
to reduce its compliance with these standards will be deemed to be in
noncompliance and to constitute a violation.
(2) Continued compliance. Continued compliance with performance standards is
required and shall be enforced by the Construction Official or administrative
officer (Zoning Officer).
(3) Termination of violation. All violations shall be terminated within 30 days of
notice or shall be deemed a separate violation for each day following and
subject to fines as set forth herein.
(4) Violation inspection. Whenever, in the opinion of the Construction Official or
administrative officer (Zoning Officer), there is a reasonable probability that
any use or occupancy violates the regulations of this article, they are hereby
empowered to employ a qualified technician or technicians to perform
investigations, measurements and analyses to determine whether or not the
regulations of this section are being violated. In the event that a violation is
found to exist, the violator shall be liable for the reasonable fees of the
technicians employed to perform such investigations, measurements and
analyses.
C. Performance standards established.
(1) Noise.
(a) The definitions contained in the Noise Control Regulations of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.1 et
seq.) are hereby incorporated by reference without being set forth in full
with regard to this section.
(b) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit nor shall any application
§ 94-5.28 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.28
94:107
for development be approved which produces sound in excess of the
standards listed below when measured at any location outside of the lot
on which the use or source of sound is located:
[1] A continuous airborne sound which has a sound level in excess of
50 decibels.
[2] A continuous airborne sound which has an octave band soundpressure
level in decibels which exceeds the values listed below in
one or more octave bands:
Octave Band Center
Frequency (Hz)
Octave Band Sound-Pressure
Level (dB)
31.5 86
63 71
125 61
250 53
500 48
1,000 45
2,000 42
4,000 40
8,000 38
[3] An impulsive sound in the air which has an impulsive sound level in
excess of 80 decibels.
(c) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
[1] Agriculture.
[2] Bells, chimes or carillons while being used in conjunction with
religious services.
[3] Commercial motor vehicle operations.
[4] Emergency energy release devices.
[5] Emergency work to provide electricity, water or other public utilities
when public health or safety are involved.
[6] National Warning System (NAWAS) signals or devices used to
warn the community of attack or imminent public danger, such as
flooding or explosion. These systems are controlled by the New
Jersey Civil Defense and Disaster Control Agency.
[7] Noise of aircraft flight operations.
[8] Public celebrations.
[9] Public roadways.
§ 94-5.28 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.28
94:108
[10] Stationary emergency signaling devices.
[11] Surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad.
[12] Rail operations.
[13] The unamplified human voice.
[14] Use of explosive devices. These are regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Labor and Industry under the 1960 Explosives Act
(N.J.S.A. 21:1A-128 et seq.).
(2) Air pollution. No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in quantities
which are injurious to human, plant or animal life or to property, or which will
interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property
anywhere in the municipality. All provisions of the New Jersey Air Pollution
Control Code,72 as amended and as augmented, and all the following
provisions stated, whichever shall be more stringent, shall be complied with.
(a) Smoke. In any zone, no smoke, the shade or appearance of which is
darker than No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, shall be emitted into
the open air from any incinerator or fuel-burning equipment; provided,
however, that smoke emitted during the cleaning of a fire box or the
building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is no darker than
No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, may be permitted for a period or
periods aggregating no more than three minutes in any 30 consecutive
minutes.
(b) Solid particles.
[1] In any residential zone, no discharge of solid particles through a
stack, duct or vent shall be permitted that is greater than 50% of the
allowable emission in pounds per hour established by Chapters 7 and
8 of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code.
[2] In any other zone, except industrial zones, the allowable discharge
shall be 75% of the allowable emission permitted by the New Jersey
Air Pollution Control Code.
[3] In the industrial zone, the allowable discharge shall be the allowable
emission permitted by the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code.
[4] No open burning shall be permitted in any zone.
[5] All incinerators shall be approved by the State Department of
Environmental Protection.
[6] Any road, parking area, driveway, truck loading or unloading station
or any other exterior area having a substantial movement of vehicles
or equipment shall be paved or otherwise stabilized during
construction sufficient to prevent the generation of dust from the
72. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:2C-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 7:27-1.1 et seq.
§ 94-5.28 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.28
94:109
movement of such vehicles or equipment.
(c) Odors. In any zone, no odorous material may be emitted into the
atmosphere in quantities sufficient to be detected without instruments.
Any process, which may involve the creation or emission of any odors,
shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system, so that control will
be maintained. Table 1 (Odor Thresholds in Air) in Part 1 (Odor
Thresholds for 53 Commercial Chemicals) of Research on Chemical
Odors, copyrighted by the Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc.,
Washington, D.C., shall be used as a guide in determining quantities of
offensive odors.
(3) Liquid waste. No liquid waste shall be stored outside or discharged into any
watercourse, storm drain or sewage collection and disposal system nor into
any ground sump, any well or percolation area, except in accordance with
plans approved by the Borough Public Works Department, Health Department
and Borough Engineer and where required by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection. No liquid wastes may be stored outdoors.
(4) Solid waste. All uses in the Borough shall:
(a) Assume full responsibility for adequate and regular collection and
removal of all refuse, except if the Borough assumes the responsibility.
(b) Comply with all applicable provisions of the Air Pollution Control Code.
(c) Comply with all provisions of the State Sanitary Code, Chapter 8, Refuse
Disposal, Public Health Council, of the State Department of
Environmental Protection.
(d) Permit no accumulation on the property of any solid waste, junk or other
objectionable materials.
(e) Not engage in any sanitary landfill operation on the property, except as
may be permitted by other Borough codes and ordinances.
(5) Radiation. All uses of materials, equipment or facilities, which are or may be
sources of radiation, shall comply with all controls, standards and
requirements of the United States Atomic Energy Act of 1965, as amended and
any codes, rules or regulations promulgated under such Act, as well as the
New Jersey Radiation Protection Law, N.J.S.A. 26:2D-1 et seq., as amended,
whichever is more stringent.
(6) Fire and explosion hazards. All activities shall be carried on only in buildings
classified as fireproof by the Building Code of the Borough, and as determined
by the Fire Department. The operation shall be conducted in such a manner
and with such precautions against fire and explosion hazards as to produce no
explosion hazard as determined by the New Jersey Inspection Bureau of Fire
Prevention to a use on an adjacent property and must conform to the rules and
regulations of the most recent adopted edition of the Fire Prevention Code of
the National Board of Fire Underwriters and the Shrewsbury Borough Fire
Department.
§ 94-5.28 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.28
94:110
(7) Vibration. There shall be no vibration which shall be discernible to the human
sense of feeling beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the source is
located. At no point on or beyond the boundary of any lot shall the maximum
ground transmitted steady state or impact vibration caused by any use or
activity (except those not directly under the control of the property user)
exceed a particle velocity of 0.1 inch per second for impact vibrations. Particle
velocity is to be determined by the formula 6.28FA, where F is the frequency
of the vibration in cycles per second and A is the maximum single amplitude
displacement of the vibration in inches. For the purpose of measuring
vibrations, a three-component measuring system shall be used. For the purpose
of this chapter, steady state vibrations are vibrations which are continuous, or
vibrations in discrete impulses more frequent than 100 per minute. Discrete
impulses which do not exceed 100 per minute shall be considered impact
vibrations.
(8) Electromagnetic interference. There shall be no electromagnetic interference
that:
(a) Adversely affects at any point the operation of any equipment other than
that belonging to the creator of such interference; or
(b) Is not in conformance with the regulations of the Federal Communication
Commission.
(9) Heat. Every use and activity shall be so operated that it does not raise the
ambient temperature more than 2° C. at or beyond the boundary of any lot line.
(10) Fire-resistant construction. All new construction and additions shall be fireresistant
construction in accordance with the requirements of the State
Uniform Construction Code.
(11) Glare. There shall be no direct or sky-reflected glare exceeding 1 1/2
footcandles measured at the boundaries of the lot on which the source is
located. This regulation shall not apply to lights which are used solely for the
illumination of entrances or exits or driveways leading to a parking lot. Any
operation or activity producing intense glare shall be conducted so that direct
and indirect illumination from the source of light shall not cause illumination
in excess of 0.1 footcandle in residential districts.
(12) Lighting and illumination. Artificial lighting or illumination provided on any
property or by any use shall adhere to the following standards:
(a) The illumination provided by artificial lighting on the property shall not
exceed 0.5 footcandle beyond any property line.
(b) Spotlights or other types of artificial lighting that provides a concentrated
beam of light shall be so directed that the beam of light does not extend
beyond any property lines.
(c) Spotlights or other types of artificial lighting used to illuminate signs or
building faces shall not emit beams of light that extend beyond the
vertical plane of the sign or building face that they illuminate and shall
§ 94-5.28 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.28
94:111
§ 94-5.29. Property maintenance.
It is the intent of this section to assure that the public health, safety and welfare is
not impaired by the neglected maintenance of the buildings and property. It is further
intended to assure that site improvements required by a municipal agency are properly
maintained and operable. It shall be the administrative officer's responsibility to enforce
this section where property conditions pose a hazard to the public or where a property
owner fails to maintain a required site improvement. It shall be the responsibility of
every property owner, tenant, developer and applicant to maintain in a safe and orderly
condition all buildings and land in the Borough which they own, use, occupy or have
maintenance responsibility for in accordance with the following regulations:
not be located in such a manner as to cause the beams of light to be
reflected upon any adjoining property, public street or vehicular
circulation area.
A. Maintenance of all land uses within the Borough shall include, but is not limited to,
the following:
(1) Potholes and other pavement failures within paved parking areas shall be
repaired on a regular basis, but in no event shall potholes or pavement failures
be left unrepaired for a period in excess of 30 days. If such potholes or
pavement failures are hazardous to vehicles, they shall be appropriately
barricaded and marked to warn motorists.
(2) Paint striping, traffic control signs and markings and all other signs and
graphics shall be maintained in a condition whereby they can be clearly seen
and are legible.
(3) Curbing, other pavement edging and sidewalks shall be maintained free of
cracks and holes which would present a hazard to pedestrians.
(4) Unpaved or gravel parking and pedestrian areas shall be maintained and
regularly regarded in a manner which will keep the area free of holes and other
severe grade changes which would be hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian
usage.
(5) All areas of the site shall be kept free of debris and other materials. All users
of shopping carts or similar items shall provide for the regular pickup of such
shopping carts or similar items from parking areas and other portions of the
site at least once every hour during their business hours. All shopping carts or
similar items shall either be stored indoors or in a location adjacent to the
building specifically set aside for such storage during nonbusiness hours.
(6) All plantings and ground cover shall be regularly watered and cut. All dead
plant materials shall be removed or replaced (if such plantings are required
under this article, they shall be replaced only). All lawn or other nonpaved
areas shall be kept trimmed and free from weeds and other noxious growth.
(7) Building finishes shall be maintained reasonably free of peeling or cracked
paint, rust or other unsightly conditions.
§ 94-5.28 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.29
94:112
§ 94-5.30. Animals.
The keeping of horses, sheep, cattle or other animals, except domesticated cats or dogs,
is prohibited except within a lot containing two acres or more and except within an
enclosure within at least 50 feet from each lot line. The keeping of pigs and/or goats on
any land in the Borough is prohibited.
§ 94-5.31. Historic District regulations. [Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-1077]
All proposed applications for development in any Historic District or on lands which
contain a historic building, place or structure, established within the Borough, shall be
referred to the Land Use Board for certificate of appropriateness consideration prior to
action on the application by the municipal agency. Proposed developments within any
Historic District or which contain a designated historic building, place or structure in the
Borough should be designed to accomplish the following goals and objectives:
(8) All refuse stored outdoors shall be kept within containers having lids, in a
manner that the refuse is not visible to pedestrians or persons within vehicles
on or off the site. Such containers shall be stored only within side or rear yard
areas and shall not be located to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
circulation.
(9) All outdoor lighting shall be maintained in a working condition.
B. All land areas for which development (site plan or subdivision) approval is granted
subsequent to the adoption of this chapter or for which site plan or subdivision
approval was previously granted under regulations heretofore in effect shall be
required to maintain all structures and improvements shown on the approved site
plan or subdivision plan in a safe and orderly condition. In addition to the
maintenance responsibilities specified in Subsection A above, additional
maintenance responsibilities shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) All ground cover and plantings within screening and landscaping areas shown
on an approved site plan or subdivision shall be regularly maintained. When
plant material shown on an approved site plan or subdivision dies, it shall be
replaced within the first 30 days of the next planting season.
(2) Where a site plan specifies an outdoor refuse storage area, refuse shall only be
stored outdoors in such areas. Refuse containers located elsewhere on the site
shall not be permitted.
C. Failure of the responsible property owner, tenant, developer and/or applicant to
maintain property in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be in
violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties prescribed in § 94-3.9 of this
chapter. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
A. The existing character and appearance of the Historic District shall be preserved.
B. Wherever feasible, existing structures should be restored in lieu of new
construction.
§ 94-5.29 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.31
94:113
§ 94-5.32. Accessory radio and television antennas. [Added 4-9-1990 by Ord. No.
606]
The installation of accessory radio and television antennas shall conform to the use
and bulk requirements of this chapter. Such antennas shall also be controlled by the
following additional limitations:
C. All proposed developments should be compatible and consistent with existing
development and the concept of the Historic District in relation to the following:
(1) Architectural design.
(2) Color scheme of buildings.
(3) Size, type, color and design of signs.
(4) Scale of the use and structure.
(5) Walls and fences.
D. Visual compatibility factors. Visual compatibility factors will be applied to Historic
District structures.
A. The location of such antennas shall be restricted as follows:
(1) Such structures shall not be located within any required front, side or rear yard
areas applicable to principal structures.
(2) Antenna structures may only be located to the rear of any principal structure.
(3) Antenna structures shall be set back a distance equal to the total height of the
antenna structure from any lot line, electric power line, street or parking area.
(4) Antenna structures shall be set back a distance equal to 1/2 the total height of
the antenna structure from any front, rear or side setback line, other structures
or any buffer.
(5) All satellite dish installations which are to be screened by plant material shall
be situated at a location which will not, in the future, require relocation as a
result of obstruction of the antenna's reception window by permitted
development on adjoining properties.
B. Such antennas shall be further restricted as follows:
(1) Antenna structures shall not be utilized to support lights other than those
required for aircraft warning in accordance with Federal Aviation
Administration regulations or other required safety purposes.
(2) Antenna structures shall not be utilized to support signs, logos or other
graphics.
(3) All wiring or connecting cables leading to or from the antenna structure shall
be buried underground.
C. All transmitting antennas shall be further restricted as follows:
§ 94-5.31 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.32
94:114
§ 94-5.33. Solar Energy Systems.73 [Added 9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 966]
(1) All commercial radio and television transmission facilities, including AM, FM
and television broadcast stations, public safety radio services, cellular radio/
telephone service, microwave or other forms of electromagnetic transmission,
shall be subject to the performance standards of this chapter for radiation and
electromagnetic interference.
(2) All transmitting antennas or towers shall be enclosed by a chain-link fence not
less than six feet in height. This chain-link fence shall be in addition to
screening requirements.
(3) Any accessory building for housing equipment for the operation of a
commercial antenna or tower shall not be greater than one story, shall not
exceed a building height of 12 feet and shall not exceed 150 square feet.
A. A solar energy system is hereby permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts.
Solar energy systems must meet the standards and conditions set forth below.
B. The primary purpose of a solar energy system will be to provide power for the
principal use of the property whereon said system is to be located and shall not be
used for the generation of power for consumption on other properties.
C. Solar energy systems shall only be permitted as an accessory use on the same lot as
the principal use and shall be roof-mounted only. Applications for a solar energy
system shall include information demonstrating compliance with the provisions of
this section.
D. Solar panels shall be permitted as a rooftop installation upon the principal structure
in any zoning district. The solar panels shall not exceed a height of eight inches
above the rooftop. In no event shall the placement of the solar panels result in a
total height greater than what is permitted in the zoning district for a principal
structure.
E. Solar energy systems shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for one
identification of the manufacturer of the system, which shall not exceed six inches
by six inches in size. In no case shall any identification be visible from a property
line.
F. The design of roof-mounted solar energy systems shall, to the extent reasonably
possible, use materials, colors and textures that will blend the facility into the
natural setting and existing environment. The provisions of § 94-8.31 shall not
apply to roof-mounted solar energy systems.
G. The installation of a solar energy system shall conform to the National Electric
Code as adopted by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
H. The installation of a solar energy system is subject to all public utility requirements
for installation.
73. Editor's Note: Former § 94-5.33, Hours of operation at construction sites, added 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 877, was
repealed 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076, as duplicative of the provisions already included in Ch. 141, Hours of Operation
at Construction Sites, adopted in 1988 by Ord. No. 570. See now Ch. 141.
§ 94-5.32 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-5.33
94:115
I. Site plan. Site plan approval must be obtained for all nonresidential solar energy
systems.
J. Every owner of property seeking to install a solar energy system shall file a zoning
permit application and receive approval of same from the Zoning Officer prior to
construction of any solar energy system.
§ 94-5.33 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-5.33
94:116
ARTICLE VI
Development Applications; Procedures and Plat Details
§ 94-6.1. Approval required.
In all zones for proposed uses, subdivision, site development or construction other than
an exempt development, site plan and/or subdivision approval shall be required prior to:
§ 94-6.2. Application for zoning permit. [Amended 4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 607;
12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-1077]
A. Subdivision or resubdivision of land. [Amended 4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 607]
B. Issuance of a zoning permit or building permit. [Amended 8-18-2003 by Ord. No.
811]
C. Commencement of any regulated use or activity, which includes: [Amended
4-9-1990 by Ord. No. 607]
(1) The erection or construction of new buildings or structures.
(2) Any alteration, repair or remodeling which increases the lot coverage or
requires a variance, waiver or interpretation of this chapter.
(3) The use or occupancy of any building, structure or land.
(4) Any activity which entails the construction of any improvements or the
alteration of the natural condition of any land.
(5) The conversion of a building or structure to a different use in accordance with
§ 94-2.3, Terms defined, "change in use."
(6) Demolition or removal of any historic structure or any building or structure
within an Historic District.
A. Applications should first be made to the administrative officer (Zoning Officer) for
issuance of a zoning permit by any person proposing to undertake any regulated or
exempt activity.
B. If the administrative officer (Zoning Officer) shall determine that the proposed
undertaking is an exempt development which conforms in all aspects to the
requirements of this chapter and does not require direction for issuance of a
building permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, he shall issue a zoning permit, and
the applicant may then apply for a building permit and/or other permits that may be
required.
C. If the administrative officer (Zoning Officer) shall determine that the proposed
undertaking is an exempt development but does not conform in all aspects to the
requirements of this chapter and/or requires direction for issuance of a building
permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., he shall instruct the applicant that
Land Use Board approval of an application for a development variance and/or
direction for issuance of a building permit is required before a zoning permit may
§ 94-6.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.2
94:117
§ 94-6.3. Informal review. [Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
At the request of the developer, the Land Use Board shall grant an informal review of a
concept plan for a development for which the developer intends to prepare and submit an
application for development. The developer shall submit any fees required in § 94-3.14
for such an informal review. The developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for
which review is requested, and the Land Use Board shall not be bound by any such
review. Such review shall be limited to planning concepts, and no written reaction to the
be issued, allowing the applicant to apply for a building permit and/or other permits
that may be required.
D. An application for a zoning permit shall be in writing by the owner or his authorized
agent and include the following:
(1) A statement of the use or intended use or uses of the building, structure or land.
(2) An elevation, drawn to scale, of the building or structures to be erected,
including signs to be placed thereon and their content and manner of
construction.
(3) A plan, drawn to scale, showing all proposed and/or existing buildings, signs,
parking areas, setbacks and yard distances in exact relation to street and lot
lines.
(4) The proportion of existing and proposed lot coverage.
E. The administrative officer (Zoning Officer) shall take action on a complete
application for a zoning permit within 10 days of its submission.
F. If the administrative officer (Zoning Officer) shall determine that the proposed
undertaking is not an exempt development, he shall instruct the applicant that Land
Use Board approval of an application for development is required. He shall further
advise the applicant which Board has jurisdiction over the application for
development and which of the following approvals is required:
(1) Site plan.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Variance.
(4) Conditional use.
(5) Direction for issuance of a building permit.
G. The Land Use Board shall hear and act upon any requests for granting of variances,
conditional use approval and/or direction for issuance of a building permit at the
same time that they hear and act upon a minor subdivision, a preliminary plat of a
major subdivision, a minor site plan or a preliminary plat of a major site plan. Such
simultaneous action may be taken in conjunction with a final plat of a major
subdivision or major site plan if revisions in the plat subsequent to preliminary plat
approval shall have created the need for such simultaneous action or if the
application is for combined preliminary and final plat approval.
§ 94-6.2 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.3
94:118
review shall normally be provided by the Board.
§ 94-6.4. Applications for development requiring Land Use Board action.
[Amended 7-11-1988 by Ord. No. 575; 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 11-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 708; 12-9-1996 by Ord. No. 725; 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811; 9-6-2011 by
Ord. No. 968; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
A. Submission requirements. All applications for development requiring Land Use
Board action shall be submitted in accordance with the requirements set forth in
§§ 94-6.4 through 94-6.11 of this chapter. Where an application involves approvals
related to more than one section, the more-restrictive requirements shall apply.
B. Administrative review.
§ 94-6.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.4
94:119
(1) Upon receipt of an application for development, the administrative officer
shall retain the original of the application and one copy of the plat maps and
attachments and shall forward copies of the application and all plat maps,
supporting attachments, exhibits and other information as submitted and the
application checklist to the following:
Reviewing Agency
Application
and Checklist
Subdivision
Plat Maps
and
Attachments
Site Plan
Maps and
Attachments
Department of Public
Works
1 1 1
Board Attorney 1 1 1
Borough Engineer 1 1 1
Land Use Board
Subdivision and Site Plan
Committee
1 1 1
Environmental
Commission
1 1 1
Police Department 1 1 1
Board of Health 1 1 1
Construction Official 1 1 1
First Aid Squad 1 1 1
Fire Department 1 1 1
Fire Marshal 1 1 1
Sewerage Authority 1 3 1
Shade Tree Commission 1 1 6*
The applicant is responsible for applications and submission documents to
county, state, federal or other applicable boards and agencies.
* Note: Only overall site, landscape and topographic maps are required.
(2) The Land Use Board may determine that additional distribution of the
application, plat map and attachments should be made to other agencies, and,
in such cases, the applicant may be required to submit additional prints.
C. Completeness review.
(1) The Borough shall utilize the following completeness checklist, which shall be
available from the administrative officer (Land Use Board Clerk) and is hereby
adopted:
(a) Development Application Checklist (Exhibit 1).74
74. Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-6.4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.4
94:120
(2) When all submission requirements have been fulfilled and, in case of major
site plans, subdivisions and conditional uses, when completeness review
reports have been received from the Borough Engineer certifying that the plans
and attachments are in compliance with all submission requirements, the
administrative officer (Land Use Board Clerk) will, if all other requirements
have been met, deem the application complete and issue a certificate of
completeness and forward the application to the municipal agency for hearing.
(3) An application for development shall be deemed to be properly submitted
unless the administrative officer determines that it does not fulfill the criteria
for a complete application pursuant to § 94-6.5, Minor subdivisions; § 94-6.6,
Minor site plans; § 94-6.7, Variances; § 94-6.8, Preliminary plat of major
subdivision; § 94-6.9, Preliminary plat of major site plan; § 94-6.10, Final plat
of major subdivision; § 94-6.11, Final plat of major site plan; and § 94-6.12,
Exempt development; and the administrative officer has done the following:
(a) Provided the applicant with a checklist indicating the criteria for a
complete application; and
(b) Notified the applicant in writing of the deficiencies of the submitted
applications within 45 days of such application.
D. Engineering review. The Borough Engineer shall review applications for
development for site plans, subdivisions and conditional uses and shall advise the
Land Use Board and the applicant of any technical deficiencies, required changes
and/or recommended changes. Copies of revised plans and attachments, which
correct all deficiencies, incorporate all required changes and satisfactorily consider
all recommended changes, shall be submitted to the administrative officer for
further review as required.
E. Conditional approvals.
(1) After issuance of a certificate of completeness, all applications for
development shall be acted upon by the Land Use Board within the time limits
set forth in Article III of this chapter, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. If required approvals from other government
agencies have not been received prior to Land Use Board approval of an
application for development, such approval shall be conditional upon the
subsequent approval or approvals by the other government agencies unless the
applicant shall request that such approval be withheld until the approval or
approvals from the other government agencies have been received.
(2) If approval is granted conditioned upon the subsequent approval of another
government agency and such government agency requires revisions in the plat
which alter the layout and/or design standards approved by the Land Use
Board to an extent that the Board determines that the basis upon which the
approval was granted has been changed, the applicant shall be required to
receive revised approval from the Land Use Board and pay the fees for such
revised approval set forth in § 94-3.14 of this chapter.
F. Board action. In acting upon an application for development for a subdivision or
site plan, the Land Use Board shall consider whether the submittal complies with
§ 94-6.4 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.4
94:121
the following standards and regulations:
(1) The proposed use is consistent with the Master Plan.
(2) The plat submission contains all of the information and data required by this
chapter.
(3) The details and improvement standards of the plat are in accord with the
standards of this chapter.
(4) Adequate provision is made for safe and convenient vehicular traffic access,
circulation and parking.
(5) Adequate provision is made for safe and convenient pedestrian circulation.
(6) Ingress and egress for the site will not unduly impede or obstruct the flow of
traffic on public streets.
(7) Adequate provision has been made for the collection and disposal of
stormwater runoff and the proposed drainage facilities have been approved by
the Borough Engineer.
(8) Adequate provision has been made to screen adjoining residential properties
from any adverse effects that might result from outdoor lighting, buildings,
parking areas, refuse storage areas, recreation areas, equipment areas, bulk
storage areas or similar utilities or structures located on the site.
(9) Adequate provision has been made for compliance with the performance
standards of this chapter.
(10) Adequate provision has been made to provide structures and uses of a quality
and design which will not produce adverse effects on existing developments in
the surrounding area or future uses designated for the surrounding area in the
Master Plan.
(11) The proposed development is compatible with approved subdivisions and/or
site plans for adjacent and nearby parcels of land.
(12) The proposed development is compatible with environmental and/or historical
characteristics and conditions of the site and nearby parcels of land.
(13) In any B-1, B-2 or HC/PO Zone where sidewalks will be used by pedestrians,
the planned location of a developer-furnished litter receptacle may be required
to be shown on the plat if no such litter receptacle exists within 1/4 mile of the
proposed site. Section 42-7 of this codification shall apply to the servicing of
such litter receptacles.
F.1. Planned developments. Site plans for planned developments shall conform to the
requirements for conventional site plans in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 94, Zoning and Land Development, as written and as the same may
hereafter be amended, as well as to the requirements for planned developments. In
the event of a conflict, the planned development requirements shall supersede site
plan requirements. Approvals shall be for a period not to exceed five years from the
date of the resolution granting approval. The following additional requirements
§ 94-6.4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.4
94:122
shall be satisfied prior to final approval:
(1) The staging proposals for any planned development shall ensure that each
stage shall provide for completion of all streets, utilities and services necessary
for the section, whether located within or outside the section.
(2) The Land Use Board may authorize a greater concentration of density or
intensity within a stage but only where offset by a lesser concentration in any
completed prior stages or offset by an appropriate reservation of open space
on the remaining land by grant of easement or covenant in favor of the
Borough.
(3) The legal documents proposed to provide for deed restrictions, cross-access
agreements and cross-maintenance agreements have been submitted and found
to satisfactorily provide for the public's interests.
(4) All open space created shall be set aside as a separate parcel and maintained
for the benefit of the owners and/or residents of the development in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
(5) Any areas designated as wetlands or wetland buffers shall be deed-restricted
except for those lands for which state approval for development has been
granted.
G. Reproduction of final site plans and plats and issuance of zoning permit. Approvals
of all applications for development shall not be valid until all the following have
taken place:
(1) The administrative officer (Land Use Board Clerk) shall certify that all
conditions of approval have been satisfied.
(2) In the case of applications for development for site plans and subdivisions, the
applicant shall submit the reproducible original of the plat for the signature of
the Chairman and Secretary of the Land Use Board, Borough Engineer and/or
Borough Surveyor as required herein.
(3) The applicant shall provide six copies of the plat and attachments. After the
signature, the administrative officer shall have the original and all copies
signed and shall return the reproducible original of the plat and attachments to
the applicant. One copy shall be retained in the files of the administrative
officer, two copies shall be retained in the files of the Borough Engineer, one
copy shall be retained in the files of the Construction Official, and one copy
shall go to the applicant.
(4) After signature and reproduction, the administrative officer shall return the
reproducible original of the plat and attachments to the applicant.
(5) For all applications for development that receive minor or final plat approval,
the administrative officer shall issue a zoning permit after the plat has been
signed. The date of the zoning permit shall be the date upon which the
approval becomes valid. The date upon which the approval of applications for
development related to preliminary plats becomes valid shall be the date on
which the plat is signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Land Use Board.
§ 94-6.4 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.4
94:123
§ 94-6.5. Minor subdivisions. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 8-18-2003
by Ord. No. 811; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
However, the period of time for which certain rights are conferred upon the
applicant shall commence on the date on which the Land Use Board granted
the approval.
(6) Waiver of requirements. The municipal agency may, upon specific written
request of an applicant, consider and approve or deny requests for a waiver of
submission requirements or for any of the specific plat detail requirements set
forth in this article. All such requests by an applicant shall cite the specific
requirement by section number and shall state the specific reason for the
request of a waiver. An application which meets all submission and detail
requirements will be considered complete. If a request for a waiver is denied,
the applicant must provide the required submissions. Such detailed
submissions will be reviewed as provided for new applications, and all time
limits will recommence as for new applications.
A. Required documents. Prior to issuance of a certificate of completeness or
scheduling of a minor subdivision for public hearing, the Land Use Board
Subdivision Committee shall determine that the following have been submitted in
proper form:
(1) A certificate of title, which may be on the plat (signed by the owner and
notarized) or in a letter form, signed by a member of the New Jersey Bar or by
a title officer or authorized agent of a title insurance company licensed to do
business in the State of New Jersey, which certificate shall confirm that the
owner of the premises in question is the owner as shown on the plat.
(2) The Borough Engineer's report.
(3) An application for state wetlands approval, where required.
(4) Other submittals that may be required by the Borough Engineer, Land Use
Board, or federal, state, county or municipal law.
(5) The application for development for a minor subdivision or minor site plan
shall include a request for the granting of any variances required.
(6) Required application fees as set forth in § 94-3.14 of this chapter.
(7) Thirty copies of a completed application form.
(8) Thirty-three copies of a plat and attachments meeting the requirements set
forth below.
(9) Proof of service of notice in conformance with § 94-3.3D of this chapter.
B. Plat requirements.
(1) General requirements. The plat for a minor subdivision shall be drawn at a
scale of not less than 30 feet to the inch, shall conform to the provisions of the
New Jersey Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.) and shall include or
§ 94-6.4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.5
94:124
be accompanied by the information specified below:
(a) All dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision, and all lots and lands reserved or dedicated for public use
shall balance, and their descriptions shall close within a limit of error of
not more than one part in 10,000.
(b) The minor subdivision shall be based upon a current boundary survey
prepared in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:40-5.1, Preparation of Land
Surveys, certified to the subdivider and prepared or recertified by a
licensed professional land surveyor.
(2) Title block. A title block shall appear on all sheets and include:
(a) A title to read "Minor subdivision."
(b) The name of the subdivision, if any.
(c) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot number(s) of the tract to be subdivided
as shown on the latest Borough Tax Map, the date of which shall also be
shown.
(d) The acreage of the tract being subdivided to the nearest hundredth of an
acre.
(e) The names and addresses of the owner and subdivider so designated.
(f) The date of the original and all revisions.
(g) The name, signature, address and license number of the land surveyor
who prepared the map and made the survey. The plat shall bear the
embossed seal of said land surveyor.
(3) Detailed information.
(a) A key map (at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet) showing
the location of the tract to be subdivided, with reference to surrounding
areas, existing streets which intersect or border the tract, the names of all
such streets and any zone district boundaries and Borough boundaries
which are within 500 feet of the subdivision.
(b) The names of all owners of and property lines of parcels adjacent to the
land to be subdivided, including properties across the street, as shown by
the most-recent records of the Borough.
(c) All zone district boundaries, Borough borders, existing public easements,
Tax Map lot and block numbers, watercourses, floodways and flood
hazard areas within 200 feet and both the width of the paving and the
width of the right-of-way of each street within 200 feet of the subdivision.
(d) All existing structures, with an indication of those which are to be
destroyed or removed and the front, rear and side yard dimensions of
those to remain, referenced to proposed lot lines.
§ 94-6.5 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.5
94:125
(e) All proposed public easements or rights-of-way and the purposes thereof.
(f) The existing systems of drainage of the subdivision and of any larger tract
of which it is a part, together with information on how it is proposed to
dispose of surface drainage, where required by the Board or Borough
Engineer.
(g) All proposed lot lines and the areas of all lots in square feet. The areas
and dimensions specified shall be shown to the nearest hundredth of a
square foot or hundredth of a linear foot.
(h) The North arrow.
(i) Written and graphic scales.
(j) A copy of any existing or proposed covenants or deed restrictions
applying to the land being subdivided or certification that none exist.
(k) Proposed lot and block numbers as assigned by the Borough Tax
Assessor in accordance with the digitized lot-numbering system
specifications promulgated by the New Jersey Division of Taxation.
(l) Such other information as the municipal agency may require or request
during the review of the application for classification and approval as a
minor subdivision.
C. Action on minor subdivision application.
(1) By the Land Use Board. If an application is referred to the Land Use Board,
the Board will take action within 45 days of the date of submission of a
complete application. Any referrals by the Subdivision Committee will be
made in a timely manner so that the Board can take action within the time
allowed.
(2) By the Land Use Board. If an application for classification and approval as a
minor subdivision is before the Land Use Board, it may be classified and
approved as a minor subdivision by a majority vote of a quorum of the Board,
with or without conditions. [If such action is simultaneous with action on a
variance pursuant to § 94-3.1J(2)(d) of this chapter or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d,
an affirmative vote of at least 2/3 of the full authorized membership of the
Board is required.]
(3) Time limits for minor subdivision approvals. Minor subdivision approvals
shall be granted or denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a
complete application to the administrative officer or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Land Use Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision approval, and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Land Use Board
to act shall be issued upon request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in
lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein required
and shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer for purposes of
filing subdivision plats. Whenever review or approval of the application by the
Monmouth County Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the
§ 94-6.5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.5
94:126
Borough Land Use Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon
timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the Monmouth
County Planning Board or approval by the Monmouth County Planning Board
by its failure to report thereon within the required time period. Except as
provided in Subsection C(5) below, approval of a minor subdivision shall
expire 190 days from the date on which the resolution of municipal approval
is adopted unless, within such period, a plat in conformity with such approval
and the provisions of the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.) or
a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is filed by the
developer with the County Recording Officer, the Borough Engineer and the
Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed must be signed by the Chairman and
Secretary of the Land Use Board before it will be accepted for filing by the
County Recording Officer.
(4) The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was granted
shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date on which the
resolution of minor subdivision approval is adopted, provided that the
approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as provided in
Subsection C(3) above.
(5) The Land Use Board may extend the 190-day period for filing a minor
subdivision plat or deed pursuant to Subsection C(3) if the developer proves to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Land Use Board that the developer was
barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays in
obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental or quasigovernmental
entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the required approvals. The length of the extension shall be
equal to the period of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as
determined by the Land Use Board. The developer may apply for an extension
either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
(6) The Land Use Board shall grant an extension of minor subdivision approval
for a period determined by the Board, but not exceeding one year from what
would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the required approvals. A developer shall apply for the
extension before what would otherwise be the expiration date of minor
subdivision approval or the 91st day after the developer receives the last
legally required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs
later.
D. Conditions of approval. Any approval of an application for development for a minor
subdivision granted by the Land Use Board shall be subject to the following
conditions being satisfied prior to the signing of the plat or issuance of a zoning
permit:
(1) Installation of or posting of performance guaranties for the installation of any
§ 94-6.5 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.5
94:127
§ 94-6.6. Minor site plans. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 8-18-2003 by
Ord. No. 811; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
improvements required by the Board.
(2) Payment of any outstanding real estate taxes and property improvement
assessments.
(3) Monmouth County Planning Board approval, if not previously granted.
(4) Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority approval, if not
previously granted.
(5) Submission of additional prints of the plat map and attachments for
distribution, if required.
(6) Publication of a notice of the decision of the Board by the administrative
officer (Land Use Board Clerk) within the time set forth in § 94-3.3E of this
chapter.
(7) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the Board or which may be
required by federal, state or municipal law.
(8) A condition setting forth the time within which all conditions must be satisfied
as described in § 94-3.3F of this chapter.
E. Certification. In the event that the application for development for a minor
subdivision is approved, a certification to that effect in the following form shall be
endorsed on the minor subdivision, and the original reproducible thereof shall be
provided to the Board by the applicant. Said original shall be signed by the
Chairman, Secretary and Engineer of the Board after they receive certification from
the administrative officer that all conditions of approval have been satisfied. After
signature, the subdivision plat shall be reproduced as provided in § 94-6.4G of this
chapter, and the signed original shall be returned to the applicant.
Classified and approved as a minor subdivision by the Borough of Shrewsbury
Land Use Board on _______________________.
Chairman
Attest:
Secretary Date
This plat (or a deed describing this subdivision) must be filed in the office of the
Clerk of Monmouth County on or before __________, which date is 190 days after
approval as a minor subdivision by the Borough of Shrewsbury Land Use Board.
Secretary
Borough Engineer/Land Surveyor
A. Required documents. Prior to issuance of a certificate of completeness, the Land
Use Board Site Plan Committee shall determine that the following have been
submitted in proper form. The administrative officer may schedule a minor site plan
for consideration by the municipal agency upon submission of the items in
§ 94-6.5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.6
94:128
Subsection A(1) through (8):
(1) The Borough Engineer's report.
(2) A copy of the application for granting of a CAFRA permit, where required and
if submitted.
(3) An application for a state wetlands permit, where required.
(4) Other submittals that may be required by the Land Use Board or federal, state
or municipal law.
(5) The application for development for a minor site plan shall include a request
for the granting of any variances required or other approvals required from the
municipal agency.
(6) Required application fees as set forth in § 94-3.14 of this chapter.
(7) Thirty-three copies of a plat and attachments meeting the requirements set
forth below.
(8) Thirty-three copies of a completed application form.
(9) Proof of service of notice in conformance with § 94-3.3D of this chapter.
B. Plan requirements. The plan shall include:
(1) General requirements.
(a) Any minor site plan presented to the municipal agency for its approval
shall be drawn, signed and appropriately sealed by an architect,
professional engineer, land surveyor and/or a professional planner
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey.
(b) Site plans shall not be drawn at a scale smaller than one inch equals 30
feet nor larger than one inch equals 10 feet. If the size of the site would
require the use of sheets larger than 30 inches by 42 inches in order to
show the entire site on one sheet, the detailed information for the site plan
shall be shown in sections not larger than 30 inches by 42 inches, which
sheets shall be keyed to an overall plan of the site drawn at a scale of not
less than one inch equals 200 feet.
(c) The site plan shall be based on a current, certified boundary survey
prepared in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:40-5.1, Preparation of Land
Surveys. The date of the survey and the name, signature and license
number of the professional land surveyor making the same shall be shown
on the map.
(2) Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and include:
(a) The title of "Minor site plan."
(b) The name of the development, if any.
(c) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot number of the site, as shown on the
§ 94-6.6 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.6
94:129
latest Tax Map, the date of which should also be shown.
(d) The date of the original and all revisions.
(e) The names and addresses of the owner and developer so designated.
(f) The name(s), signature(s), address(es) and license number(s) of the
engineer, architect, land surveyor or planner who prepared the plat and
his/her embossed seal(s).
(g) If the site plan contains more than one sheet, each sheet shall be
numbered and titled.
(3) A schedule shall be placed on the site plan indicating:
(a) The area of the tract and site (the portion of the tract involved in the site
plan).
(b) The floor area of the existing and proposed building, listed separately.
(c) The proposed use or uses and the floor area devoted to each use.
(d) The zone district in which the site is located.
(e) Proposed and required lot dimensions and front, rear and side setbacks.
(f) Provided and required off-street parking spaces.
(g) Square footage and percentage of the site retained in unoccupied open
space.
(4) The North arrow and written and graphic scales.
(5) Sufficient spot elevations (United States Coast and Geodetic Survey datum)
and/or contour lines to indicate the proposed system of surface drainage and
the relationship of proposed grading to the land surrounding the site.
(6) The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and flood hazard areas
of all existing watercourses, where such have been delineated, or the limits of
alluvial soils, where the boundaries of floodways and flood hazard areas have
not been determined, and/or such other information as may assist the Land Use
Board in the determination of floodway and flood hazard area limits.
(7) Paving and right-of-way widths of existing streets within 200 feet of the site.
(8) The boundary, nature and extent of the wooded areas, swamps, bogs and ponds
within the site and within 200 feet thereof. Any specimen trees 12 inches or
larger on the site as measured at four feet above the base shall be located and
identified by species name.
(9) A key map (at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet) showing the
location of the site, with reference to surrounding areas, existing streets, the
names of all such streets and any zone district boundaries or Borough
boundaries which are within 500 feet of the subdivision.
§ 94-6.6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.6
94:130
(10) The following shall also be required unless the administrative officer
determines that they are not necessary to provide a full understanding of the
application:
(a) Existing, at the point of connection, and all proposed, manholes, sewer
lines, waterlines, fire hydrants, utility poles and all other topographical
features of a physical or engineering nature within the site and within 50
feet thereof.
(b) All existing structures on the site and within 50 feet thereof, including the
use thereof, and indicating those to be destroyed or removed and those to
remain.
(c) The location, use, finished grade level, ground coverage, first-floor and
basement elevations, and front, rear and side setbacks of all buildings and
other pertinent improvements.
(d) Existing and proposed public easements or rights-of-way and the
purposes thereof.
(e) Zone district boundaries and Tax Map sheet, lot and block numbers and
the names of owners of all properties across any street from or within 50
feet of the site.
(f) The capacity of off-street parking areas and the location and dimensions
of all access drives, aisles and parking stalls.
(g) The location and size of proposed loading docks.
(h) The location of curbs and sidewalks.
(i) Cross section(s) showing the composition of pavement areas, curbs and
sidewalks.
(j) An exterior lighting plan, including the location, direction of
illumination, amount of illumination expressed in horizontal footcandles,
wattage and drawn details of all outdoor lighting standards and fixtures.
(k) A landscaping and screening plan showing the location, type, spacing and
number of each type of tree or shrub and the location, type and amount of
each type of ground cover to be utilized and planting details for trees,
shrubs and/or ground cover.
(l) The location of signs and drawn details showing the size, nature of
construction, height and content of all signs.
(m) Drawn details of the type of screening to be utilized for refuse storage
areas, outdoor equipment and bulk storage areas.
(n) Floor plans and building elevation drawings of any proposed structure or
structures or existing structures to be renovated.
(o) A written description of the proposed operations in sufficient detail to
indicate the effects of the use in producing traffic congestion, noise, glare,
§ 94-6.6 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.6
94:131
air pollution, fire hazards or safety hazards; and the written description of
the use, the number of shifts to be worked, the number of employees in
each shift, the number of vehicles to be stored or parked on the site and
provisions to be made for site maintenance.
(11) Such other information as the municipal agency and/or the Borough Engineer
may request during site plan review.
C. Conditions of approval. Any approval of an application for development for a minor
site plan granted by the municipal agency shall be subject to the following
conditions being satisfied prior to the signing of the site plan or issuance of a zoning
permit:
(1) Installation and approval or posting of performance guaranties for the
installation of those improvements which are necessary to protect adjacent
property and public interest in the event development of the site was not
completed.
(2) Payment of any outstanding real estate taxes and property improvement
assessments.
(3) Final Monmouth County Planning Board approval, if not previously granted.
(4) Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority approval, if not
previously granted.
(5) Submission of additional prints of the site plan and attachment for distribution,
if required.
(6) Filing of an appropriate instrument with the Monmouth County Clerk
consolidating the lots constituting the site, if required.
(7) Publication of a notice of the decision of the Board by the administrative
officer (Land Use Board Clerk) within the time set forth in § 94-3.3E of this
chapter.
(8) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the Land Use Board or which
may be required by federal, state, county or municipal law.
(9) A condition setting forth the time within which all conditions must be satisfied
as described in § 94-3.3F of this chapter.
D. Certification. In the event that the application for development for a minor site plan
is approved, a certification to that effect in the following form shall be endorsed on
the site plan, and the original reproducible thereof shall be provided to the Land
Use Board by the applicant. Said original shall be signed by the Chairman and
Secretary of the municipal agency after they receive certification from the
Administrative Officer (Land Use Board Clerk) that all conditions of approval have
been satisfied. After signature, the site plan shall be reproduced as provided for in
§ 94-6.4G of this chapter, and the signed original shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 94-6.6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.6
94:132
§ 94-6.7. Variances. [Amended 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-1077]
Approved as a minor site plan by the Shrewsbury Borough Land Use Board on
_____________.
Attest: Chairman
Secretary Date
Borough Engineer Date
E. Time limit and effect of approval. Minor site plan approvals shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete application to the
administrative officer (Land Use Board Clerk) or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Land Use Board to act within the
period prescribed shall constitute minor site plan approval. Whenever review or
approval of the application by the Monmouth County Planning Board is required
by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, the Borough Land Use Board shall condition any approval
that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
Monmouth County Planning Board or approval by the Monmouth County Planning
Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time period. The zoning
requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or otherwise,
upon which minor site plan approval was granted shall not be changed for a period
of two years after the date of the minor site plan approval. The Land Use Board
shall grant an extension of this period for a period determined by the Board, but not
exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the
developer proves to be the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the developer
was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the
development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently
pursued the required approvals. A developer shall apply for this extension before
what would otherwise be the expiration date or the 91st day after the date on which
the developer receives the last of the legally required approvals from the other
governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
A. Required documents. Prior to issuance of a certificate of completeness, the
administrative officer (Land Use Board Clerk) shall determine that the following
have been submitted in proper form. The administrative officer may schedule a
variance for public hearing upon submission of the items in Subsection A(1)
through (3):
(1) Required application fees as set forth in § 94-3.14 of this chapter.
(2) Fifteen copies of a plan, drawn to scale, showing the location and dimensions
of the property and any structures, including buildings, pools, fences and
parking areas, and indicating any proposed changes.
(3) Proof of service of notice in conformance with § 94-3.3D of this chapter.
B. Conditions of approval. Any approval of an application for development for a
variance granted by the municipal agency shall be subject to the following
conditions being satisfied prior to the issuance of a zoning permit:
§ 94-6.6 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.7
94:133
§ 94-6.8. Preliminary plat of major subdivision. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord.
No. 670; 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 708; 8-3-1998 by Ord. No. 751; 12-7-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-1077]
(1) Payment of any outstanding real estate taxes and property improvement
assessments.
(2) Publication of a notice of the decision by the administrative officer (Land Use
Board Clerk) within the time set forth in § 94-3.3E of this chapter.
(3) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the municipal agency or
which may be required by federal, state or local law.
(4) A condition setting forth the time within which all conditions must be satisfied
in § 94-3.3F of this chapter.
A. Required documents. Prior to issuance of a certificate of completeness, the Land
Use Board Subdivision Committee shall determine that the following have been
submitted in proper form. The Subdivision Committee may recommend a
preliminary plat of a major subdivision for public hearing upon submission of the
items in Subsection A(1) through (8):
(1) The Borough Engineer's report.
(2) A copy of the application for granting of a CAFRA permit, where required and
if submitted.
(3) An application for a New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
wetlands permit, where required.
(4) Other submittals which may be required by the Land Use Board or federal,
state or municipal law.
(5) The application for development for a preliminary plat of a major subdivision
shall include a request for the granting of any variances required.
(6) Required application fees as set forth in § 94-3.14 of this chapter.
(7) Thirty-three copies of a plat and attachments meeting the requirements set
forth below.
(8) Thirty copies of a completed application form.
(9) Proof of service of notice in conformance with § 94-3.3D of this chapter.
A.1. Planned developments. Except as provided in Subsection A.1(8) below,
subdivisions for or within planned developments shall conform to the requirements
for conventional subdivision plats in accordance with the requirements of Chapter
94, Zoning and Land Development, as written and as the same may be hereafter
amended, as well as to the requirements for planned developments. The following
additional requirements shall be satisfied prior to preliminary approval of the
planned development:
(1) The staging proposals for any planned development shall ensure that each
§ 94-6.7 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.8
94:134
stage shall provide for completion of all streets, utilities and services necessary
for the section, whether located within or outside the section.
(2) The Land Use Board may authorize a greater concentration of density or
intensity within a stage but only where offset by a lesser concentration in any
completed prior stages or offset by an appropriate reservation of open space
on the remaining land by grant of easement or covenant in favor of the
municipality.
(3) The legal documents proposed to provide for deed restrictions, cross-access
agreements and cross-maintenance agreements have been submitted and found
to satisfactorily provide for the public's interests.
(4) All open space created shall be set aside as a separate parcel and maintained
for the benefit of the owners and/or residents of the development in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
(5) Any areas designated as wetlands or wetland buffers shall be deed-restricted
except for those lands for which state approval for development has been
granted.
(6) The Land Use Board shall determine the appropriateness of proposed
dedications of open space prior to granting subdivision approval. Unless
dedicated for public use, all open space parcels shall be owned and maintained
by organizations established for those purposes.
(a) The developer shall provide for an organization pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-43 for the ownership and maintenance of open space created
under a planned development.
(b) Such organization shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any open
space, by sale or otherwise, except to an organization conceived and
established to own and maintain the open space for the benefit of such
development, and thereafter such organization shall not be dissolved nor
dispose of any of its open space without first offering to dedicate the same
to the municipality.
(c) Unless the subdivision option provided in § 94-10.6A(5)(h) pertaining to
the property located in the R-1B Zone is elected, all owners of property
within a planned development shall be required to become members of
the homeowners' association charged with ownership and maintenance of
open space and other common facilities, and the deeds for all properties
as to which the owners must become members of the homeowners'
association shall include a provision requiring such membership in the
homeowners' association, which requirement shall pass from owner to
owner as a deed restriction.
(d) The legal documents proposed in the establishment of the required
homeowners' association shall have been submitted and found to conform
to the objectives of the plans and proposals for the planned development
and the intent of this chapter.
§ 94-6.8 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.8
94:135
[1] The enabling declaration shall set forth the developer's intent to
charge an association with certain responsibilities, including the
covenants, which set forth the purchaser's responsibilities and
obligations, including the provisions for ownership and management
of the common areas, the establishment of association assessments
as a lien against all lots, the rights of members, including voting
rights, the basis for assessments, the basis for enforcement of
covenants by the association and the process of amendments.
[2] The articles of incorporation shall establish the association, set forth
the name of the association, the name and address of principal
officers at the time of incorporation and the purpose and powers of
the association. It shall set forth terms of membership and voting
rights, create the initial board of directors, establish procedures for
dissolution, the duration of the association in the absence of
dissolution, the basis for amendments to the articles of incorporation
and the severability of provisions.
[3] The bylaws shall set forth the meeting of the association, the basis
for a quorum, provisions for vote by proxy and the notice of
meetings. Bylaws shall set forth the terms of office for the board of
directors, the composition of the board, the method of nomination,
the method of election and the handling of resignations, removals,
vacancies and compensation, as well as the conduct of board
meetings. They shall also set forth the power and duties of the
Board. The officers, their means of election, terms of office and their
duties shall be described. The committees required or the basis for
their establishment shall be defined. The fiscal year shall be
established, the indemnification of officers shall be described, and
the basis for amendment shall be set forth.
[4] The proposed form of deed clause referring to the declaration and
clarifying the title to common property adjacent to a lot.
[5] An information brochure designed to help ensure that all purchasers
are informed of the association. It shall restate in clear text the
relationship between the association, the purchaser and the
developer. It shall cover the major elements of common area
identification, ownership and use, the structure of the association,
dues, officer and director selection and election, architectural
controls, liens, annexation, dissolution and other areas.
(e) The plat shall contain specifics of the enabling declaration dealing with
the title to the common property; the granting of easements of enjoyment;
the designation of areas dedicated for use by the general public; the
designation of areas conveyed or intended to be conveyed to an
association; and the granting of easements, covenants and restrictions
establishing, fixing and apportioning responsibility for the maintenance
of common property in the event the subdivision option provided in
§ 94-10.6A(5)(h) is exercised.
§ 94-6.8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.8
94:136
(f) Any condominium or homeowners' association filings with the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs shall also be filed with the
Land Use Board.
(7) Residential clusters shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) Each cluster shall be restricted to one type or types of land use/housing
type in a contiguous group.
(b) The total number of dwelling units, or lots for single-family dwellings,
shall not exceed the allowable density multiplied by the tract area to be
improved for residential use plus any open space set aside for residential
use.
(c) Building lots shall conform to the requirements for the alternative zone as
if developed in that zone and shall maintain continuing compliance with
said zone requirements.
(d) Developed open space parcels shall be designed to accommodate
pedestrianways of not less than 10 feet in width, which may include a
four-foot-wide paved, graveled, stoned or other suitable surfaced
walkway, and recreation sites of not less than 2,500 square feet in area.
(8) In the event the subdivision option provided in § 94-10.6A(5)(h) pertaining to
property located in the R-1B Zone is elected, and provided all other
requirements for land development are met and a general development plan is
approved, the requirements for conventional subdivision plats otherwise set
forth in Chapter 94, Zoning and Land Development, shall be waived by the
Board.
B. Plat requirements.
(1) General requirements. All plats containing proposals or designs for drainage,
streets and subdivision layouts shall be prepared by a professional engineer
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey and shall bear the address,
signature, embossed seal and license number of said professional engineer.
The preliminary plat shall be based on a current certified land survey certified
to the subdivider and shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 30 feet to the
inch for subdivisions and shall show or be accompanied by the information
specified below:
(2) Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and include:
(a) The title, to read "Preliminary plat — major subdivision."
(b) The name of the subdivision, if any.
(c) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot number(s) of the tract to be subdivided
as shown on the latest Borough Tax Map, the date of which shall also be
shown.
(d) The date of the original and all revisions.
(e) The names and addresses of the owner and subdivider so designated.
§ 94-6.8 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.8
94:137
(f) The name(s), signature(s), address(es) and license number(s) of the
engineer and/or land surveyor who prepared the map. (The plat shall bear
the embossed seal of said engineer and land surveyor.)
(3) A key map (at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet) showing the
location of the tract to be subdivided, with reference to surrounding areas,
existing streets which intersect or border the tract, the names of all such streets
and any zone boundary or Borough boundary which is within 500 feet of the
subdivision.
(4) A schedule shall be placed on the map indicating the acreage of the tract, the
number of lots, the zone district, and the minimum required lot areas, setbacks,
yards and dimensions.
(5) Zone district boundaries, Borough borders and the names of all owners, lot and
block numbers and property lines of parcels within 200 feet of the land to be
subdivided, including properties across the street, as shown by the most-recent
records of the Borough or of the municipality of which the property is a part.
(6) The preliminary plat shall be based on a current certified boundary survey as
required above with sufficient lines of the adjoining tracts surveyed to
establish any overlap or gap between the adjoining boundary lines and the
boundary lines of the tract in question and prepared in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 13:40-5.1, Preparation of Land Surveys. The date of the survey and
the name of the person making the same shall be shown on the map.
(7) Contours. Existing one-foot-interval contours based on United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey datum (MSL=0) shall be shown extending a minimum of
100 feet behind the boundary of the tract in question and shall be certified by
a New Jersey licensed land surveyor or professional engineer as to accuracy;
except that where the slopes exceed 5%, a two-foot interval may be used, and
if the slopes exceed 10%, a five-foot interval is permissible. The source of
elevation datum base shall be noted. If contours have been established by
aerial photography, a check profile shall be made on the boundary line of the
tract and certified by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor.
(8) All existing streets, public easements, watercourses, floodways and flood
hazard areas within the proposed subdivision and within 200 feet of the
boundaries thereof, including both the width of the paving and the width of the
right-of-way of each street within 200 feet of the subdivision.
(9) All existing structures, an indication of those which are to be destroyed or
removed and the front, rear and side yard dimensions of those to remain.
(10) The boundaries, nature, extent and acreage of wooded areas and other
important physical features, including swamps, bogs and ponds, within the
proposed subdivision and within 200 feet thereof.
(11) The layout of the proposed subdivision drawn in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(12) All proposed public easements or rights-of-way and the purposes thereof and
§ 94-6.8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.8
94:138
proposed streets within the proposed subdivision. The proposed streets shall
show the right-of-way and proposed pavement width.
(13) The existing system of drainage of the subdivision and of any larger tract of
which it is a part, together with information on how it is proposed to dispose
of surface drainage.
(14) The acreage of the drainage area (or areas) of each natural or man-made
watercourse traversing the subdivision, including the area within the
subdivision and the area upstream from the subdivision.
(15) All proposed lot lines and areas of all lots in square feet. The areas and
dimensions specified should be accurate to within -0% and +4%. (For
example, a lot line specified as 250 feet long should not be less than 250 feet
but may be as long as 260 feet.)
(16) The North arrow and basis therefor and written and graphic scales.
(17) Preliminary utility layouts showing methods of connection and sources of
service. Prior to public hearing for a preliminary subdivision plat, the
developer shall provide written certification that he has contacted the involved
servicing utility companies and has received their detailed specific installation
standards. It will be the developer's responsibility to then integrate the various
design standards and achieve optimum coordinated design.
(18) The proposed location and area, in acres or square feet, of all proposed
common open space areas.
(19) The types and locations of all stakes, marks or flagged points, if any, placed
on the property to aid in on-site inspections. The Land Use Board may require
that the marks or stakes, as a minimum, be placed at the intersection of all lines
of the tract boundary with existing streets, at the center of all culs-de-sac, at all
internal street intersections, along street tangents, at intervals not exceeding
500 feet and at such additional locations as the Land Use Board may deem
necessary. The locations indicated on the plat shall be accurate within plus or
minus 10 feet. Any traverse lines cut out and/or marked on the site shall be
shown on the plan. If such on-site points, as above discussed, have not been
established at the time of submission of a tentative plat, the Land Use Board
may give the subdivider 15 days' notice of the date of any proposed site
inspection by the Board, so the points can be set.
(20) The tentative plat shall show, on the property to be subdivided and within 200
feet of that property, all existing paper streets, dirt roads, paved streets, curbs,
manholes, sewer lines, water and gas pipes, utility poles, ponds, swamps and
all other topographical features of a physical or engineering nature.
(21) Preliminary on-site grading and drainage plan.
(a) The preliminary plat shall show or be accompanied by a preliminary
grading and drainage plan which shall show locations of all existing and
proposed drainage swales and channels, retention-recharge basins, the
scheme of surface drainage and other items pertinent to drainage,
§ 94-6.8 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.8
94:139
including the approximate proposed grading contours at one-foot
intervals; except that if slopes exceed 5%, a two-foot interval may be
used, and if they exceed 10%, a five-foot interval is permissible. Datum
shall be United States Coast and Geodetic Survey datum (MSL=0), and
the source of datum shall be noted.
(b) The plan shall outline the approximate area contributing to each inlet.
(c) All proposed drainage shall be shown with preliminary pipe type and
sizes, invert elevations, grades and direction of flow. The direction of
flow of all surface waters and all watercourses shall be shown.
(d) The preliminary grading and drainage plan shall be accompanied by
drainage calculations made in accordance with standards set forth in
§ 94-8.39.
(22) Preliminary off-site drainage plan. The preliminary plat shall also be
accompanied by a preliminary off-site drainage plan prepared in accordance
with the following standards:
(a) The plan shall consist of an outline of the entire drainage basin in which
the property to be subdivided is located. The terminus of the basin and
existing ground contours or other basis for determining basin limits shall
be shown.
(b) Pertinent off-site existing drainage, which receives or discharges runoff
from or onto the site, shall be shown with elevations of inverts, pipe types
and sizes or other appropriate physical data for open or nonpipe conduits.
(c) To the extent that information is available and may be obtained from the
County or Borough Engineer(s), any existing plans for drainage
improvements shall be shown.
(d) In the event that a temporary drainage system is proposed, tentative plans
of that system shall be shown.
(23) Boring logs. Unless the Borough Engineer shall determine that fewer boring
logs are required or that some or all of the boring logs may be deferred to the
final plat stage, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by a set of boring
logs and soil analyses for borings made in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) Borings taken shall be between January 1 and April 30 and spaced evenly
throughout the tract.
(b) One boring not less than 15 feet below the proposed grade or 20 feet
minimum depth shall be made for every five acres, or portion thereof, of
land within a tract where the water table is found to be 10 feet or more
below the proposed or existing grade at all boring locations.
(c) One additional boring shall be made per acre, or portion thereof, in those
areas where the water table is found to be less than 10 feet below the
proposed or existing grade.
§ 94-6.8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.8
94:140
(d) In addition to the above, in those areas where the water table is found to
be five feet or less below the existing or proposed grade, two additional
borings per acre, or portion thereof, will be required. If construction of
homes with basements is contemplated, at least one boring will be located
on each lot within the building setback lines.
(e) Boring logs shall show soil types and characteristics encountered,
groundwater depth, the methods and equipment used, the name of the
firm making the borings and the name of the person in charge of the
boring operation. The boring logs shall also show surface elevations to
the nearest 0.1 of a foot.
(f) Based on the borings, the preliminary plat shall clearly indicate all areas
having a water table within two feet of the existing surface of the land, or
within two feet of proposed grade, or all areas within which two feet or
more of fill is contemplated or has previously been placed.
(24) The location, dimensions, area and disposition of any park and recreation areas
shall be shown and noted on the preliminary plat and shall be subject to the
approval of the Land Use Board.
(25) Sectionalization and staging plans. The preliminary sectionalization and
staging plan showing the following:
(a) If the subdivision is proposed to be filed for final approval in sections, the
plan shall show each such section and the anticipated date of filing for
each section. The staging of the various sections in the subdivision shall
be such that if development of the subdivision were to be discontinued
after the completion of any section, the developed portion of the
subdivision would be provided with adequate street drainage and utility
systems. The size and staging of the section in a subdivision shall be
established to promote orderly development and shall be subject to the
approval of the Board.
(b) The sectionalization and staging plan shall identify for each lot or group
of lots in the subdivision those improvements that will be completed prior
to application for certificates of occupancy. The plan should demonstrate
that the staging of construction will minimize adverse effects upon
occupied buildings in the subdivision and adjoining properties.
(26) If the Land Use Board, Shade Tree Commission or Environmental
Commission determines that existing trees located on the site may have an
effect on the proper layout of the subdivision, it may be required that the
location, caliper and type be shown on the plat for the following:
(a) Living deciduous trees having a trunk of four inches' diameter or more
measured at four feet above grade.
(b) All living coniferous trees having a trunk of four inches or more diameter
measured at four feet above grade.
(c) All living dogwood (Cornus florida) or American Holly (Ilex opaca) trees
§ 94-6.8 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.8
94:141
having a trunk of one inch or greater diameter at four feet above grade.
(d) All native laurel (Kalmia latifolia) shrubs having a root crown of three
inches or greater measured at the soil or surface level.
(27) The location of proposed depressed pedestrian ramps and other facilities for
the handicapped.
(28) Such other information as the Board and/or Borough Engineer may require or
request during the review of the preliminary plat.
C. Conditions of approval.
(1) Any approval of an application for development for a preliminary plat of a
major subdivision by the Land Use Board shall be subject to the following
conditions being satisfied prior to the signing of the plat:
(a) Submission of additional prints of the plat and attachments for
distribution, if required.
(b) Preliminary Monmouth County Planning Board approval, if not
previously granted.
(c) Preliminary Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority
approval, if not previously granted.
(d) Publication of the decision of the Board by the administrative officer
(Land Use Board Clerk) within the time set forth in § 94-3.3E of this
chapter.
(e) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the Board of may be
required by federal, state, county or municipal law.
(f) A condition setting forth the time within which all conditions must be
satisfied as described in § 94-3.3F of this chapter.
(2) The Board may also condition its preliminary approval upon the applicant
providing for certain revisions or additions on the final plat submission.
D. Certification. In the event that the application for development for a preliminary
plat of a major subdivision is approved, a certificate to that effect in the following
form shall be endorsed on the preliminary plan, and the original reproducible
thereof shall be provided to the Board by the applicant. Said original shall be signed
by the Chairman and Secretary of the Board after they receive certification from the
administrative officer (Land Use Board Secretary) that all conditions of approval
have been satisfied. After signature, the preliminary plat shall be reproduced as
provided for in § 94-6.4G of this chapter, and the signed original shall be returned
to the applicant.
Approved as a preliminary plat of a major subdivision by the Shrewsbury
Borough Land Use Board on ________.
Attest:
Chairman
§ 94-6.8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.8
94:142
Secretary Date
Borough Engineer/Land Surveyor Date
E. Time limits for preliminary approval.
(1) Upon submission of a complete application to the administrative officer (Land
Use Board Secretary) for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Land Use Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer. Upon submission of a complete application to the administrative
officer (Land Use Board Secretary) for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the
Land Use Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the Land Use Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval of the major subdivision.
(2) Approval of a preliminary plat shall confer upon the applicant the rights set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49 and Subsection F of this section.
F. Effects of preliminary approval.
(1) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48
shall, except as otherwise provided herein, confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date on which the resolution
of preliminary approval is adopted:
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was
granted shall not be changed, including, but not limited to, use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; and off-tract improvements; except
that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Borough from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary
approval as relate to public health and safety.
(b) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections
of the preliminary subdivision plat.
(c) That the applicant may apply for and the Land Use Board may grant
extensions of such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least
one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided that if
the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised
standards shall govern.
(2) In the case of a subdivision of 50 acres or more, the Land Use Board may grant
the rights referred to in Subsection F(1)(a), (b) and (c) above for such period
of time, longer than three years, as shall be determined by the Land Use Board
to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may
apply for thereafter and the Land Use Board may thereafter grant an extension
§ 94-6.8 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.8
94:143
§ 94-6.9. Preliminary plat of major site plan. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No.
670; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
to preliminary approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the Land Use Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration
the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval, the potential number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting final approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development, provided
that if the design standards have been revised, such revised standards shall
govern.
(3) Whenever the Land Use Board grants an extension of preliminary approval
pursuant to Subsection F(1)(c) or (2) above and preliminary approval has
expired before the date on which the extension is granted, the extension shall
begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may
apply for the extension either before or after what would otherwise be the
expiration date.
(4) The Land Use Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for a
period determined by the Board, but not exceeding one year from what would
otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly
or indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in
obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities and that
the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required
approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension before what would
otherwise be the expiration date of the preliminary approval or the 91st day
after the developer receives the last legally required approval from other
governmental entities, whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant
to this subsection shall not preclude the Land Use Board from granting an
extension pursuant to Subsection F(1)(c) or (2).
G. Improvements not to be installed. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not confer
upon the developer the right to undertake any clearing, grading and/or to install any
improvements prior to final plat approval unless it shall be determined by the Land
Use Board and the Borough Engineer that such clearing, grading and/or installation
of improvements would not hinder future development or create physical or
aesthetic problems in the event that further development of the subdivision is not
undertaken and that required inspection fees have been paid and adequate
performance guaranties have been posted to provide for the cost to the Borough of
performing work that may be necessary to protect adjacent property owners and the
public interest in the event that such clearing, grading and/or installation of
improvement is not completed and/or further development of the subdivision is not
undertaken. Such performance guaranties shall include, but are not limited to, the
cost to the Borough of providing erosion control facilities, seeding or otherwise
stabilizing the site, drainage facilities necessary to protect off-tract acres from
flooding, screening or fencing that may be required and all improvements to be
undertaken which are within existing public rights-of-way of easements.
A. Required documents. Prior to issuance of a certificate of completeness, the Site Plan
§ 94-6.8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.9
94:144
Committee shall determine that the following have been submitted in proper form.
The Site Plan Committee may recommend a preliminary plat of a major site plan
for public hearing upon submission of the items in Subsection A(1) through (8):
(1) The Borough Engineer's report.
(2) A copy of the application for granting of a CAFRA permit, where required and
if submitted.
(3) An application for a New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
wetlands permit, where required.
(4) Other submittals that may be required by the Borough Engineer, Land Use
Board or federal, state, county or local law.
(5) A request for the granting of any variances required.
(6) Required application fees as set forth in § 94-3.14 of this chapter.
(7) Thirty-three copies of a plat and attachments meeting the requirements set
forth below.
(8) Thirty-three copies of a completed application form.
(9) Proof of service of notice in conformance with § 94-3.3D of this chapter.
B. Plat requirements. The plat shall include:
(1) General requirements.
(a) Any preliminary plat of a major site plan presented to the Land Use Board
for its approval shall be signed and appropriately sealed by an architect,
professional engineer, land surveyor and/or professional planner licensed
to practice in the State of New Jersey; provided, however, that sanitary
sewer, water distribution and storm drainage plans and water and sewage
treatment plans may only be signed for and sealed by a professional
engineer.
(b) Site plans shall not be drawn at a scale larger than one inch equals 30 feet
nor larger than one inch equals 10 feet. If the size of the site would require
the use of sheets larger than 30 inches by 42 inches in order to show the
entire site on one sheet, the detailed information for the site plan shall be
shown on sheets no larger than 30 inches by 42 inches, which sheets shall
be keyed to an overall plan of the site drawn at a scale of not less than one
inch equals 20 feet.
(c) The site plan shall be based on a current certified boundary survey. The
date of the survey and the name of the person making the same shall be
shown on the map.
(2) Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and include:
(a) The title, to read "Preliminary plat — major site plan."
(b) The name of the development, if any.
§ 94-6.9 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.9
94:145
(c) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot number of the site, as shown on the
latest Borough Tax Map, the date of which should also be shown.
(d) The date of the original and all revisions.
(e) The names and addresses of the owner and developer so designated.
(f) The names, signatures, addresses and license numbers of the engineer,
architect, land surveyor or planner who prepared the plan and their
embossed seal(s).
(g) If the site plan contains more than one sheet, each shall be numbered and
titled.
(3) A schedule shall be placed on the site plan indicating:
(a) The acreage of the tract and site (the portion of the tract involved in the
site plan).
(b) The floor area of the existing and proposed buildings (listed separately).
(c) The proposed use or uses and the floor area devoted to each use.
(d) The zone district in which the site is located.
(e) The proposed and required lot dimensions and front, rear and side
setbacks.
(f) The proposed and required off-street parking spaces.
(g) The square footage and percentage of the site retained in unoccupied open
space and occupied by buildings.
(4) The North arrow and written and graphic scales.
(5) The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and flood hazard areas
of all existing watercourses, where such have been delineated, or the limits of
alluvial soils where the boundaries of floodways and flood hazard areas have
not been determined, and/or such other information as may assist the Board in
the determination of floodway and flood hazard area limits.
(6) Paving and right-of-way widths of existing streets within 200 feet of the site.
(7) The boundary, nature and extent of wooded areas, swamps, bogs and ponds
within the site and within 200 feet thereof.
(8) Existing and proposed manholes, sewer lines, fire hydrants, waterlines, utility
poles and all other topographical features of a physical or engineering nature
within the site and within 200 feet thereof.
(9) All existing structures on the site and within 200 feet thereof, including their
use, indicating those to be destroyed or removed and those to remain.
(10) The location, use, finished grade level, ground coverage, first-floor and
basement elevations, and front, rear and side setbacks of all existing buildings
§ 94-6.9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.9
94:146
and other pertinent improvements.
(11) Existing and proposed public easements or rights-of-way and the purposes
thereof.
(12) A grading plan showing existing and proposed grading contours at one-foot
intervals throughout the tract, except that if slopes exceed 5%, a two-foot
interval may be used, and if they exceed 10%, a five-foot interval is
permissible. Datum shall be United States Coast and Geodetic Survey datum
(MSL=0), and the source of datum shall be noted. In addition to proposed
grading contours, sufficient additional spot elevations shall be shown to
clearly delineate proposed grading.
(13) On-site drainage plan.
(a) The drainage plan shall be presented in graphic form which shall clearly
show the street and lot layout and those items which are pertinent to
drainage, including existing and proposed contours as previously
required.
(b) The plan shall outline each area contributing to each inlet.
(c) All proposed drainage shall be shown with pipe type and sizes, invert and
grate or rim elevations, grades and direction of flow. The direction of
flow of all surface waters and of all streams shall be shown.
(d) The drainage plan shall be accompanied by complete drainage
calculations made in accordance with the standards set forth in this
chapter.
(14) Off-site drainage plan. The plat shall also be accompanied by an off-site
drainage plan prepared in accordance with the following standards:
(a) The plan shall consist of an outline of the entire drainage basin in which
the site is located. The terminus of the basin and existing ground contours
or other basis for determining basin limits shall be shown.
(b) The pertinent off-site existing drainage shall be shown with elevations of
inverts and grates to the nearest 0.1 of a foot.
(c) To the extent that information is available and may be obtained from the
County or Municipal Engineer(s), any existing plans for drainage
improvements shall be shown.
(d) In the event that a temporary drainage system is proposed, full plans of
that system shall be shown.
(e) The off-site drainage plans shall be accomplished by profiles of all
proposed drainage, showing existing details, pipe sizes, types, inverts,
crowns, and slopes; all proposed structures and connections; and design
hydraulic grade lines for all conduits designed to carry 40 or more cubic
feet per second. Cross sections at intervals not exceeding 100 feet shall
be shown for all open channels.
§ 94-6.9 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.9
94:147
(15) If required by the municipal agency, center-line profiles of streets bordering
the site, internal roadways and major circulation aisles showing:
(a) Existing and proposed final grades and slopes.
(b) Pipe sizes, slope, types, inverts and grate or rim elevation of drainage and
sanitary sewerage facilities.
(16) Boring logs. Unless the municipal agency shall determine that fewer boring
logs are required or that some or all of the boring logs may be deferred to the
final plat stage, the site plan shall be accompanied by a set of boring logs and
soil analyses for borings made in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Borings shall be taken between January 1 and April 30 and spaced evenly
throughout the site.
(b) One boring not less than 15 feet below grade or 20 feet minimum depth
shall be made for every five acres, or portion thereof, of land where the
water table is found to be 10 feet or more below proposed or existing
grade at all boring locations.
(c) One additional boring shall be made per acre, or portion thereof, in those
areas where the water table is found to be less than 10 feet below
proposed or existing grade.
(d) In addition to the above, in those areas where the water table is found to
be five feet or less below existing or proposed grade, two additional
borings per acre, or portion thereof, will be required if construction of
basements is contemplated. Borings shall be located where such
basements are proposed.
(e) Boring logs shall show soil types and characteristics encountered,
groundwater depths, the methods and equipment used, the name of the
firm, if any, making the borings and the name of the person in charge of
the boring operation. The boring logs shall also show surface elevations
to the nearest 0.1 of a foot.
(f) Based on the borings, the site plan shall clearly indicate all areas having
a water table within two feet of the existing surface of the land, or within
two feet of proposed grade, or all areas within which two feet or more of
fill is contemplated or has previously been placed.
(17) Zone district boundaries and the Tax Map sheet, lot and block numbers and
names of owners of all properties within 200 feet of the site.
(18) A key map, at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet, showing the
location of the site with reference to surrounding areas, existing streets, the
names of all such streets and any zone district boundary or municipal boundary
which is within 500 feet of the subdivision.
(19) The location, area, dimensions and proposed disposition of any area or areas
of the site proposed to be retained as common open space, indicating the
facilities to be provided in such areas.
§ 94-6.9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.9
94:148
(20) The capacity of off-street parking areas and the location and dimensions of all
access drives, aisles and parking stalls. The location and treatment of existing
and proposed entrances and exits to public rights-of-way, including the
possible utilization of traffic signals, channelization, acceleration and
deceleration lanes, additional width and any other device necessary for traffic
safety and/or convenience, and the estimated average number of passenger
vehicles, single-unit trucks or buses, and semitrailers that will enter the site
each day.
(21) Graphic depiction of the anticipated routes and details of the system of on-site
vehicular and pedestrian circulation. If the developer desires to have the
appropriate provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq. governing motor vehicle
operation made applicable to the site, thereby allowing municipal police
regulation of traffic control devices, he shall submit a formal request and a
detailed plan meeting the requirements of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation. The Borough Engineer will advise the developer regarding the
details of such a plan.
(22) The location and size of proposed loading docks.
(23) The location of curbs and sidewalks.
(24) Cross sections showing the composition of pavement areas, curbs and
sidewalks.
(25) An exterior lighting plan, including the location, direction of illumination,
amount of illumination expressed in horizontal footcandles, wattage and
drawn details of all outdoor lighting standards and fixtures.
(26) Landscaping and screening plan showing the location, type, spacing and
number of each type of tree or shrub, the location, type and amount of each
type of ground cover to be utilized and a plant list and planting details for trees,
shrubs and/or ground cover.
(27) Location of signs and drawn details showing the size, nature of the
construction, height and content of all signs.
(28) Drawn details of the type of screening to be utilized for refuse storage areas,
outdoor equipment and bulk storage areas.
(29) Floor plans and building elevation drawings of any proposed structure or
structures or existing structures to be renovated.
(30) The location of handicapped facilities, including parking spaces and ramps,
where applicable.
(31) If the Land Use Board, Shade Tree Commission or Environmental
Commission determines that existing trees located on the site may have an
effect on the proper layout of the site, it may be required that the location,
caliper and type be shown on the plat for the following:
(a) Living deciduous trees having a trunk diameter of four inches or more at
breast height.
§ 94-6.9 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.9
94:149
(b) All living coniferous trees having a trunk of four inches or more in
diameter at breast height.
(c) All living dogwood (Cornus florida) or American holly (Ilex opaca) trees
having a trunk of one inch or greater at breast height.
(d) All native laurel (Kalmia latifolia) shrubs having a root crown of three
inches or greater measured at the soil or surface level.
(32) Sectionalization and staging plan. Developers of large uses, such as shopping
centers, industrial parks or other such uses proposed to be developed in stages,
shall submit a sectionalization and staging plan showing the following:
(a) The anticipated date for commencing construction of each section or
stage. The staging of development on the site shall be such that if
development of the site were discontinued after the completion of any
stage, the developed portion of the site would comply in all respects to
the requirements of this chapter and be provided with adequate drainage
and utility systems.
(b) Those improvements that will be completed in each stage prior to
application for a certificate of occupancy. The plan should demonstrate
that the staging of construction will minimize adverse effects upon
occupied buildings in the site and adjoining properties.
(33) A written description of the proposed operations in sufficient detail to indicate
the effects of the use in producing traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution,
fire hazards or safety hazards. The written description shall also include the
hours of operation of the use, the number of shifts to be worked, the number
of employees in each shift, the number of vehicles to be stored or parked on
the site and provisions to be made for site maintenance.
(34) Such other information as the municipal agency and/or Borough Engineer may
request during site plan review.
C. Conditions of approval.
(1) Any approval of an application for development for a preliminary plat of a
major site plan by the Land Use Board shall be subject to the following
conditions being satisfied prior to the signing of the plat:
(a) Submission of additional prints of the plat and attachments for
distribution, if required.
(b) Preliminary Monmouth County Planning Board approval, if not
previously granted.
(c) Tentative Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority
approval, if not previously granted.
(d) Publication of a notice of the decision of the Board by the administrative
officer (Land Use Board Clerk) in accordance with § 94-3.3E of this
chapter.
§ 94-6.9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.9
94:150
(e) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the Board or may be
required by federal, state, county or municipal law.
(2) The Board may also condition its preliminary approval upon the applicant
providing for certain revisions or additions on the final plat submission.
D. Certification. In the event that the application for development for a preliminary
plat of a major subdivision is approved, a certification to that effect in the following
form shall be endorsed on the preliminary plat, and the original reproducible thereof
shall be provided to the Board by the applicant. Said original shall be signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the municipal agency after they receive certification
from the administrative officer (Land Use Board Clerk) that all conditions of
approval have been satisfied. After signature, the preliminary plat shall be
reproduced as provided for in § 94-6.4G of this chapter, and the signed original
shall be returned to the applicant.
Approved as a preliminary plat of a major site plan by the Shrewsbury Borough
Land Use Board on _______.
Attest:
Chairman
Secretary Date
Borough Engineer Date
E. Time limits for approval. Upon the submission to the administrative officer (Land
Use Board Clerk) of a complete application for a site plan which involves 10 acres
of land or less and 10 dwelling units or less, the Land Use Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such submission or within such
further time as may be consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a
complete application for a site plan which involves more than 10 acres or more than
10 dwelling units, the Land Use Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval
within 95 days of the date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Land Use Board shall be deemed to
have granted preliminary approval of the site plan.
F. Effects of preliminary approval.
(1) Preliminary approval of a major site plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46
shall, except as otherwise provided herein, confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date on which the resolution
of preliminary approval is adopted:
(a) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was
granted shall not be changed, including, but not limited to, use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions; and off-tract improvements; and any
requirements peculiar to site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-41; except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
Borough from modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions
of preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety.
§ 94-6.9 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.9
94:151
(b) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections
of the preliminary site plan.
(c) That the applicant may apply for and the Land Use Board may grant
extensions of such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least
one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided that,
if the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised
standards shall govern.
(2) In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the Land Use Board
may grant the rights referred to in Subsection F(1)(a), (b) and (c) above for
such period of time longer than three years as shall be determined by the Land
Use Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development. The
applicant may apply for thereafter and the Land Use Board may thereafter
grant an extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of time
as shall be determined by the Land Use Board to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval; the potential number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval; economic conditions; and the comprehensiveness of the
development, provided that if the design standards have been revised, such
revised standards shall govern. Approval of a preliminary plat shall confer
upon the applicant all the rights set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49.
(3) Whenever the Land Use Board grants an extension of preliminary approval
pursuant to Subsection F(1)(c) or (2) above and preliminary approval has
expired before the date on which the extension is granted, the extension shall
begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may
apply for the extension either before or after what would otherwise be the
expiration date.
(4) The Land Use Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for a
period determined by the Board, but not exceeding one year from what would
otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly
or indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in
obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities and that
the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required
approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension before what would
otherwise be the expiration date of the preliminary approval or the 91st day
after the developer receives the last legally required approval from other
governmental entities, whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant
to this subsection shall not preclude the Land Use Board from granting an
extension pursuant to Subsection F(1)(c) or (2).
G. Improvements not to be installed. Approval of a preliminary plat shall not confer
upon the developer the right to undertake any clearing or grading and/or to install
any improvements prior to final plat approval unless it shall be determined by the
§ 94-6.9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.9
94:152
§ 94-6.10. Final plat of major subdivision. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670;
8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811; 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-1077]
Land Use Board and the Borough Engineer that said clearing, grading and/or
installation of improvements would not hinder future development or create
physical or aesthetic problems in the event that further development of the site plan
is not undertaken and that required inspection fees have been paid and adequate
performance guaranties have been posted to provide for the cost to the Borough
of performing work that may be necessary to protect adjacent property owners
and the public interest in the event that such clearing, grading and/or installation
of improvements is not completed and/or further development of the site is not
undertaken. Such performance guaranties shall include, but are not limited to, the
cost to the Borough of providing erosion control facilities, seeding or otherwise
stabilizing the site, drainage facilities necessary to protect off-tract areas from
flooding, screening or fencing that may be required, and all improvements to be
undertaken which are within existing public rights-of-way or easements.
A. Required documents. Prior to issuance of a certificate of completeness or
scheduling of a final plat of a major subdivision for public hearing, the Land Use
Board Subdivision Committee shall determine that the following have been
submitted in proper form:
(1) The Borough Engineer's report.
(2) An application for a land disturbance permit from the Freehold Soil
Conservation District.
(3) An application for a New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
wetlands permit, where required.
(4) An application for a New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
stream encroachment permit, where required.
(5) An application for a New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
floodplain encroachment permit, where required.
(6) Where applicable, a copy of the permit issued or, if the permit has not been
issued, the application filed with the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, under the Coastal Area Facility Review Act,75 and copies of the
environmental impact statement and any attachments thereto filed in
accordance with the provisions of the Act or, in the alternate, a statement
issued by the Department of Environmental Protection that the proposed
development is exempt from the Act.
(7) A certificate of title, which may be on the plat (signed by the owner and
notarized) or in letter form, signed by a member of the New Jersey Bar or by a
title officer or authorized agent of a title insurance company licensed to do
business in the State of New Jersey, which certificate shall confirm that the
owner of the premises in question is the owner as shown on the plat.
75. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 et seq.
§ 94-6.9 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.10
94:153
(8) Other submittals that may be required by the Land Use Board or federal, state,
county or municipal law.
(9) Unless waived by the Board, a formal request, in appropriate statutory form,
requesting that the applicable provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq. shall be
made applicable to the site in order to permit police regulation of traffic
control devices prior to acceptance of streets.
(10) Required application fees as set forth in § 94-3.14 of this chapter.
(11) Thirty-three copies of the plat and attachments meeting the requirements set
forth below.
(12) A condition setting forth the time within which all other conditions must be
satisfied as described in § 94-3.3F of this chapter.
B. Plat requirements.
(1) General requirements. A final plat may, for all or any portion of an approved
preliminary plat, be submitted to the municipal agency within three years of
the date of approval of the preliminary plat. In general, all requirements set
forth in this chapter for tentative plats shall apply to final plats with the
addition of the specific additional requirements set forth herein:
(a) A final plat shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 30 feet to the inch
and shall conform to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9, Map Filing
Law, as amended and supplemented, specified herein.
(b) All dimensions, both linear and angular, of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision and all lots and all lands reserved or dedicated for public use
shall balance, and their description shall close within a limit of error of
not more than one part in 10,000.
(c) Unless specifically waived by the municipal agency, the bearing system
used on the exterior boundaries of the final plat shall conform to the New
Jersey State Plane Coordinate System, or the plat shall show bearings
based on said system in addition to any other bearings shown. When
multiple bearing systems are shown, the bearings conforming to the New
Jersey State Plane Coordinate System shall be enclosed in brackets.
(d) Unless specifically waived by the municipal agency, coordinates, based
on the New Jersey State Plane Coordinate System (x and y), shall be
shown individually or in tabular form for the monumented (existing or
proposed) corners of the exterior boundary of the tract.
(e) The source of the New Jersey State Plane Coordinate System information
shown as required above shall be noted on the final plat.
(2) Purpose of a final plat. A final plat and supporting drawings and documents
for a proposed subdivision constitute the complete and fully detailed and
documented development of the subdivision proposal and become the basis for
the construction of the subdivision and inspection by the Borough Engineer,
other officials and the Land Use Board. The portion of the plat intended for
§ 94-6.10 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.10
94:154
filing must be recorded at the County Clerk's office to have legal status.
(3) Title block. The title block shall appear on all sheets and include:
(a) The title, to read "Final plat — major subdivision."
(b) The development name, if any.
(c) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers of the tract to be subdivided
as shown on the latest Borough Tax Map, the date of which shall also be
shown.
(d) The date of the original and all revisions.
(e) The names and addresses of the owner and subdivider, so designated.
(f) The names, signatures, addresses and license numbers of the engineer and
land surveyor who prepared the map. (The plat shall bear the embossed
seal of said engineer and land surveyor.)
(4) The final plat shall be based on a monumented, current, certified boundary
survey prepared in accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:40-5.1, Preparation of Land
Surveys. The date of the survey and the name of the person making the same
shall be shown on the map. If 12 months or more have passed since the date or
dates of the last recertification of the survey, it shall be recertified and, if
necessary, brought up to date. Any necessary revisions from the survey used
as a base for the tentative plat shall be specifically noted.
(5) A schedule shall be placed on the map indicating the acreage of the tract, the
number of lots, the zone, the minimum required lot areas, setbacks, yards and
dimensions.
(6) All design information submissions required by the provisions of the
improvements and design standards portions of this chapter shall accompany
the final plat.
(7) A grading plan showing existing and proposed grading contours at one-foot
intervals throughout the tract; except that if slopes exceed 5%, a two-foot
interval may be used, and if they exceed 10%, a five-foot interval is
permissible. Datum shall be United States Coast and Geodetic Survey datum
(MSL=0), and the source of datum shall be noted. In addition to proposed
grading contours, sufficient additional spot elevations shall be shown to
clearly delineate proposed grading, including corner elevations of buildings
and first-floor and basement elevations.
(8) The limits of all areas of proposed cuts and fills, exclusive of excavations for
basements, shall be clearly designated.
(9) On-site drainage plan.
(a) The drainage plan shall be presented in graphic form which shall clearly
show the street and lot layout and those items which are pertinent to
drainage, including existing and proposed contours as previously
required.
§ 94-6.10 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.10
94:155
(b) The plan shall outline each area contributing to each inlet.
(c) All proposed drainage shall be shown with pipe type and sizes, invert and
grate or rim elevations, grades and direction of flow. The direction of
flow of all surface waters and of all streams shall be shown.
(d) The drainage plan shall be accompanied by complete drainage
calculations made in accordance with standards set forth herein.
(10) Off-site drainage plan. The final plat shall also be accompanied by an off-site
drainage plan prepared in accordance with the following standards:
(a) The plan shall consist of an outline of the entire drainage basin in which
the property to be subdivided is located. The terminus of the basin and
existing ground contours or other basis for determining basin limits shall
be shown.
(b) The pertinent off-site existing drainage shall be shown with elevations of
inverts and grade to the nearest 0.1 of a foot.
(c) To the extent that information is available and may be obtained from the
County or Municipal Engineer(s), any existing plans for drainage
improvements shall be shown.
(d) In the event that a temporary drainage system is proposed, full plans of
that system shall be shown.
(e) The off-site drainage plans shall be accompanied by profiles of all
proposed drainage, showing existing and proposed finished grades,
channel section details, pipe sizes, types, inverts, crowns and slopes; all
proposed structures and connections; and design hydraulic grade lines for
all conduits designed to carry 40 or more cubic feet per second. Cross
sections at intervals not exceeding 100 feet shall be shown for all open
channels.
(11) Center-line profiles of all proposed streets showing:
(a) Existing and proposed finished grades and slopes.
(b) Pipe sizes, slope, types, inverts and grate or rim elevations of drainage
and sanitary sewerage facilities.
(12) Where required by the Borough Engineer, cross sections of proposed streets to
at least 10 feet outside of any grading limit at intervals of at least every 100
feet of all proposed streets.
(13) Where required by the Land Use Board, Environmental Commission or Shade
Tree Commission, the location, caliper and type of all:
(a) Living deciduous trees having a trunk of four inches or greater in
diameter at a height of four feet.
(b) All living coniferous trees having a trunk of four inches or greater in
diameter at a height of four feet.
§ 94-6.10 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.10
94:156
(c) All living dogwood (Cornus florida) or American holly (Ilex opaca) trees
having a trunk of one inch or greater in diameter at a height of four feet.
(d) All native laurel (Kalmia latifolia) shrubs having a root crown of three
inches or greater measured at the soil or surface level.
(14) The number, location and species of all proposed trees, shrubs and/or ground
cover plant materials and planting details of the same.
(15) Utility layouts, specifications and cross sections (sewers, water, gas, electric,
telephone, etc.) showing feasible connections to any existing or proposed
utility systems; provided, however, that detailed layouts of gas, electric and
telephone lines are not required. An indication of these on a typical road cross
section shall be sufficient. Layouts shall include proposed locations of
streetlights and fire hydrants. If private utilities are proposed, they shall
comply with all local, county and state regulations.
(16) The tops of the banks and boundaries of the floodways and flood hazard areas
of all existing watercourses, where such have been delineated, or the limits of
alluvial soils, where boundaries of floodways and flood hazard areas have not
been determined, and/or such other information as may assist the Board in the
determination of floodway and flood hazard area limits.
(17) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rightsof-
way, land to be reserved or dedicated to public use, all lot lines and site
easement lines, with accurate dimensions and bearings and radii, tangents,
chords, arcs and central angles of all curves and all front, rear and side (or
yard) setback lines.
(18) All monuments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., the Map Filing
Law, including all monuments found, monuments set and monuments to be set
and an indication of monumentation found and reset.
(19) Certificate of professional land surveyor as to accuracy of the details of the
plat.
(20) Lot and block numbers shown on the final plat shall conform to the Borough
Tax Map (or proposed revisions thereof) and shall be obtained by the
applicant's engineer and/or surveyor from the Borough Tax Assessor.
Proposed house numbers shall be obtained from the Borough Tax Assessor
and shall be shown encircled on the final plat, or on one of the attachments
thereto. The Borough Engineer shall not affix his signature to the final plat
unless the applicant has fully complied in this regard.
(21) Subdivision names and street names shown on the final plat shall not be the
same or similar to any name of any existing subdivision or street in the
Borough and shall be approved by the Borough Engineer.
(22) The location of areas dedicated for park and recreation facilities or common
open space as approved by the Board.
(23) Unless waived by the Board, a detailed plan setting forth the type and location
of all traffic control and regulatory devices. This plan shall have been
§ 94-6.10 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.10
94:157
approved by the New Jersey Department of Transportation. This plan shall be
prepared by consultation with the Borough Engineer and the Chief of Police
and shall provide for all appropriate traffic control measures necessary for the
health, safety, convenience and well-being of those occupying, or likely to
occupy, the subdivision between final approval and final acceptance. This plan
shall be accompanied by the formal request referred to in § 94-6.10A.
(24) Such other information as the Board and/or Borough Engineer may request
during review.
(25) Sectionalization of final plats shall be in conformance with the sectionalization
and staging plan, if any, approved with the preliminary plat.
C. Conditions of approval. Any approval of an application for development of a final
plat of a major subdivision shall be subject to the following conditions being
satisfied within 95 days of action by the approving authority or such period of time
as specified by the Land Use Board, prior to the signing of the plat or issuance of a
zoning permit:
(1) Payment of any outstanding real estate taxes and property improvement
assessments.
(2) Submission of additional prints of the plat map and attachments for
distribution, if required.
(3) Publication of a notice of the decision of the Board by the administrative
officer (Land Use Board Clerk) within the time set forth in § 94-3.3E of this
chapter.
(4) Final Monmouth County Planning Board approval, if not previously obtained.
(5) Final Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority approval, if
not previously obtained.
(6) Final Monmouth Consolidated Water Company approval.
(7) Final Jersey Central Power and Light Company, New Jersey Natural Gas
Company, New Jersey Bell Telephone and cable television company service
agreement.
(8) Certification of soil erosion and sediment control plans, if not previously
obtained.
(9) Fire Department approval, if not previously obtained.
(10) Granting of a New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection wetlands
permit, if required.
(11) Certification of approval of plans for drainage or watercourse diversions by
the State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection, where
required.
(12) Granting of a New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Coastal
Area Facilities Review Act (CAFRA) permit, where required.
§ 94-6.10 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.10
94:158
(13) Approval of any required riparian and/or tidelands grants or licenses.
(14) Granting of any required construction permits.
(15) Posting of required performance guaranties.
(16) Payment of required inspection fees.
(17) Evidence of a comprehensive general liability insurance policy in an amount
not less than $300,000 per occurrence, indemnifying and saving harmless the
Borough and its agencies, employees and agents from any liability for any acts
of the subdivider or his agents, contractors or employees in the implementation
of the approved subdivision. The insurance policy shall provide for 10 days'
notice to the Borough prior to cancellation. It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any property owner, subdivider or builder to carry on the
construction of a subdivision without having current, valid evidence of
insurance on file.
(18) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the Board or may be required
by federal, state, county or municipal law.
(19) A condition setting forth the time within which all other conditions must be
met as described in § 94-3.3F of this chapter.
D. Certification. In the event that the application for development for a final plat of a
major subdivision is approved, a certification to that effect in this form:
Approved as a major subdivision by the Shrewsbury Borough Land Use Board on
__________.
Attest: Chairman
Secretary Date
This plat must be filed in the office of the Clerk of Monmouth County on or before
__________, which date is 95 days after the date upon which this plat was signed.
Secretary
Borough Engineer/Land Surveyor
E. Filing of approved plat. If the applicant desires to proceed with a subdivision for
which final approval has been granted, he shall file with the County Recording
Officer a plat map drawn in compliance with the New Jersey Map Filing Law
(N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), as amended and supplemented, within 95 days from
the date upon which said plat was signed by the Land Use Board Chairman and
Secretary and Borough Engineer/Land Surveyor. The applicant shall, within one
week after filing the subdivision with the County Recording Officer, notify, in
writing, the Borough Engineer and Borough Tax Assessor of the date of filing of
the subdivision with the County Recording Officer and the case and sheet or page
number for the filed map. A duplicate tracing of the filed map indicating thereon
the filing date shall be obtained from the County Recording Officer by the Borough
Clerk, who shall distribute copies of the filed map to appropriate municipal
officials. In the event that the subdivider fails to so file within the period allowed,
the approval of the plat shall expire unless, prior to expiration, such time is extended
§ 94-6.10 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.10
94:159
by the Board for a period not to exceed 95 days for good cause shown.
F. Final approval.
(1) Application for final subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45
days of submission of a complete application to the Land Use Board
Subdivision Committee or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant.
(2) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 from the date of signing
of the plat unless, within such period, the plats shall have been duly filed by
the developer with the County Recording Officer. The Land Use Board may,
for good cause shown, extend the period of recording for an additional period
not to exceed 190 days from the date of the signing of the plat. The Land Use
Board may extend the ninety-five-day or 190-day period if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Land Use Board that the developer
was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays
in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental or quasigovernmental
entities and that the developer applied for and diligently pursued
the required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to the period
of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the
Land Use Board. The developer may apply for an extension either before or
after the original expiration date.
(3) No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording
Officer until it has been approved by the Land Use Board as indicated on the
instrument by the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the Land Use
Board or a certificate has been issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47,
40:55D-50, 40:55D-56, 40:55D-61, 40:55D-67 or 40:55D-76. The signatures
of the Chairman and Secretary of the Land Use Board shall not be affixed until
the developer has posted the guaranties required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53 and § 94-7.1 of this chapter. If the County Recording Officer
records any plat without such approval, such recording shall be deemed null
and void; and upon request of the Borough, the plat shall be expunged from
the official records.
(4) It shall be the duty of the County Recording Officer to notify the Land Use
Board in writing within seven days of the filing of any plat, identifying such
instrument by its title, date of filing and official number.
G. Effect of final approval.
(1) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted
and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date on which the resolution of final approval is
adopted, provided that, in the case of a major subdivision, the rights conferred
by this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the
required time period. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed
for final approval and, in the case of a subdivision, has duly recorded the plat
as required in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54, the Land Use Board may extend such
period of protection for an extension of one year but not to exceed three
§ 94-6.10 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.10
94:160
extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., the granting of final approval terminates the time period of preliminary
approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49 for the section granted final
approval.
(2) In the case of a subdivision for a residential cluster of 50 acres or more or
conventional subdivision of 100 acres or more, the Land Use Board may grant
the rights referred to in Subsection G(1) above for such period of time, longer
than two years, as shall be determined by the Land Use Board to be reasonable
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The developer may apply for
thereafter and the Land Use Board may thereafter grant an extension of final
approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined by the Land
Use Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be
developed, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
(3) Whenever the Land Use Board grants an extension of final approval pursuant
to Subsection G(1) or (2) above and final approval has expired before the date
on which the extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would
otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may apply for the extension
either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
(4) The Land Use Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a period
determined by the Board, but not exceeding one year from what would
otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly
or indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in
obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities and that
the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued these approvals. A
developer shall apply for the extension before what would otherwise be the
expiration date of the final approval or the 91st day after the developer
receives the last legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall
not preclude the Land Use Board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection G(1) or (2) above.
H. Combined preliminary and final major subdivision approval.
(1) An applicant may request and the Land Use Board may consent to accept an
application for development for combined preliminary and final major
subdivision approval, provided that:
(a) The proposed development is not to be constructed in sections or stages.
(b) The applicant pays the application fees and provides all submissions
required for both preliminary and final applications.
(c) Any notice of hearing requirements applicable to the preliminary plat
§ 94-6.10 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.10
94:161
§ 94-6.11. Final plat of major site plan. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670;
8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811; 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-1077]
stage is complied with.
(d) The applicant consents to the time limits for action by the Board to be the
greater of the limits set for either preliminary or final approval.
(e) The Board is satisfied that the scope of the project is not so large or so
complex as to require the additional review time which separate
applications would provide.
(2) Any approval granted by the Land Use Board on such combined application
shall confer upon the applicant all the rights set forth in this section for final
approval.
I. Display of final plat. The subdivider or his agent shall keep a clear and legible copy
of the approved final plat in plain view in a prominent location in his offices and/or
sales rooms from which sales in the approved subdivisions are made so that
prospective purchasers may have the opportunity to learn the special conditions, if
any, under which approval was given.
A. Required documents. Prior to issuance of a certificate of completeness or
scheduling of a final plat of a major site plan for public hearing, the Land Use Board
Site Plan Committee shall determine that the following have been submitted in
proper form:
(1) The Borough Engineer's report.
(2) The application for state wetlands approval, if required.
(3) The application for a stream encroachment permit, where required.
(4) Where applicable, a copy of the permit issued or, if the permit has not been
issued, the application filed with the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection under the Coastal Area Facility Review Act, and copies of the
environmental impact statement and any attachments thereto filed in
accordance with the provisions of the Act, or, in the alternate, a statement
issued by the Department of Environmental Protection that the proposed
development is exempt from the Act.
(5) Other submittals that may be required by the Land Use Board or federal, state
or local law.
(6) Required application fees as set forth in § 94-3.14 of this chapter.
(7) Twenty-seven copies of a plat and attachments meeting the requirements set
forth below.
(8) When required, five copies of an environmental impact report (EIR) meeting
the requirements of § 94-8.15.
B. Plat requirements. The final plat shall include all data required for the preliminary
§ 94-6.10 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.11
94:162
plat of the major site plan and shall be drawn to incorporate all changes required
as a condition of preliminary approval and shall be drawn by persons and to
specifications as required for a preliminary plat and shall be titled "Final plat —
major site plan."
C. Conditions of approval. Any approval of an application for development of a final
plat of a major site plan shall be subject to the following conditions being satisfied,
within a period of time specified by the Land Use Board, prior to the signing of the
plat or issuance of a zoning permit:
(1) Payment of any outstanding real estate taxes and property improvement
assessments.
(2) Submission of additional prints of the plat map and attachments for
distribution, if required.
(3) Publication of a notice of the decision of the Board by the administrative
officer (Land Use Board Clerk) within the time set forth in § 94-3.3E of this
chapter.
(4) Final Monmouth County Planning Board approval, if not previously obtained.
(5) Final Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority approval, if
not previously obtained.
(6) Final Monmouth Consolidated Water Company approval.
(7) Final Jersey Central Power and Light Company, New Jersey Natural Gas
Company, Bell Telephone Company and cable television company service
agreements, if applicable.
(8) Certification of soil erosion and sediment control plans, if not previously
obtained.
(9) Fire Department approval, if not previously obtained.
(10) Granting of a state wetlands permit, if required.
(11) Certification of approval of plans for drainage or watercourse diversions by
the State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection, where
required.
(12) Granting of a Coastal Area Facilities Review Act (CAFRA) permit, where
required.
(13) Approval of any required riparian grants or licenses.
(14) Granting of any required construction permits.
(15) Posting of required performance guaranties.
(16) Payment of required inspection fees as set in § 94-3.14 of this chapter.
(17) Evidence of a comprehensive general liability insurance policy in an amount
not less than $300,000 per occurrence, indemnifying and saving harmless the
§ 94-6.11 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.11
94:163
Borough and its agencies, employees and agents from any liability for any acts
of the developer or his agents, contractors or employees in implementing the
approved site plan. The insurance policy shall provide for 10 days' notice to
the Borough prior to cancellation. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any
property owner, developer or builder to carry on the construction of the site
without having a current, valid evidence of insurance on file.
(18) Any other conditions which may be imposed by the Board or may be required
by federal, state or local law.
(19) A condition setting forth the time within which all other conditions must be
satisfied as described in § 94-3.3F of this chapter.
D. Certification. In the event that the application for development for a final plat of a
major site plan is approved, a certification to that effect in the following form shall
be endorsed on the plat, and the original reproducible thereof shall be provided to
the Board by the applicant. Said original shall be signed by the Chairman and
Secretary of the Board after they receive a certification from the administrative
officer (Land Use Board Clerk) that all conditions of approval have been satisfied.
After the signature, the plat shall be reproduced as provided for in § 94-6.4G of this
chapter, and the original shall be returned to the applicant.
Approved as a final plat of a major site plan by the Borough of Shrewsbury Land
Use Board on __________.
Attest:
Chairman
Secretary Date
Borough Engineer Date
E. Filing of approved plat. If the applicant desires to proceed with a subdivision for
which final approval has been granted, he shall file with the County Recording
Officer a plat map drawn in compliance with the New Jersey Map Filing Law, as
amended and supplemented,76 within 95 days from the date upon which said plat
was signed by the Land Use Board Chairman and Secretary. The applicant shall,
within one week after filing the subdivision with the County Recording Officer,
notify, in writing, the Borough Engineer and Borough Tax Assessor of the date of
filing of the subdivision with the County Recording Officer and the case and sheet
or page number for the filed map. A duplicate tracing of the filed map indicating
thereon the filing date shall be obtained from the County Recording Officer by the
Land Use Board Clerk, who shall distribute copies of the filed map to appropriate
municipal officials. In the event that the subdivider fails to so file within the period
allowed, the approval of the plat shall expire unless, prior to expiration, such time
is extended by the Board for a period not to exceed 95 days for good cause shown.
F. Final approval. Application for final site plan approval shall be granted or denied
within 45 days of submission of a complete application to the administrative officer
(Land Use Board Clerk) or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
76. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 94-6.11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.11
94:164
G. Effect of final approval.
(1) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted
and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date on which the resolution of final approval is
adopted. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, the Land Use Board may extend such period of protection for an
extension of one year but not to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the granting of final approval
terminates the time period of preliminary approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49 for the section granted final approval.
(2) In the case of a site plan for a planned development of 50 acres or more,
conventional site plan for 100 acres or more or site plan for development of a
nonresidential floor area of 200,000 square feet or more, the Land Use Board
may grant the rights referred to in Subsection G(1) above for such period of
time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the Land Use Board to
be reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development. The developer may
apply for thereafter and the Land Use Board may thereafter grant an extension
of final approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined by
the Land Use Board to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval,
the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be
developed, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
(3) Whenever the Land Use Board grants an extension of final approval pursuant
to Subsection G(1) or (2) above and final approval has expired before the date
on which the extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would
otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may apply for the extension
either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
(4) The Land Use Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a period
determined by the Board, but not exceeding one year from what would
otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly
or indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in
obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities and that
the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued these approvals. A
developer shall apply for the extension before what would otherwise be the
expiration date of the final approval or the 91st day after the developer
receives the last legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this subsection shall
not preclude the Land Use Board from granting an extension pursuant to
Subsection G(1) or (2) above.
H. Combined preliminary and final major site plan approval.
§ 94-6.11 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.11
94:165
§ 94-6.12. Exempt development. [Amended 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811; 12-7-2020
by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
(1) An applicant may request and the Land Use Board may consent to accept an
application for development for combined preliminary and final major site
plan approval, provided that:
(a) The proposed development is not to be constructed in sections or stages.
(b) The applicant pays the application fees and provides all submissions
required for both preliminary and final applications.
(c) Any notice of hearing requirements applicable to the preliminary plat
stage are complied with.
(d) The applicant consents to the time limits for action by the Board to be the
greater of the limits set for either preliminary or final approval.
(e) The Board is satisfied that the scope of the project is not so large nor so
complex as to require the additional review time which separate
applications would provide.
(2) Any approval granted by the Land Use Board on such combined application
shall confer upon the applicant all the rights set forth in this section for final
approval.
A. Required documents. In cases where a proposed exempt development requires Land
Use Board action on an application for development for either the granting of a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 or direction for issuance of a building
permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or 40:55D-36, the administrative officer
(Land Use Board Clerk) shall, prior to issuance of a certificate of completeness or
scheduling of the application for development for a public hearing before the Land
Use Board, determine that the following have been submitted in proper form:
(1) Required application fees as set forth in § 94-3.14 of this chapter.
(2) Seven copies of a plot plan and/or other documents which clearly describe the
basis for the variance being requested or the basis for direction for issuance of
a building permit being requested.
(3) Seven copies of an area map showing the tax lot and block numbers of all
properties located within 200 feet of the property for which the application is
being made.
(4) Any other documents which the Land Use Board may request.
B. Conditions of approval. Any approval of an application for development by the
Land Use Board or issuance of a zoning permit under this section shall be subject
to the following:
(1) The applicant obtaining a construction permit or certificate of occupancy,
where a construction permit is not required, within the time period stated in
§ 94-3.1 of this chapter.
§ 94-6.11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-6.12
94:166
(2) Any other conditions which the Land Use Board may impose.
§ 94-6.12 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-6.12
94:167

ARTICLE VII
Performance Guaranties
[Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811]
§ 94-7.1. Performance guaranties required.
Before signing and recording of final subdivision plats, or as a condition of final
site plan approval or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d, the applicant shall have installed under the inspection of the
Borough Engineer, all improvements required unless the applicant has posted and the
Borough Council has accepted a performance guarantee providing for such installation
and maintenance.
§ 94-7.2. Posting of performance guarantee.
Performance guarantees shall be submitted in the following form:
A. The performance guarantee shall be in favor of the Borough in an amount not to
exceed 120% of the cost of installation, which cost shall be determined by the
Borough Engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4, for which the approving authority may deem necessary or
appropriate, including streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
streetlighting, shade trees, surveyors monuments, as shown on the final map and
required by the Map Filing Law, (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), water mains, culverts,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices, public improvements
of open space and, in the case of site plans only, other on-site improvements and
landscaping.
B. The Borough Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements
covered by the performance guarantee, which itemized cost estimate shall be
appended to each performance guarantee posted by the obligor.
A. 10% of the performance guarantee must be posted in cash.
B. The remaining 90% of the performance guarantee amount may be posted in cash,
certified check, irrevocable letter of credit or surety bond in the favor of the
Borough.
C. The Borough Council, by resolution, shall either approve the improvements
determined to be complete and satisfactory by the Borough Engineer, or reject any
or all of these improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for
rejection, and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in
the performance guarantee relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance
with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and appended to
the performance guarantee pursuant to § 94-7.1 above. This resolution shall be
adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the
Borough Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the Borough Council, the
obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee,
with respect to those approved improvements, except for that portion adequately
sufficient to secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved;
§ 94-7.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-7.2
94:169
§ 94-7.3. Release of guarantees.
provided that 30% of the amount of the total performance guarantee posted may be
retained to ensure completion and acceptability of all improvements.
D. For the purpose of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to its performance
guarantee, the amount of the performance guarantee attributable to each approved
improvement shall be reduced by the total amount for each such improvement, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to § 94-7.1, including any
contingency factor applied to the cost of installation. If the sum of the approved
improvements would exceed 70% of the total amount of the performance guarantee,
then the Borough may retain 30% of the amount of the total performance guarantee
to ensure completion and acceptability of all improvements, as provided above.
E. If the applicant elects to post a surety bond, it shall be issued by an insurance or
bonding company licensed to do business in New Jersey and acceptable to the
Borough Attorney.
F. All guarantees shall provide for construction of the required improvements within
two years of the date of their posting or such other time as determined by the
municipal agency. This time period may be extended by the Borough Council, in
the form of a resolution granting such extension provided the municipal agency has,
if necessary, extended the period of protection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52a. As
a condition of this extension the guarantee amount shall be increased or reduced, as
the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the installation
determined by the Borough Engineer as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
G. All performance guarantees shall remain in effect until formally released by the
Borough Council by a resolution and receipt of an approved maintenance guarantee
as required.
H. All guarantees, sureties, and lending institutions are subject to the approval of the
Borough Attorney and the Borough Council.
A. Upon substantial completion of required street improvements (except for the top
course) and appurtenant utility improvements, and the connection of same to the
public system, the obligor may request of the Borough Council in writing, by
certified mail addressed in care of the Borough Clerk, that the Borough Engineer
prepare, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough
Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to § 94-7, above, a
list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactorily completed improvements. If such a
request is made, the obligor shall send a copy of the request to the Borough
Engineer. The request shall indicate which improvements have been completed and
which improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor.
Concurrent with this request the obligor shall forward a set of as-built plans for the
following.
(1) Roads (plan and profiles).
(2) Surface and stormwater drainage (plans and profiles) for facilities in roads and
easements.
§ 94-7.2 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-7.3
94:170
(3) Sanitary sewers including individual lot connections and cleanouts (plans and
profiles) for facilities in roads and easements.
(4) Water mains, gas mains and underground electric, telephone and community
antenna television (C.A.T.V.) conduits (plans and profiles) for facilities in
roads and easements.
B. Thereupon the Borough Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered by the
obligor's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with the
Borough Council, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor not
later than 45 days after the receipt of the obligator's report.
C. The list prepared by the Borough Engineer shall state, in detail, with respect to each
improvement determined to be incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent
of the incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature and extent of,
and remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement
determined to be unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the Borough Engineer shall
identify each improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory together
with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be made in the performance
guarantee relating to the completed and satisfactory improvement, in accordance
with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and appended to
the performance guarantee pursuant to § 94-7.1, above.
D. The Borough Council, by resolution, shall either approve the improvements
determined to be complete and satisfactory by the Borough Engineer, or reject any
or all of the improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for
rejection, and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in
the performance guarantee relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance
with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and appended to
the performance guarantee pursuant to § 94-7.1 above. This resolution shall be
adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the
Borough Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the Borough Council, the
obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee,
with respect to those approved improvements, except for that portion adequately
sufficient to secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved;
provided that 30% of the amount of the performance guarantee posted may be
retained to ensure completion and acceptability of all improvements.
E. If the Borough Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report as requested by
the obligor pursuant to Subsections A and B, above, within 45 days from the receipt
of the request, the obligor may apply to the court in a summary manner for an order
compelling the Borough Engineer to provide the list and report within a state period
of time and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees,
may be awarded to the prevailing party. If the Borough Council fails to approve or
reject the improvements determined by the Borough Engineer to be complete and
satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee for the complete and satisfactory
improvements within 45 days from the receipt of the Borough Engineer's list and
report, the obligor may apply to the court in a summary manner for an order
compelling within a stated time, approval of the complete and satisfactory
improvements and approval of a reduction in the performance guarantee for the
approvable complete and satisfactory improvements in accordance with the
§ 94-7.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-7.3
94:171
§ 94-7.4. Maintenance guarantee.
§ 94-7.5. Inspections.
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Borough Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to § 94-7.1, and the cost of applying to the court,
including reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
F. In the event that the obligor has made a deposit with the Borough or approving
authority as part of the performance guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in
the performance guarantee pursuant to this section shall be applied to the cash
deposit in the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears in the full amount
of the performance guarantee.
G. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving authority
may require the obligor to complete or correct such improvements and, upon
completion or correction, the same procedure of notification, as set forth above,
shall be followed.
A. Any release of performance guarantees will be conditioned upon the provision of a
maintenance guarantee to be posted with the Borough Council, in an amount equal
to 15% of the performance guarantee amount and in a form approved by the
Borough Attorney.
B. The maintenance guarantee shall state that all improvements will remain in
satisfactory condition for a period of at least two years.
A. All site improvements shall be inspected during the time of their installation under
the supervision of the Borough Engineer. Prior to the start of construction of any
improvements, the applicant shall deposit by cash or certified check with the
Borough Clerk the applicable inspection fee required in this section.
B. In no case shall installation of underground facilities or any paving work be
conducted without permission from the Borough Engineer.
C. The Borough Engineer's office shall be notified two working days prior to
commencement of each of the following phases of construction so that the Borough
Engineer or a qualified representative may be present to inspect the work:
(1) Clearing and grading.
(2) Road subgrade.
(3) Curb and gutter forms.
(4) Curbs and gutters.
(5) Road paving.
(6) Sidewalk and driveway apron forms.
(7) Sidewalks and driveway aprons.
(8) Drainage pipes and other drainage construction.
§ 94-7.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-7.5
94:172
(9) Street name signs and traffic signage and striping.
(10) Monuments.
(11) Sanitary sewers.
(12) Water distribution.
(13) Detention and/or retention basins.
(14) Topsoil, seeding, planting shade trees.
(15) Driveways and parking lots.
D. Any improvement installed contrary to the plan or plat approval by the Borough or
Borough design standards shall constitute just cause to void the municipal approval.
E. Any improvements installed without notice for inspection shall constitute just cause
for:
(1) The issuance of a "stop work" order by the Borough Engineer pending the
resolution of any dispute.
(2) Removal of the uninspected improvements.
(3) The payment by the developer of any costs of material testing.
(4) The restoration by the developer of improvements disturbed by any material
testing.
F. Inspection by the Borough of the installation of improvements and utilities shall no
operate subject the Borough to liability for claims, suits or liability of any kind that
may at any time arise because of defects or negligence during construction or at any
time thereafter, it being recognized that the responsibility to maintain safe
conditions at all times during construction and to provide proper utilities and
improvements is upon the owners and his contractor, if any.
G. Inspection fees. The obligor shall reimburse the Borough for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Borough Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements; provided that the Borough may require of the developer a deposit
for the inspection fees.
(1) The amount of money deposited by the applicant shall not exceed, except for
extraordinary circumstances the greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of the
improvements which cost shall be determined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. For
those developments for which the inspection fees are less than $10,000, fees
may, at the option of the developer, be paid in two installments. The initial
amount deposited by the developer shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When
the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the
Borough Engineer for inspection, the developer shall deposit the remaining
50% of the inspection fees. For those developments for which the inspection
fees are $10,000 or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in
four installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer shall be 25% of
§ 94-7.5 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-7.5
94:173
§ 94-7.6. Developer's agreement.
Prior to the signing and recording of final major subdivision plats and as a condition
of final site plan approval in the case of a site plan, the developer shall enter into
an agreement with the Borough Council if so required by the municipal agency. This
agreement shall be a form that is acceptable to the Borough Attorney and one in
which the developer agrees to abide by the terms and conditions of approval, construct
the required improvements in accordance with the approved plans, agree to maintain
the constructed improvements including but not limited to, payment of streetlighting
charges, snow removal, maintenance of storm drainage, sewer and water facilities. The
developer also shall agree that in the event the improvements are not maintained, the
Borough can utilize the cash portions of the performance guarantees to immediately
attend to items presenting a safety hazard.
§ 94-7.7. Development of stages.
In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of the development pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, the provisions of § 94-7 shall be applied by stage or section.
§ 94-7.8. Acceptance of streets and improvements.
To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the Borough on the
subdivision plat or site plan, the Borough Council shall be deemed, upon the release of
any performance guarantee required pursuant to § 94-7.3 above, to accept dedication for
public use of streets or roads and any other improvements made thereon according to
site plans and subdivision plats approved by the approving authority, provided that such
improvements have been inspected and have received final approval by the Borough
Engineer.
the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit drops to 10% of the
inspections fees because the amount deposited by the developer has been
reduced by the amount paid to the Borough Engineer for inspection, the
developer shall make additional deposits of 25% of the inspection fees.
(2) The Borough Engineer shall not perform any inspection if sufficient funds to
pay for these inspections are not on deposit.
(3) Upon final acceptance or final approval of the improvements, any balance
remaining for any deposit paid hereunder shall be returned to the applicant
without any interest.
(4) The foregoing deposits shall be a condition of preliminary approval where the
developer intends to post performance guarantees and construct the
improvements after final approval.
§ 94-7.5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-7.8
94:174
ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards and Improvement Specifications
§ 94-8.1. General improvement standards.
§ 94-8.2. General design standards.
A. All improvements shall be installed in complete accordance with the standards of
this chapter, with other particular specifications approved by the municipal agency
and Borough Engineer and with all other applicable municipal, county, state and
federal regulations.
(1) Should improvements be required which are not provided for within the
particular sections of this chapter, they shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with good engineering practice and recognized design standards.
(2) The developer (or his engineer) shall submit detailed design calculations and
construction specifications in each instance.
(3) Prior to initiation of such specialized design, the particular standards to be
utilized shall be submitted for review by the municipal agency and Borough or
Municipal Agency Engineer.
B. The Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation 1989 (and all subsequent editions), including all
addenda, and the Standard Construction Details of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation (latest revision), as modified, supplemented, amended or superseded
by the requirements of this chapter, by the approved final plat, by particular
agreement among the municipal agency, Borough Council and subdivider or by
other applicable Borough, county, state or federal regulations, shall govern the
completion of the required improvements. Such Standard Specifications and
Standard Construction Details are made a part of this chapter by reference and will
not be repeated herein.77 It is the responsibility of all developers to familiarize
themselves with these standards, copies of which may be examined at the offices of
the Borough Clerk, administrative officer and Borough Engineer and may be
obtained, upon payment of the cost thereof, from the New Jersey Department of
Transportation. The requirements of this chapter, of an approved final plat or of
particular agreements and conditions of approval and of applicable Borough,
County, state or federal regulations shall govern and prevail in the case of conflict
between them and the Standard Specifications or Standard Construction Details.
Should the Borough adopt, subsequent to the effective date of this chapter,
particular and specific Standard Construction Details for the Borough, they shall
govern and prevail over the Standard Construction Details of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation previously referred to. [Amended 12-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 670]
A. All site plan and subdivision plats shall conform to design standards that will
encourage desirable development patterns within the Borough.
77. Editor's Note: Said standards are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 94-8.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.2
94:175
(1) Where either or both an Official Map or Master Plan have been adopted, the
site plan or subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown
thereon.
(2) The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds
and other municipal facilities shown on an adopted Master Plan or Official
Map shall be considered in the review of site plans and subdivision plats.
(3) Where no Master Plan or Official Map exists or makes no provisions therefor,
streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the final plat in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 and shall be such as to lend themselves
to the harmonious development of the Borough and the enhancement of the
public welfare.
B. Within the criteria established by and subject to the review and approval of the
municipal agency, all design of a site plan or subdivision is the responsibility of the
developer, and he shall be responsible for and bear the entire cost of any and all
investigations, tests, reports, surveys, samples, calculations, environmental
assessments, designs, researches or any other activity necessary to the completion
of the design.
(1) The standards set forth in this chapter shall be taken to be the minimum
necessary to meet its purposes as set forth elsewhere herein.
(2) The responsibility of the municipal agency shall be to see that these minimum
standards are followed and, in those cases not covered by these standards,
sufficient precautions are taken to assure that the eventual design is conducive
to the implementation of the purposes of this chapter and the Borough Master
Plan.
(3) The municipal agency may employ professionals in various disciplines to
advise and assist it in its determinations.
(4) Any decisions of the municipal agency regarding the suitability or sufficiency
of any design proposal, taken upon advice of its professionals and subject to
the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed conclusive.
C. To properly execute the design of a site plan or subdivision, it is anticipated that the
developer will obtain or cause to be obtained certain design data, including but not
limited to soil tests and analyses, environmental assessments, traffic studies and
traffic projections, surveys, reports and similar design data.
(1) Any and all such data obtained by the developer, or by others retained by him
to complete the design, shall be made available to the municipal agency and
its employees and professional consultants, for the purpose of reviewing the
proposed design.
(2) Should the municipal agency determine that the design data submitted is not
sufficient for the purpose of completing a full review of the proposal, it may
request the applicant to provide such additional information as is deemed
necessary.
(3) Until the applicant supplies such information, no submission under the
§ 94-8.2 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.2
94:176
§ 94-8.3. (Reserved)
§ 94-8.4. Architectural and building site design standards. [Amended 12-7-2020
by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
provisions of this chapter shall be termed complete.
(4) Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted to prevent the municipal agency
from making or causing to be made such independent studies, calculations or
other undertakings as it deems necessary in the review of any application for
development.
D. When a developer determines that it will be necessary to utilize design standards in
addition to or other than those minimum requirements established herein, he is
advised to consult with the Borough Engineer prior to beginning his detailed design,
for review and approval of his proposed design standards.
(1) Standards utilized should generally be nationally recognized and in common
use in this area.
(2) Design standards may not be utilized if they do not have the approval of the
Borough Engineer.
E. It is recognized that, in certain instances, preexisting conditions or the uniqueness
of a particular proposal may require the waiver of some of the standards presented
herein.
(1) The municipal agency may consider and, for cause shown, may waive strict
conformance with such of these detailed design standards as it sees fit.
(2) Any developer desiring such action shall prevent with his application for
development a listing of all such waivers desired, together with the reasons
therefor.
A. The following standards and guidelines contained herein shall apply to all
applications for site plan approval containing proposed new buildings and
structures or alterations or modifications to existing structures.
B. These building design objectives are intended to assist the Land Use Board in the
review of specific development proposals:
(1) All buildings should be located with proper consideration of their orientation
and relationship to other buildings, both existing and proposed, in terms of
light, air and usable open space; access to public rights-of-way and off-street
parking; height and bulk; drainage and existing topography; trees and
vegetation; watercourses; solar access; and energy conservation.
(2) Groups of related buildings shall be designed to present a harmonious
appearance in terms of architectural style and exterior materials.
(3) Buildings should be designed to be attractive from all vantage points,
including fences, storage areas and rear entrances.
§ 94-8.2 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.4
94:177
(4) Building setbacks should be varied to the extent practicable in order to provide
an interesting interplay of buildings and open spaces.
(5) Accessory buildings should be architecturally treated in the same manner as
principal structures.
(6) All exterior storage and service yards, loading docks and ramps, electrical and
mechanical equipment and enclosures, storage tanks and the like shall be
screened from the public view, within and from the outside of the
development, by a fence, wall or mature landscape materials, consistent with
the exterior design of the building within the development.
(7) Colors, materials and finishes shall be coordinated in all exterior elevations of
buildings to achieve continuity of expression. All roof and wall projections,
such as gutters, flues, louvers, utility boxes, vents, grills, downspouts, exposed
flashing and overhead doors, shall be painted or installed with an anodized or
acrylic finish, in a color to match adjacent surfaces.
(8) Buildings of a traditional design should have steeper roofs. Overhangs should
be consistent in front and rear.
(9) All openings in the wall of a structure, such as windows and doors, should
relate to each other on each elevation, vertically and horizontally, in a clearly
defined order and should take into account orientation to the sun, in terms of
architectural elements for sun shading and consideration of the efficiencies of
heat loss and gain through such openings.
(10) Buildings and parking areas should be designed to relate to existing grade
conditions. Exposed basement walls are not acceptable as an architectural
treatment. All exposed basement walls must be painted to relate properly to
the side of the building.
(11) Landscape elements shall relate to architectural design elements and shall be
considered a strong unifying component of the overall site design, reflecting
the natural and man-made (architectural and aesthetic) qualities of the
development.
C. These residential design standards and guidelines are intended to assist the Land
Use Board in the review of specific proposals:
(1) Residential design should create the appearance of individuality of housing
units and avoid the appearance of a large, undifferentiated project.
(2) Dwelling units should have adequate interior living space, using lowmaintenance,
high-quality and aesthetically attractive materials.
(3) Easy access to outdoor space and parking from all residential units should be
provided.
(4) The design should provide a safe, well-lighted residential environment, free of
through traffic and congestion.
D. Senior citizen housing should be located near community facilities, public
§ 94-8.4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.4
94:178
§ 94-8.5. Blocks.
transportation and neighborhood retail services.
E. Dwelling units in a development designed for possible use by physically
handicapped persons shall meet or exceed New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
minimum property standards and the additional requirements contained in N.J.A.C.
5:23-1 et seq. pertaining to barrier-free regulations.
F. The commercial office and industrial design standards contained below are
intended to assist the Land Use Board in the review of specific proposals:
(1) Exterior materials may include brick, stone, anodized aluminum and baked
enamel metal panels, precast concrete and similar materials, with appropriate
texture and trim to prevent a large, undifferentiated facade of the same
material. All buildings within the Historic District shall utilize exterior
materials compatible with and of a type which will enhance the historical
character of the area.
(2) All roof planes or caps meeting the exterior facade shall have overhangs or
appropriate cornice and trim details.
(3) All major entrances to buildings shall be properly identified with architectural
elements, such as recessed entranceways, projected overhangs and porticoes.
(4) Flat roof canopies on metal pipe columns shall not be used on commercial
buildings.
(5) Window and door openings shall include appropriate trim and either recesses
or overhangs to promote a harmonious variety of light and shade on the facade
of the building.
(6) Buildings and structures used for functional purposes, such as warehouses,
indoor sports facilities and manufacturing facilities, shall include appropriate
landscaping adjacent to boundary facades in the public view.
A. The block length, width and acreage within bounding roads shall be such as to
accommodate the size and dimensions of lots required for the zoning district by this
chapter and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and safety of
vehicles and pedestrians.
B. Block lengths may vary between 400 feet and 2,000 feet, but blocks along other
than local collector streets shall not be less than 1,000 feet long.
C. Interior crosswalks with a right-of-way 20 feet wide containing a sidewalk of four
feet or greater in width and fenced on both sides may be required for blocks longer
than 1,000 feet, from the ends of the culs-de-sac to adjacent streets and elsewhere
as required by the public convenience, including the provision of walks giving
access to schools, playgrounds and shopping centers without the necessity of
crossing traffic thoroughfares.
D. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be sufficient to
meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
§ 94-8.4 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.6
94:179
§ 94-8.6. Buffer areas and screening. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670;
10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 921; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
A. Buffers shall be required for tracts fronting on arterial and collector streets, on the
perimeter of all tracts within business zones, the Professional Zone, the R1-B
Single-Family Senior Citizen Zone, the Light Industrial Zone and the Limited
Industrial, Research and Office Zones, around parking lots and unloading areas, and
for nonresidential uses which abut areas zoned residential or which are conforming
residential uses where the Land Use Board determines that a proposed development
should be screened or separated from adjacent uses and from public view.
B. A buffer shall include an area that is topsoiled and containing ground cover, seed
and/or sod and appropriate plantings of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs.
Where buffers are required, the buffer shall be at least 20 feet wide and located
within common open space areas. In no case shall part of the yard area assigned to
a building or a dwelling be considered as part of the buffer.
(1) A landscaped buffer screen, where required, shall comply with the following
minimum standards:
(a) Shrubs and trees required as buffer elements shall be comprised of a
variety of species approved by the Shade Tree Commission and shall
conform to the current American Standard for Nursery Stock sponsored
by the American Association of Nurserymen, Inc.
(b) Where a commercial, business, office or industrial use abuts an existing,
conforming residential use, a landscaped buffer shall be required along
the perimeter and within the commercial, industrial, office or business use
lot in conformance with the Schedule of Lot and Development
Regulations contained within this chapter.78
(c) Preexisting vegetation and trees shall be preserved and incorporated into
the landscaped buffer in a manner recommended by the Environmental
Commission and/or Shade Tree Commission, provided that additional
plantings will be incorporated to comply with the minimum standards
above.
(d) A berm may be used as part of the landscaped buffer screen, in which
case the landscaping requirements may be reduced in minimum height
and quantity, provided that a suitable and attractive visual screen is
maintained. The berm shall not be less than three feet wide. The design
shall be reviewed by the Borough Engineer and the Environmental
Commission and/or Shade Tree Commission.
(e) The intensity of the buffer screen may be reduced by the Land Use Board
if it is found that the proposed use is visually attractive and not
detrimental to the appearance of the neighboring uses.
(f) Within a buffer area, no use, activity or sign shall be established other
than the following:
78. Editor's Note: Said schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-8.6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.6
94:180
[1] Driveways which are necessary to provide proper means of ingres
and egress for parking areas. Driveways, when located in a buffer,
shall provide direct access from the road or right-of-way line to the
nearest nonbuffered area. Loop or peripheral roads shall not be
located within a buffer area.
[2] Directional signs in conjunction with said driveways which are
necessary for the proper guidance and control of vehicular traffic,
provided that not more than one such sign is erected in conjunction
with each driveway.
C. Within buffer areas required by Subsection A above, there shall be provided
screening in accordance with the following regulations:
(1) Except as otherwise provided herein, the screening area shall be a minimum of
15 feet in width and shall be planted with evergreen trees approved by the
municipal agency based on the recommendations of the Environmental
Commission and Shade Tree Commission and the Borough Engineer. Trees
shall be planted in two staggered rows seven feet apart and shall be between
six feet and eight feet in height and shall conform to the current standard for
nursery stock of the American Association of Nurserymen. Within each row,
the trees shall be planted on six-foot centers. The municipal agency may vary
the spacing of the trees depending upon the species and the size of the
specimens.
§ 94-8.6 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.6
94:181
Double Staggered Rows of Approved Evergreen Trees
(2) In cases where it is determined to be desirable by the municipal agency,
evergreen trees planted with a minimum height of four feet may be substituted
for the six-foot trees required under § 94-8.6, provided that the developer shall
install a solid six-foot-high stockade fence along the outside of the required
screening strips in accordance with § 94-8.16 prior to commencing the
construction of improvements on the site. The spacing of the trees may be
varied by the municipal agency depending upon the size and species of the
specimen to be used. The stockade fence shall be maintained in good condition
by the developer as long as it exists or until such time as the evergreen trees
have grown to a minimum height of 10 feet, at which time the developer may
remove the stockade fence in lieu of maintaining it.
(3) Where all proposed buildings, parking areas and other improvements are
located 100 feet or more from a property line abutting a residential zone or
use, the Land Use Board may permit a screening area 10 feet in width planted
with a single row of evergreen trees in a location approved by the municipal
agency, planted on five-foot centers with a minimum height of six feet to eight
feet, of a type and species to be substituted for the screening area required in
Figure 1. (See Figure 2.) spacing requirements for the buffer plantings may be
varied by the municipal agency depending upon the size and species of the
§ 94-8.6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.6
94:182
specimens to be used.
Single Row of Approved Evergreen Trees
(4) The required height for a screening area shall be measured in relationship to
the elevation of the land at the nearest required rear, side or front yard setback
line of the abutting residentially zoned properties. Where the average ground
elevation of the location at which the screening strip is to be planted is less
than the average ground elevation at the nearest required rear, side or front
setback line on the abutting residentially zoned property, the municipal agency
may require the height of the trees planted in the required screening strip to be
increased by an amount equal to the difference in elevation. Where the average
ground elevation of the location on which the screening strip is to be planted
is greater than the average ground elevation at the nearest required rear, side
or front setback line on the abutting residentially zoned property, the
municipal agency may permit the height of trees planted in the required
screening strips to be decreased by an amount equal to 1/2 the difference in
elevation, except that in no case shall the required height be reduced to less
than four feet.
(5) All trees in a screening area shall be watered weekly through the first growing
season. The developer shall construct a six-inch-deep earth saucer six inches
outside the dripline of each tree to hold water and fill with woodchips or other
suitable mulch. Trees shall be nursery-grown, balled and bagged, sheared and
shaped, of the required height and planted according to accepted horticultural
standards.
(6) At the following locations within required screening areas, evergreen shrubs
with a maximum mature height of 30 inches or less, approved by the municipal
agency as to type, location and spacing, shall be provided in lieu of the
evergreen trees specified above:
(a) Within sight triangle easements.
(b) Within 25 feet of intersections where sight triangle easements are not
§ 94-8.6 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.6
94:183
§ 94-8.7. Bulkheads.
provided.
(c) Within 25 feet of access drives.
(7) Waiver. The municipal agency, after favorable recommendation by the
Borough Engineer and the Shade Tree Commission, and after examination and
review, may waive, fully or partially, provisions of this section in heavily
wooded areas, in areas unsuitable for plantings or because of other exceptional
conditions and/or may require supplementary plantings. In cases where
plantings are deemed not necessary, the payment representing the cost of said
improvement shall be made by the developer to a Shade Tree Planting Fund to
be established and maintained by the Borough for public rights-of-way.
D. Buffers and visual screens shall be required for all properties along railroad rightsof-
way in accordance with the design guidelines of the Monmouth County Planning
Board, "Buffer and Visual Screen Along Railroad Right-of-Way," as specified in
the following diagrams and tables listing plant materials:
(1) Diagrams:
(a) The visual screening and protection of the railroad right-of-way.
(b) Spacing layout of trespass inhibiting shrubs.
(c) Double row of evergreen plant material, to provide visual screening.
(d) Layout and spacing of evergreen trees.
(e) Installation of board fence for visual screening and protection.
(2) Tables:
(a) Trespass inhibiting shrubs.
(b) Evergreen buffer plant material.
A. All development on tidal lagoons, navigable waterways or other bodies of water,
either existing or proposed, shall provide for bulkheading. All development on
nontidal bodies of water, either existing or proposed, shall provide for bulkheading
or other appropriate permanent bank stabilization, acceptable to the municipal
agency. In no case shall bank slopes, bulkhead, riprap, revetments or other elements
of bank stabilization be located within required minimum yard areas.
B. Bulkheads may be constructed of treated timber, reinforced concrete, marine alloy
steel or other material in accordance with approved details, if adopted, and a
detailed design to be submitted by the developer in each case for approval by the
Borough Engineer and such other approval authorities, including but not limited to
the United States Army Corps of Engineers, as may be necessary.
C. The municipal agency may consider waiver and/or modification of this requirement
when necessary to preserve wetlands or other natural features, provided that
minimum lot sizes may be maintained and that all development may be made
§ 94-8.6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.7
94:184
§ 94-8.8. Bulk storage.
§ 94-8.9. Clearing and grading.
reasonably secure from erosion.
A. In zoning districts where bulk storage is a permitted accessory use, the following
minimum requirements shall apply;
(1) No bulk storage of material or equipment shall be permitted in any required
front yard area or within 50 feet of any public street, whichever is greater.
(2) No bulk storage of materials or equipment shall be permitted between any side
or rear lot line and the required side or rear setback line.
(3) All bulk storage areas shall be screened from public view by means of suitable
fencing and/or evergreen plantings as required by the municipal agency.
Where the property is adjacent to a residential zone or use, the screening shall
meet the minimum requirements of § 94-8.6 of this chapter and a six-foot
chain-link fence or equivalent shall be provided.
B. No fence used to screen a bulk storage area shall be placed closer to any property
line than the distance constituting the required front, side or rear setbacks, and all
setback areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of § 94-8.6
of this chapter.
C. All service roads, driveways and bulk storage areas shall be paved with bituminous
concrete or other surfacing material, as required by the municipal agency, which
shall be of sufficient strength to handle the anticipated use.
D. In no instance shall on-site bulk storage of material exceed the height of 10 feet.
E. No heavy equipment shall be operated or parked closer to the front property line
than the required front setback, plus 20 feet, except as the same may be in transit to
or from the site.
A. All grading, excavation or embankment construction shall be in accordance with
the approved final plat and shall provide for the disposal of all stormwater runoff
and such groundwater seepage as may be encountered. All clearing, excavation and
embankment construction shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements
of the New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. No
excavated material may be removed from the site, except in accordance with an
approved final plat, nor without the prior approval of the Borough Engineer. Where
borrow excavation materials from off-site sources are required to complete the
necessary grading, such material shall meet the requirements of the Standard
Specifications for Borrow Excavation, Zone 3, and shall be subject to the approval
of the Borough Engineer. All trees to be saved must have a snow fence erected at
the dripline of the tree.
B. Material which the Borough Engineer judges unsuitable for use in roadway
embankment may be used for grading outside the roadway right-of-way or in
building areas with the permission of the Borough Engineer and the Construction
§ 94-8.7 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.9
94:185
Official (for building areas). Any unsuitable material which cannot be satisfactorily
utilized on the site shall be removed from the site and disposed of at places to be
provided by the developer.
C. To preserve the integrity of pavements, embankments and excavations for streets or
roadways shall be provided with slopes no steeper than one foot of vertical rise for
every three feet of horizontal distance.
D. Such slopes shall be suitably planted with perennial grasses or other ground cover
plantings in accordance with the plans approved by the municipal agency.
E. In areas where excavations or embankments would extend significantly beyond
road rights-of-way, thereby causing disruption to the natural environment of the
development, the municipal agency may, upon the application of the developer,
consider or may, upon it own initiative, direct the use of terraces, retaining walls,
crib walls or other means of maintaining roadway slopes.
(1) In any event, the entire roadway right-of-way shall be fully graded, and any
retaining walls, crib walls or terraces shall be located outside of the roadway
right-of-way, and their maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the property on which they are constructed.
(2) The developer shall make suitable provisions in the instrument transferring
title to any property containing such terraces, retaining walls or crib walls and
shall provide a copy thereof to the municipal agency and the Borough Clerk.
(3) All graded areas within or outside of the roadway right-of-way shall be neatly
graded, topsoiled, fertilized and seeded to establish a stand of perennial
grasses.
F. The tops of slopes in excavations and the toe of slopes in embankment areas shall
not extend beyond the right-of-way line or, where provided, the exterior line of the
six-foot-wide shade tree and utility easement required herein. Sidewalk and
easement areas shall slope at 2% to the top of the curb elevation, and sidewalk
construction shall conform to this slope.
G. Lot grading. Lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage and to prevent the
collection of stormwater. Said grading shall be performed in a manner which will
minimize the damage to or destruction of trees growing on the land. Topsoil shall
be provided and/or redistributed on the surface as cover and shall be stabilized by
seeding or planting. Grading plans shall have been submitted with the preliminary
and final plats, and any departure from these plans must be approved in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter for the modification of improvements.
Grading shall be designed to prevent or minimize drainage to structures or
improvements when major storms, exceeding the design basis of the storm drainage
system, occur.
(1) Wherever possible, the land shall be graded so that the stormwater from each
lot shall drain directly to the street. If it is impossible to drain directly to the
street, it shall be drained to a system of interior yard drainage designed in
accordance with the standards for drainage facilities, and suitable drainage
easements shall be provided.
§ 94-8.9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.9
94:186
§ 94-8.10. Concrete requirements.
(2) Unless otherwise required by the standard specifications, all tree stumps,
masonry and other obstructions shall be removed to a depth of two feet below
finished grade.
(3) The minimum slope for lawns shall be 1% and, for smooth hard-finished
surfaces, other than roadways, 1/2 of 1%.
(4) The maximum grade for lawns within five feet of a building shall be 10% and
for lawns more than five feet from a building, 25%.
(5) Retaining walls installed in slope control areas shall be constructed of heavy
treated timber or logs, reinforced concrete, other reinforced masonry or of
other constructed acceptable to the Borough Engineer and adequately designed
and detailed on the final plat to carry all earth pressures, including any
surcharges. The height of retaining walls shall not exceed 1/3 of the horizontal
distance from the foundation wall of any building to the face of the retaining
wall. Should the Borough adopt, subsequently to this chapter, standard details
for such construction, the same shall govern.
(6) The developer shall take all necessary precautions to prevent any siltation of
streams during construction. Such provisions may include, but are not limited
to, construction and maintenance of siltation basins or holding ponds and
division berms through the course of construction.
A. All concrete used in any subdivision or site improvement shall be prepared in
accordance with the requirements of the standard specifications for the various
classes of concrete used, except that the twenty-eight-day compressive strength of
the concrete used shall not be less than the following:
Type of Concrete
Strength
(pounds per square inch)
Class A 5,000
Class B 4,500
Class C 4,000
Class D 3,500
B. Unless specific written permission is obtained from the Borough Engineer to the
contrary, only concrete obtained from dry-batched redi-mixed trucks shall be
allowed.
C. Concrete shall be cured with a compound in accordance with the following methods
of materials:
(1) Methods of application. The compound shall be applied in a continuous
uniform film by means of power-operated pressure spraying or distributing
equipment at the rate directed by the Engineer, but not less than one gallon per
200 square feet of surface. The equipment for applying the compound shall
§ 94-8.9 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.10
94:187
§ 94-8.11. Curbs and gutters.
provide for adequate agitation of the compound during application and must
be approved by the Engineer before work is started. If the compound becomes
too thick for satisfactory application during cold weather, the material may
be warmed in a water bath at a temperature not over 100° F. Thinning with
solvents will not be permitted. Should the method of applying the compound
produce a nonuniform film, its use shall be discontinued, and the curing shall
be done by another method approved by the Engineer that will conform to the
requirements for curing concrete.
(2) Materials for curing: liquid compound, clear or translucent. Clear or
translucent liquid curing compound shall consist of a blend of resins and other
suitable materials held in solution in a volatile solvent. It shall not separate on
standing, shall be nontoxic and shall become dry to touch within four hours
after being applied to the concrete under ordinary conditions. Acceptance for
continued use also will be based upon satisfactory field performance.
(3) Consistency. The consistency of the compound shall be such that it can be
applied to the concrete in the amount specified, as a fine spray, by means of an
atomizing nozzle.
(4) Character of film. The compound shall adhere to damp, vertical or horizontal
concrete surfaces forming a continuous coherent film when applied at the
specified rate. When dry, the film shall not be tacky or track off the concrete
when walked upon nor impart a slippery condition to the surface.
(5) Color. The compound shall produce no darkening or changing of the color of
the concrete which it is applied. It shall, however, be of such a nature or so
treated that the film will be distinctively visible for at least four hours after
application. Any coloring matter added to the compound shall be a fugitive
organic dye of a color approved by the Engineer. All trace of this color shall
be indistinct 30 days after application.
(6) Reaction with concrete. The compound shall not react deleteriously with the
wet concrete and shall form a superficial layer over the surface thereof.
(7) Moisture retention. When tested in accordance with current ASTM
Designation C 156, the moisture loss shall be not more than 0.055 gram per
square centimeter of the mortar specimen surface, based on the amount of
water in the mortar at the time the curing material is applied.
A. Curbing shall be constructed on both sides of all streets shown on all major
subdivisions and shall be required on minor subdivisions in accordance with the
standards prescribed for the requirements of sidewalks in the case of minor
subdivisions.
B. Any existing pavements damaged by curb construction shall be repaired to the
standards herein and/or as shown on the final plat.
C. Where one side of the development boundary is along an existing street, the curb
and/or curb and gutter shall be constructed only on a development side.
§ 94-8.10 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.11
94:188
D. The following type of curb shall be constructed:
(1) The concrete curb shall be eight inches wide at its base and not less than six
inches wide at its top.
(2) Its height shall not be less than 18 inches constructed to show a vertical face
above the roadway pavement of six inches.
(3) It shall be constructed by use of suitable lumber or metal forms, true to line
and grade, and open joints shall be provided at intervals of 10 feet and onehalf-
inch bituminous expansion joints every 20 feet.
(4) Curb and/or combination curb and gutter shall be constructed of Class B
concrete, air-entrained, in accordance with the requirements of the standard
specifications.
(5) Curbing shall be laid in a workmanlike manner as directed and approved by
the Borough Engineer.
(6) At places where a concrete curb abuts portland cement concrete pavement,
joints in the curb shall be placed to match the paving joints, and intermediate
joints shall be placed so as to create equal curb panels not longer than 20 feet.
(7) When concrete combination curb and gutter is required, the gutter shall be
eight inches thick and shall be constructed of Class B air-entrained concrete.
(a) Joints in the gutter shall be formed simultaneously with joints on the curb.
(8) Curb and combination curb and gutter cross sections shall be as shown on
Figures 3 and 4.79
(9) The requirements of the standard specifications regarding curing precautions
must be strictly observed.
E. The curb at all delivery openings shall be depressed at the front of the curb to a
point two inches above the finished pavement and at the back of the curb three
inches above the finished pavement.
F. The rear top corner of this curb shall have a radius of 1/4 inch, and the front top
corner shall have a radius of 1 1/2 inches.
G. Curb openings shall be in such width as shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer but in no case less than 16 feet at the edge of the pavement.
H. Use of combination curb and gutter will be allowed in all areas and required in those
areas having a bituminous pavement with a profile grade greater than 5% with the
following exceptions:
(1) Both sides of a street for the entire block length shall be constructed with one
type of curb; that is, where only a portion of a block is required to have
combination curb and gutter, the entire block shall be constructed using the
combination curb and gutter.
79. Editor's Note: Figures 3 and 4 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 94-8.11 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.11
94:189
§ 94-8.12. Driveways and access aisles.
(2) Where 50% or more of the curb length of any street would be required to have
combination curb and gutter, the entire street shall be constructed with
combination curb and gutter.
(3) Where 50% or more of any subdivision is required to have a combination curb
and gutter, the entire subdivision shall be constructed with combination curb
and gutter.
A. All entrance and exit driveways to public streets shall be located to afford
maximum safety to traffic on the public streets.
B. Whenever possible, any exit driveway or driveway land shall be so designed with
regard to profile, grading and location to permit the sight distance in accordance
with § 94-8.14C, Sight triangle easements.
C. The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to adequately accommodate the
volume and character of vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto the land
development for which a site plan is prepared.
(1) Driveway dimensions. Driveway width at the curbline should be limited to 15
to 35 feet.
(a) Driveways serving large volumes of traffic shall be required to utilize
high to maximum dimensions.
(b) Driveways serving low traffic volumes shall be permitted to use low to
minimum dimensions.
(2) Number of driveways. The number of driveways provided from a site directly
to any one municipal street shall be recommended as follows:
Length of Site Frontage
(feet) Recommended Number of Driveways
100 or less 1
More than 100 to 800 2
Over 800 To be specified by the municipal agency upon
receipt of advice of the Borough Engineer
D. No driveway to or from a parking area should be located closer than 100 feet from
the nearest right-of-way line of an intersection collector or arterial street. However,
any major use, such as shopping center or office complex, which, in the opinion of
the municipal agency, will generate large traffic volumes shall not be located closer
than 200 feet from the nearest right-of-way line of an intersection of a collector or
arterial street.
E. No part of any driveway may be located within five feet of a side property line for
single- and/or two-family dwellings and within 20 feet of a side property line for all
other uses. However, upon application to the municipal agency and approval of the
§ 94-8.11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.12
94:190
design by the Board Engineer, the municipal agency may permit a driveway serving
two or more adjacent sites to be located on or within 10 feet of a side property line
between the adjacent sites.
F. Driveway angle, one-way operation. Driveways used by vehicles in one-way
direction of travel (right turn only) shall not form in angles smaller than 45° with
the public street, unless acceleration and deceleration lanes are provided.
G. Driveway angle, two-way operation. Driveways used for two-way operation will
intersect the public street at any angle as near 90° as site conditions will permit, and
in no case shall it be less than 60°.
H. Parking areas for 25 or more cars and access drives for all parking areas on arterial
highways provide curbed return radii of not less than 15 feet for all right-turn
movements and left-turn access from one-way streets and concrete aprons on
entrance and exit drives.
I. Parking areas for less than 25 cars may utilize concrete aprons without curb returns
at entrance and exit drives which are not located on a minor arterial or principal
arterial highway.
J. Access drives for single- and two-family dwellings shall utilize concrete aprons
without curb returns, regardless of size or location. [Amended 6-18-2001 by Ord.
No. 781]
(1) Such drives shall have a minimum width of 10 feet and a maximum width of
24 feet.
(2) All such aprons shall be paved as provided by § 94-8.10 of this chapter.
K. Maximum curb depression width for single- and two-family dwellings shall be the
driveway width plus four feet, but not more than 25 feet.
(1) For all other uses it shall be the driveway width plus 10 feet, but not more than
35 feet.
(2) All concrete should be constructed as provided by the appropriate section of
this chapter.
L. Where a driveway connecting to a public street serves traffic from parking areas of
a major traffic generator, an acceleration and/or deceleration lane may be required
in accordance with (Policy of Geometric Design of Rural Highways 1965)
American Association of State Highway Officials.
M. The number of driveways, in such locations and of such widths, as shall be certified
by the engineering official having jurisdiction over road design to be necessary and
proper in order to achieve compatibility with the road design in view of the site
conditions, shall be permitted and shall be deemed to constitute compliance
herewith.
N. If the road to which the driveways connect is a Borough street, the certifying
official shall be the Borough Engineer. If a County road, the certifying official shall
be such County Engineer as may be in charge of road design. If a state road, the
§ 94-8.12 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.12
94:191
§ 94-8.13. Driveway aprons.
Driveway aprons shall be required between the curbing and the sidewalk. They shall
be six inches of concrete according to specifications required for curbing described in
§ 94-8.11D(4) above.
§ 94-8.14. Easements.
certifying official shall be such official of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation division, bureau or other unit in charge of road design for that road.
O. Aisles from which cars directly enter or leave parking spaces shall no be less than:
(1) Twenty-five feet for perpendicular parking.
(2) Twenty feet for sixty-degree angle parking.
(3) Twenty-five feet for all aisles allowing two-way traffic.
(4) Only angle parking stalls or parallel parking stalls shall be used with one-way
aisles.
A. Drainage easements.
(1) If the property on which a proposed development is to be located is or is
proposed to be traversed by a drainage facility of any kind, including a pipe,
channel, stream or swale, the municipal agency may require that a stormwater
and drainage easement or right-of-way along said facility shall be provided by
the developer, conforming substantially with the lines of such facility.
(2) If existing land drainage structures, such as french drains, are encountered
during the course of construction of any development, such drainage structures
shall either be removed entirely or a revised final plat showing the location of
such drainage structures and accompanied with detailed cross sections thereof
shall be filed with the Borough Engineer for consideration by the municipal
agency. The municipal agency, after consulting its Engineer and other
appropriate agencies, shall either require a drainage easement, require that the
structure be removed in part or in its entirety or recommend such other action
to the governing body as it deems appropriate.
(3) All easements shall be shown on the final plat with a notation as to the purpose
and restrictions of the easement. Easement lines of the final plan shall be
shown with accurate dimensions and bearings unless the easement lines are
parallel or concentric with lot lines.
(4) The land which is the subject of an easement or right-of-way shall, in the case
of storm drains or constructed channels, be of a suitable width meeting the
requirements for design of drainage facilities, or be a strip which conforms
substantially to the floodplain of any watercourse along both sides of the
watercourse to a width of 35 feet in each direction from the center line of the
watercourse, whichever is the greater; except, however, that if the location of
such watercourse is at or near the boundary of the subdivision, the dimensions
of the easements and right-of-way shall be modified to retain it within the
§ 94-8.12 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.14
94:192
confines of the development.
(5) Said easement and right-of-way shall include provisions assuring the
following:
(a) Preservation of the channel of the watercourse.
(b) Except in the course of an authorized drainage improvement, prohibition
of alteration of the contour, topography or composition of the land within
the easement and right-of-way.
(c) Prohibition of construction within the boundaries of the easement and
right-of-way which will obstruct or interfere with the natural flow of the
watercourse.
(d) Reservation of a public right-of-entry for the purpose of maintaining the
storm drain, drainage channel or the natural flow or drainage through the
watercourse, of maintaining any and all structures related to the exercise
of the easement and right-of-way and of installing and maintaining a
storm or sanitary sewer system or other public utility.
B. Conservation easements.
(1) Conservation easements may be required along all drainage and stormwater
rights-of-way in the development and may be required also along ponds,
marshes, swamps and streams or other watercourses along which drainage
rights-of-way are not required. Such easements are intended to help prevent
the siltation of streams and other courses and adjacent lands.
(2) The land subjected to a conservation easement shall be a strip at least 25 feet
but not more than 100 feet in width independently located or running adjacent
to each side of any required drainage or stormwater right-of-way.
(3) Such conservation easement shall contain provisions to restrict the removal of
trees and ground cover except for the following purposes: removal of dead or
diseased trees; thinning of trees and other growth to encourage a more
desirable growth; removal of trees to allow for structures designed to impound
water; and removal of trees in areas to be flooded for the creation of ponds or
lakes.
(4) The easements shall also prohibit filling or grading of the lands or the disposal
of refuse or waste material of any type within the limits of the easement.
(5) The easement shall be indicated on the plat and shall be marked on the land by
iron stakes wherever the lines of such easement change direction or intersect
lot lines.
C. Sight triangle easements.
(1) In addition to right-of-way widths required for the full design of all streets and
the wider intersections as specified, sight triangle easements may be required
on all corners at all street intersections and at entrances and exits of driveways.
[Amended 11-5-2007 by Ord. No. 904]
§ 94-8.14 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.14
94:193
§ 94-8.15. Environmental impact report.
(2) Such easements shall include provisions to restrict the planting of trees or
other plantings or the location of structures exceeding 30 inches in height that
would obstruct the clear sight across the area of the easements and a
reservation to the public right-of-entry for the purpose of removing any object,
natural or otherwise, that obstructs the clear sight.
(3) Such easements shall include the area of each street corner and driveway
entrances and exits that are bounded by Borough street right-of-way lines and
a straight line connecting points on each right-of-way line 50 feet from the
intersection of the right-of-way lines with points on the intersecting right-ofway
line, which points are the following distances from the intersection of the
right-of-way lines, or of their prolongations: [Amended 11-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 904]
(a) On local streets: 50 feet.
(b) On collector streets: 100 feet.
(c) On arterial streets: 200 feet.
(4) Where intersections occur on highways or roadways under the jurisdiction of
the State of New Jersey or County of Monmouth, the sight triangle easements
required by the state or the County of Monmouth shall be substituted in lieu of
the requirements above.
A. An environmental impact report shall accompany all applications for preliminary
major subdivision and preliminary site plan approval for all projects which exceed
10 acres in size or those projects deemed to be environmentally sensitive by the
municipal agency. Such report shall provide the information needed to evaluate the
effects of the project for which approval is sought upon the environment and shall
include data as follows;
(1) A project description which shall specify what is to be done and how it is to be
done, during construction and operation, as well as recital of alternative plans
deemed practicable to achieve the objective.
(2) An inventory of existing environmental conditions at the project site and in the
surrounding region, which shall describe air quality, water supply, hydrology,
geology, soils and properties thereof, including capabilities and limitations,
sewerage systems, topography, slope, vegetation, wildlife habitat, aquatic
organisms, noise characteristics and levels, demography, land use, aesthetics,
history and archaeology.
(a) Air and water quality shall be described with reference to standards
promulgated by the Department of Environmental Protection of the State
of New Jersey.
(b) Soils shall be described with reference to criteria contained in the Soil
Survey of Monmouth County, New Jersey, published by the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service. [Amended
§ 94-8.14 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.15
94:194
12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
(3) An assessment of the probable impact of the project upon all topics set forth in
Subsection A(2) above.
(4) A listing and evaluation of adverse environmental impacts which cannot be
avoided, with particular emphasis upon air or water pollution, increase in
noise, damage to plant, tree and wildlife systems, damage to natural resources,
displacement of people and businesses, increase in sedimentation and siltation,
increase in municipal services and consequences to municipal tax structure.
Off-site impact shall also be set forth and evaluated if appropriate.
(5) A description of steps to be taken to minimize adverse environmental impacts
during construction and operation, both at the project site and in the
surrounding region, such description to be accompanied by necessary maps
and schedules and other explanatory data as may be needed to clarify and
explain the actions to be taken.
(6) A statement concerning any irreversible and irretrievable commitment of
resources which would be involved in the proposed action, should it be
implemented.
(7) A statement of alternatives to the proposed project which might avoid some or
all of the adverse environmental effects, including a no-action alternative.
B. When required, 20 copies of the environmental impact report shall be submitted to
the municipal agency.
C. The municipal agency shall either approve or disapprove the environmental impact
report as part of its underlying function with respect to site plan review. In reaching
a decision, the municipal agency shall take into consideration the effect of the
applicant's proposed project upon all aspects of the environment as outlined above,
as well as the sufficiency of the applicant's proposals for dealing with any
immediate or projected adverse environmental effects. Upon approval by the
municipal agency, the environmental impact report shall be marked or stamped
"approved" by the Secretary of the municipal agency and shall be designated as the
"final environmental impact report."
D. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the municipal agency may, at the request of an
applicant, waive the requirement for an environmental impact report, if sufficient
evidence is submitted to support a conclusion that the proposed development will
have a slight or negligible environmental impact. Portions of such requirements
may likewise be waived upon a finding that a complete report need not be prepared
in order to evaluate adequately the environmental impact of a particular project.
E. An environmental impact report, as required herein, shall also be submitted for all
public or quasi-public projects, unless such are exempt from the requirements of
local law or by superseding county, state or federal law.
F. Submission of an environmental impact statement or assessment consistent with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 et seq., the Coastal Area Facility Review Act
(CAFRA), and N.J.A.C. 7:7-1.1 et seq., Coastal Permit Program Rules, and the
§ 94-8.15 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.15
94:195
§ 94-8.16. Fences and hedges. [Amended 12-7-1998 by Ord. No. 758]
rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto will be conclusively deemed to
meet the requirements of this section. [Amended 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
A. Fences, walls and hedges shall not be located in any required sight triangle or in a
public right-of-way. All fences, walls and hedges shall be set back the minimum
distances set forth herein, or such greater distances at street intersections, driveways
and around street curves as may be necessary using accepted engineering standards
to protect the safety and to promote the general welfare of the residents of the
Borough.
B. Fences, hedges and walls hereafter erected, altered or reconstructed in any zone in
the Borough shall not exceed six feet in height above ground level except as
follows:
(1) Hedges, walls and fences, which are not open fences as defined in this chapter,
located in a front yard or within 50 feet of any river, stream or other body of
water shall not exceed 30 inches in height, with the exception of residential
corner lots wherein a fence shall not exceed six feet and accompanied by
decorative planting, along the street side of the fence, may extend from the
rear line of the dwelling to the rear line of the property.
(2) In any business or industrial zone, open wire fences not exceeding eight feet
in height may be erected in the rear or side yard areas and behind the building
setback line.
(3) On park, recreation or school properties, open wire fences not exceeding eight
feet in height may be erected in the rear of side yard areas and behind the
building setback line.
(4) Fences specifically required by other provisions of this chapter and other
municipal and state regulations.
(5) Chain-link fences are not permitted in residential front yards.
C. All fences must be erected within the property lines, and no fence shall be erected
so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way.
D. Razor wire, canvas or cloth fences and fencing construction are prohibited in all
zones in the Borough.
E. All supporting members of a fence shall be located on the inside of the fence, and
if erected along or adjacent to a property line, the supporting members of the fence
shall face the principal portion of the tract of land of the property upon which the
fence is erected.
F. All fences must also comply with the provisions of the Uniform Construction
Code80 except where in conflict with the technical provisions of this section.
G. Tennis court fences, baseball and softball backstops and spectator-protective
80. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 88, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 94-8.15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.16
94:196
§ 94-8.17. Fire hydrants. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 12-7-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-1077]
§ 94-8.18. (Reserved)
§ 94-8.19. Garages.
fencing is exempt from the requirements of this section, provided that they are not
located within any required yard area. Located outside of any required yard area,
they are subject to the height limitations of the particular zone district.
H. Fences which are painted shall be painted in only one color, harmonious with the
surrounding area. Multicolored fences are prohibited.
I. Fences shall be erected in a manner so as to permit the flow of natural drainage,
shall not cause surface water to be blocked or dammed to create ponding and shall
comply with § 94-5.27.
A. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a new residential structure which
is the subject of a major subdivision or site plan, located in an area serviced by
Monmouth Consolidated Water Company, unless the distance from the midpoint of
the frontage of such premises to a functioning fire hydrant which has been tested
and approved, as measured down to the center line of connecting public streets, is
600 feet or less.
B. Final subdivision plats shall not be approved by the Land Use Board unless fire
hydrants are indicated on the final plat in accordance with the requirements herein
contained as to location of and distance between fire hydrants.
C. Fire hydrants shall not be placed at the closed end of the turnaround of a cul-de-sac
unless the distance between the open end and the closed end is greater than 400 feet,
in which event the fire hydrants shall be placed at both the open end and the closed
end of the cul-de-sac.
D. The installation of fire hydrants, with respect to any subdivision, shall not be
considered a subdivision improvement to be included in the bonding requirements
of this chapter, but rather the proper installation of fire hydrants shall be a condition
of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy; however, all costs shall be borne by
the developer.
E. All fire hydrants installed in the municipality shall have no less than two two-andone-
half-inch hose connection nozzles and one four-and-one-half-inch pumper
nozzle. All threads are to be in accordance with the specifications of the Fire
Department of Shrewsbury Borough.
F. Hydrants shall be set plumb with nozzles 18 inches above the ground or, where they
are to be placed in hose houses, 18 inches above the floor.
A. Underground garages or garages under structures shall be properly lighted.
(1) Roofs of garages may be landscaped or utilized for approved recreation uses,
such as but not limited to tennis courts.
§ 94-8.16 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.19
94:197
(2) The garage shall be designed to be properly drained.
B. A garage which is within the building line of a principal building shall contain not
more than 50 parking spaces. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
(1) Private garages which are an integral part of an individual dwelling unit shall
not contain more than three parking spaces each, and each parking space shall
contain a minimum of 240 square feet of floor area.
(2) A private garage for an individual dwelling unit shall not have access thereto
from another dwelling unit or garage.
C. An accessory commercial or industrial building garage shall be fully enclosed and
have a full roof covering all parking spaces.
(1) Such garage shall contain at least four parking spaces.
(2) No portion of more than one level shall be above ground.
(3) All levels shall be lighted and properly ventilated, and any underground levels
shall meet all the requirements set forth above for an underground garage.
D. No freestanding commercial garage or parking structure shall be placed nearer than
100 feet to a side or rear property line. In no case shall a garage or accessory
building be permitted between a street frontage and building. [Amended 3-14-1994
by Ord. No. 675; 11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1010]
(1) In the R-1 Zone and R-1A Zone, garages, whether attached or detached, shall
be arranged to open to the side or rear of the lot except fully detached garages,
located entirely to the rear of the principal building.
(2) In all other residential zones, garages may be arranged to open to the front,
side or rear of the lot.
(3) Attached garages shall have a joint capacity of not more than 10 vehicles
arranged in a row, and there shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between
such structures.
(4) Freestanding garages and other accessory buildings in residential zones shall
be no more than one story nor more than 16 feet in height.
(5) The architectural design and materials used in the construction thereof shall
conform to the design and building materials used in the construction of the
main structures.
(6) No part of any garage or other accessory building shall be used for living
purposes.
E. All public garages shall have adequate security provisions.
F. Only passenger vehicles, small vans, pickup trucks and similar vehicles, whether
such carry passengers or commercial plates, may be parked in any parking space
for extended periods.
G. Garages and parking areas shall be used as automobile parking units only, with no
§ 94-8.19 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.19
94:198
§ 94-8.20. Guardrails.
§ 94-8.21. Landscaping and shade tree regulations. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord.
No. 670; 5-21-2007 by Ord. No. 895; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
sales, dead storage, dismantling or servicing of any kind permitted.
A. Guardrails, pipe railing or other appropriate barricades, as required by the
municipal agency, shall be designed and placed at drainage structures, streams,
embankment limits, curries and other required locations.
B. Guardrails shall be standard steel-beam-type with galvanized steel posts in
accordance with the standard specification details. Alternate design of guardrails
and barricades may be used and shall be submitted for approval as part of the final
plat submission.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Clerk of the Land Use Board.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a subdivision
plat, site plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning variance, or
direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — For the purpose of this chapter and article, the division
of a parcel of land into two or more parcels or the construction, reconstruction,
conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any building or
structure for which permission may be required per the Municipal Land Use Law.
DEVELOPMENT, PLANNED — Unit development, planned unit residential
development, residential cluster, planned commercial development, or planned
industrial development.
DEVELOPMENT, PLANNED UNIT — An area with a specified minimum
contiguous acreage of 10 acres or more to be developed as a single entity according
to a plan, containing one or more residential clusters or planned unit residential
development and one or more public, quasi-public, commercial, or industrial areas
in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses to residential uses as shall be
specified in this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT, PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL — An area with a specified
minimum contiguous area of five acres or more to be developed as a single
entity according to a plan, containing one or more clusters, which may include
commercial or public or quasi-public uses, all primarily for the benefit of the
residential development.
§ 94-8.19 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.21
94:199
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
sidewalk, utility transmission lines, gas pipeline, water main, and/or sanitary or
storm sewer.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown the
existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including, but not necessarily limited
to, topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes, and waterways; the
location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways,
means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping,
structures, signs, lighting and screening devices; and any other information that
may reasonably be required in order to make an informed determination pursuant
to an ordinance requiring review and approval of site plans by the appropriate
municipal agency.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — A development plan of one or more lots which proposes
new development within the scope of development specifically permitted by
ordinance as a minor site plan; does not involve planned development, any new
street, or extension of any off-tract improvements that is to be prorated pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42; and contains the improvement reasonably required in order
to make an informed determination as to whether the requirements established by
ordinance for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two or more
lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land for development pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-7.
B. Powers and authority of the Shade Tree Commission generally. The Shade Tree
Commission shall have such powers as are authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 to
40:64-14, inclusive, as amended and supplemented, and the powers specifically
enumerated in Chapter 94, Zoning and Land Development: Article VIII, § 94-8.6,
Buffer areas and screening, § 94-8.44, Street trees; and in the Borough of
Shrewsbury Code, Chapter 246, Trees, Shrubbery and Landscaping.
C. Powers regarding care for shade and ornamental trees, shrubbery, and other
plantings. The Shade Tree Commission shall have the following powers:
(1) Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, removal, planting,
placement, trimming, spraying and care of shade and ornamental trees,
shrubbery and other plantings now located or which may hereafter be planted
in a development as defined in § 94-8.21A, utility rights-of-way, or
construction sites, and any public highway, right-of-way, park or parkway,
except such as are excluded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:64-1, and the regulation
and control of the use of the ground surrounding same, so far as may be
necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
(2) Remove or require the removal of any tree or part thereof that is diseased or
dangerous to public safety, at the expense of the owner of such tree, following
appropriate notice of its intention to remove or cause the removal of a tree or
part of a tree dangerous to public safety.
D. Duties and responsibility of the Shade Tree Commission.
§ 94-8.21 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.21
94:200
(1) Meetings and minutes. The Shade Tree Commission shall schedule regular
meetings and/or special meetings for review of landscape plans submitted with
an application for development. The applicant shall be notified of the date and
time of the scheduled meeting for review of the plans submitted with his/her
application. The agenda of a scheduled meeting shall be posted on the bulletin
board in the Municipal Building and on the Borough web site.
(2) Minutes of every regular meeting and special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the members in attendance, matters discussed, persons
appearing, action taken, and the findings made by it and the reason therefor.
The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public inspection.
(3) Review of landscape plan. The Commission shall review the landscape plans
to determine compliance with the provisions of Chapter 94, Zoning and Land
Development, Article VIII, specifically, § 94-8.21, Landscaping and shade
tree regulations; § 94-8.6, Buffer areas and screening, and § 94-8.44, Street
trees.
(4) Notification of findings. The Commission shall approve or deny landscape
plans submitted for its review and shall submit the findings of its review of the
landscape plans submitted for its review in a timely manner to the municipal
agency reviewing the application for development. The administrative officer
or municipal agency reviewing the application for development shall forward
a copy of the Shade Tree Commission's findings to the applicant.
E. Submission requirements for approval of landscape plans.
(1) Development applications. An application for development that requires
action by the Land Use Board shall include eight copies of a landscaping and
screening plan prepared by an accredited landscape architect or an authorized
licensed professional and three copies of plat maps for use of the Shade Tree
Commission.
(2) Administrative review and distribution. The administrative officer of the
municipal agency reviewing the application shall retain the original
application, the original plat maps and original landscaping plan. He/she shall
forward seven copies of the application and seven copies of the landscaping
plans, including supporting attachments, exhibits and other related
information, and the three copies of plat maps to the Shade Tree Commission.
F. Landscape design standards. The following standards and guidelines shall apply to
all applications for development containing proposed new buildings and structures
or modifications to existing structures. Landscape elements shall relate to
architectural design elements and shall be considered a strong unifying component
of the overall site design, reflecting the natural and architectural and man-made
qualities of the development. An applicant granted approval for development shall
not excavate or remove trees, shrubs and other plant material from the site without
the approval of the Shade Tree Commission. [§ 94-8.4B(11)]
(1) Developments:
(a) Residential zoning districts. A minimum of 10% of the plan site shall be
§ 94-8.21 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.21
94:201
reserved for landscaping, which shall be reasonably distributed within the
area and shall include suitable shrubbery in a planting strip not less than
four feet wide on the front, rear and two sides of a structure.
(b) Single-family subdivisions. Besides screening and street tree
requirements, additional trees shall be planted throughout the subdivision
in accordance with a planting plan approved by the Shade Tree
Commission. The number of trees planted shall be not less than 10 per
acre, calculated on the basis of the entire subdivision tract. The type of
plantings may vary from those listed under shade tree requirements and
may include flowering types and/or evergreens, not exceeding 30% of the
total planting. Tree planting shall be pursuant to § 94-8.21H, Tree
planting requirements. Street trees shall be planted pursuant to § 94-8.44,
Street trees.
(c) In nonresidential zone districts, a minimum of 15% of the lot or tract area,
excluding any parking areas or driveways, shall be devoted to landscaped
open space.
(2) Landscape elements:
(a) Plant materials to be chosen and located to screen or create views, to
accent and compliment buildings, to define boundaries between private
and common open space, to attenuate noise, to articulate outdoor spaces
and to define circulation systems shall be inherent.
(b) Variety and mixture of plants. Seasonal interest, textures, shapes,
blossoms, and foliage are to be considered. The use of native plant
material is encouraged. A variety subject to disease is discouraged. No
plant material included on the New Jersey Invasive Species List shall be
used.
(c) All areas not devoted to structures, parking areas or other required areas
shall be appropriately graded and landscaped in accordance with
§§ 94-8.6, 94-8.21, and 94-8.44, regulating landscaping, tress and buffer
areas. The landscape plan shall include maintenance systems to ensure
survival of plantings.
(d) Soil conditions. Raised borders or similar structures are to be installed to
prevent soil washing over adjoining paths where necessary.
(e) Water availability and the inclusion of adequate provisions for irrigation
of landscaped areas acceptable to the Borough Engineer are required.
(f) Environmental climate control. Planting of shade trees on the south to
shield heat from summer sun and evergreens on the north for windbreaks.
G. Landscape plan. Landscape plans shall comply with Borough ordinances,
specifically enumerated in Chapter 94, Article VIII: § 94-8.6, Buffer areas and
screening; § 94-8.21, Landscaping and shade tree regulations; and § 94-8.44. Street
trees. Whenever practical, natural features shall be preserved pursuant to § 94-5.13.
(1) The landscape plan shall provide:
§ 94-8.21 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.21
94:202
(a) The location of existing trees, shrubs and proposed planting materials and
the signature of the accredited landscape architect or an authorized
licensed professional with date of submission.
(b) Planting material to be used: their minimum sizes, quantity, variety and
species; planting details for trees, shrubs, and/or ground cover,
identifying same by common and botanical names. The varieties or
species selected for landscaping and screening shall be subject to the
approval of the Shade Tree Commission. The use of native plants is
encouraged. Evergreen planting may be interspersed with or placed with
appropriate deciduous flowering shrubs. No plant material on the New
Jersey Invasive Species List shall be used.
(c) The location of existing trees four inches or more in diameter as measured
five feet above ground level, indicating type, number, location, and
spacing, including wooded areas indicating predominate species and
sizes.
(d) The location of existing shrubs and the location, type and quantity of each
type.
(e) The location of shrubs in yard areas and open spaces. Yard areas and open
spaces shall contain the equivalent of at least two shrubs and one shade
or ornamental tree of two-inch caliper or greater for each 1,500 square
feet of yard area, excluding areas devoted to parking or vehicular
circulation.
(f) Placement. All planting shall be at least the maximum mature plant
distance from the foundation of a building, structure, wall or fence, but
not less than two feet therefrom. One evergreen is required for each five
feet of the foundation, wall or fence, including side surfaces of projecting
porches and steps. Varieties shall be selected and specified as appropriate
to sun and wind exposures and shall be a mature size for the location
planned.
(g) Rear exposures may be exempted under circumstances as determined by
the Commission.
(h) Buffer areas and screening. For any use required by this chapter or by a
municipal agency, a buffer shall comply with the buffer regulations,
§ 94-8.6, Buffer areas and screening.
(i) Fences. Installation of fences and the height for a screening area shall be
in accordance with § 94-8.16, Fences and hedges.
(j) Sight triangles. Landscaping in sight triangles at the intersection of two
or more streets and at the end of driveways shall be provided pursuant to
§ 94-5.7, Sight triangles at intersections.
(2) Implementation of landscape plan.
(a) Following approval of the applicant's landscape plan: Notice must be
given to a member of the Shade Tree Commission three days prior to the
§ 94-8.21 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.21
94:203
start of planting in order that the Commission may inspect the stock for
variety, condition, size and quantity.
(b) Existing trees and shrubs to be retained shall be protected by the erection
of storm fencing at the outmost dripline of the tree during construction.
All work shall be subject to the general supervision and approval of the
Commission.
(c) Excavations for each plant shall not be less than 12 inches deep and not
less than 20 inches in diameter. A seepage area shall be provided by
loosening the soil to a depth of six inches at the bottom of the excavation.
(d) Planting soil in the excavation shall be composed of one part peat or
humus and four parts of soil free of debris (all mixed thoroughly), to
which shall be added and mixed one pound of bond meal or its equivalent.
There shall be no pieces or chunks of plaster, mortar or other limecontaining
material or loose lime around foundation plantings.
(e) Mulching. Each evergreen and shrub planted shall be mulched with wood
chips, peat, buckwheat hulls, cocoa hulls or other approved material out
to the branch tips, not to exceed four inches in depth. Bases of trees and
landscaped areas shall be mulched to a depth not to exceed four inches,
placing mulch six inches from the tree trunk at ground level and outward
to the edge of the dripline of the tree to a maximum depth of four inches.
(f) Removal of all planting debris is required. The property shall be left in an
orderly and neat condition in accordance with accepted planting practice.
(3) Maintenance standards. Landscape plan elements shall be properly maintained
following development to prevent overgrowth or neglect of reasonable
maintenance of landscape plantings and ground covers, including:
(a) Trees, hedges and shrubbery shall not obstruct walkways or streets and
obscure vision of persons using same. Trees shall be pruned in such a
manner that branches will hang not less than eight feet over sidewalks
and walkways and 13 feet over roadways. Shrubs and/or hedges planted
along walkways and within a sight-triangle area shall be a height of 30
inches.
(b) Overgrowth or neglect of reasonable maintenance of landscape plantings
and ground cover, including failure to remove dead or diseased trees and
shrubbery, is subject to enforcement subject to § 94-5.29, Property
maintenance.
(c) Survival. All plantings that fail to survive for a period of one calendar
year following planting shall be replaced by the developer within 30 days
following receipt of written notice from the Shade Tree Commission or
within such extended period as may be specified by the Commission.
H. Tree planting requirements.
(1) Requirements.
§ 94-8.21 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.21
94:204
(a) Any owner, person, developer, firm or corporation erecting and
constructing any building or buildings fronting a public or private street
in any zoning district shall plant shade trees in front yards at least five
feet from the right-of-way, defined as a strip of land occupied or intended
to be occupied by a sidewalk, utility transmission lines, gas pipeline,
water main, and/or sanitary or storm sewer. One tree shall be planted
every 40 feet of frontage of said property, unless a waiver is granted by
the Shade Tree Commission. Street trees shall be planted in accordance
with § 94-8.44, Street trees.
(b) The Shade Tree Commission may grant a waiver if there are trees
growing along such right-of-way or on the abutting property near the
street line which are in compliance with the specifications of the Shade
Tree Commission.
(c) Such new trees to be provided shall be of a kind and size approved by the
Shade Tree Commission and shall be planted in accordance with its
specifications for planting trees in such a location approved by the
Commission.
(2) Specifications for shade trees.
(a) Shade tree size. Trees shall be not less than 1 3/4 inches' to two inches'
caliper, measured six inches above the ground, and not less than 12 feet
high. Trees must be well-branched, the branches to start not less than six
feet from the crown of the root system.
(b) Flowering tree size. Where authorized for placement, flowering
decorative trees may be smaller in size than shade varieties. Those trees
shall not be less than 1 1/2 inches' caliper, measured six inches above the
ground, nor less than eight feet high. They must be well-branched, the
branches to start not less than five feet from the crown of the root system.
(c) Placement. All trees must be planted in the location approved by the
Shade Tree Commission. Large-growing (timber-type) trees shall be
located not closer than five feet to the right-of-way. Ornamentals may be
planted in planting strips. The minimum width of planting strips, located
in accordance with the site plan approved by the reviewing agency, shall
be 30 inches.
(d) Time for planting. Deciduous trees under the jurisdiction of the
Commission shall not be planted between May 15 and November 1
without specific authorization.
(e) Soil excavations must not be less than 18 inches deep and not less than
30 inches in diameter. A seepage area shall be provided by loosening the
soil to a depth of one foot below the excavation. Planting soil shall be
composed of one part peat, one part humus and one part of parent soil (all
mixed thoroughly), to which shall be added and mixed in two pounds of
bone meal or its equivalent.
(f) Planting; watering. At time of planting, burlap and wire surrounding the
§ 94-8.21 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.21
94:205
root ball shall be loosened from around the tree trunk. Each tree shall be
given an adequate amount of water at the time of planting.
(g) Staking and guying. Stakes shall be white or red cedar, oak or locust
treated with an approved wood preservative and must be eight feet long
and not less than two inches in minimum diameter. Stakes shall be driven
securely into the ground and preferably on the northwest side of the tree
trunk. Trees shall be guyed with rubber hose or plastic straps and shall be
watered adequately for a minimum of one year after planting.
(h) Ground cover; mulching. Bases of trees and other landscaped sections
shall include ground cover or mulching to discourage the growth of
weeds. Gravel, stone or decorative stone shall not be used as a ground
cover unless specifically approved by the Shade Tree Commission. Bases
of trees shall be mulched to a depth not to exceed four inches, placing
mulch six inches from the tree trunk at ground level and outward to the
edge of the dripline of the tree to a maximum of four inches.
(i) Survival. Trees that have failed to survive for a period of one calendar
year following planting shall be replaced by the developer within 30 days
following receipt of written notice from the Commission or within the
extended period as may be specified by the Commission.
I. Landscaping of parking areas. Landscaping shall be required in parking lots as
follows:
(1) An area within the parking area equal to 5% of the parking area shall be
landscaped with trees, shrubs and ground cover. This shall be accomplished
through the use of landscaped islands.
(2) The minimum width of planting strips in a parking area, located in accordance
with the site plan approved by the reviewing municipal agency, shall be 48
inches.
(3) At least one deciduous shade or ornamental tree of two-inch caliper or greater
at the time of planting and two shrubs shall be provided within the area noted
in above subsection for each 10 existing or proposed parking spaces. Planting
areas shall be a minimum of six feet in width at the base of each tree.
(4) Ground cover shall consist of plant material or mulch acceptable to the
reviewing agency. Bases of trees and landscaped areas shall be mulched to a
depth not to exceed four inches. Any weed barrier used shall be permeable.
(5) No parking area for 20 continuous spaces in a row in a business, commercial,
or industrial zone, nor more than 15 continuous spaces in a residential zone,
shall be permitted without interruption by a landscaped island divider at least
eight feet wide.
(6) All parking areas for 20 or more vehicles shall contain landscaped island areas
of at least six feet in width separating parallel rows of parking spaces.
(a) Such island areas shall be located within the parking area in accordance
with the site plan approved by the municipal agency and shall occupy a
§ 94-8.21 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.21
94:206
minimum of 5% of the area formed by the outer perimeter of the parking
area.
(b) The island area shall contain a minimum of one shade tree for each four
parking spaces along the edge of the parking island and shall be otherwise
landscaped in accordance with the requirements of this section.
(7) The buffer screen around the parking areas and loading and unloading areas
may include fencing of wood, or other construction material, provided that not
more than 25% of the fence is open on its vertical surface. In such cases,
evergreens and deciduous trees and shrubs shall be planted along the fence to
break up the monotony of the fence.
(8) Parking areas or unloading areas of commercial, business or industrial uses
abutting residential uses shall provide a landscaped buffer screen at least 50
feet wide on the perimeter of all parking or loading areas in accordance with
§ 94-8.6, Buffer areas and screening.
(9) Sidewalks and suitably surfaced pathways shall be provided from each parking
space or area to the appropriate destination, minimizing the crossing of streets
and parking aisles. All pedestrian crosswalks across aisles and shall be
properly marked with striping or a change in the street paving material.
(10) The use of landscaping in parking areas to disconnect impervious areas is
encouraged in accordance with the Municipal Stormwater Management Plan
of the Borough of Shrewsbury. Any such nonstructural stormwater
management technique shall be counted toward the minimum landscape area
required by this section.
(11) All parking areas shall include a year-round headlight screen along the
perimeter. The minimum planting height for landscape materials intended to
meet such requirement shall be 24 inches in height and maintained at a
maximum height of 30 inches.
(12) All landscaping and/or plantings intended to meet the requirements of this
chapter shall be properly maintained following development, including:
(a) Means for adequate irrigation shall be provided.
(b) A minimum vertical clearance of eight feet shall be maintained between
the lowest branch of any tree and a walkway.
(c) A minimum vertical clearance of 13 feet (at mature height) shall be
maintained between the lowest branch of any tree and adjacent roadways.
(d) Any shrubs or hedge planted along walkways shall be maintained at a
maximum height of 30 inches.
J. Guaranties and improvement procedures. The provisions of Chapter 94, Zoning and
Land Development, Article VII, Performance Guaranties, shall apply.
K. Violations and penalties. The provisions of Chapter 94, Article III, § 94-3.9, shall
apply.
§ 94-8.21 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.22
94:207
§ 94-8.22. Lighting. [Amended 2-21-2002 by Ord. No. 793]
A. Purpose. The governing body of the Borough of Shrewsbury does herein find that
the regulation of outdoor lighting in the Borough is necessary to prevent
misdirected or excessive artificial light, caused by inappropriate or misaligned light
fixtures that produce glare, light trespass, and/or unnecessary sky glow; and also
that such regulation is necessary to discourage the waste of electricity and to
improve or maintain nighttime public safety, utility, and security.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC TIMING DEVICES — A switching device, a part of which is a
clock, set to the prevailing time (Eastern Standard Time or Daylight Savings Time),
that will control the period of illuminating outdoor light fixtures and outdoor signs.
FOOTCANDLE (fc) — The illuminance on a surface of one square foot in area on
which there is uniformly distributed a light flux of one lumen.
GLARE — The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field that is
sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adopted to cause
annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual performance and visibility.
IESNA — Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. An organization
that recommends standards for the lighting industry.
LIGHT TRESPASS — Any form of artificial illuminance emanating from a light
fixture or illuminating sign that penetrates other property and creates a nuisance, as
specified in Subsection C.81
LUMEN—A unit of measure of the quantity of light which falls on an area of one
square foot every part of which is one foot from the source of one candela (candle).
A light source of one candela emits a total of 12.57 lumens.
MOTION SENSOR DEVICE—A device that will sense motion electronically and
switch on security lighting for a brief duration.
OBJECTIONABLE DIRECT GLARE SOURCE — Any direct glare source
offensively visible above a height of five feet at the subject property line.
OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE — An electrically powered illuminating device
containing a total light source of more than 1,800 initial lumens per fixture (this
is greater than a single 100 watt incandescent, or two 75 watt reflectorized
incandescent bulbs) which is permanently installed outdoors, including, devices
used to illuminate any site, architectural structure or sign.
SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE — A light fixture with cutoff optics that allows
no direct light emissions above a vertical cutoff angle of 90° above nadir (straight
down at perfect vertical) for streetlighting and 80° for all other lighting, through the
fixture's lowest emitting part. Any structural part of the light fixture providing this
cutoff angle must be permanently affixed.
C. Outdoor light fixtures. All outdoor light fixtures installed and thereafter maintained,
other than those serving one- or two-family dwellings, shall comply with the
81. Editor's Note: See also Subsection D of this section and § 8-34E(2).
§ 94-8.22 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.22
94:208
requirements specified below:
(1) Where used for security purposes or to illuminate walkways, roadways, and
parking lots, only shielded light fixtures shall be used.
(2) Where used for commercial and industrial purposes such as in merchandise
display areas, work areas, platforms, signs architectural, landscape, or sport or
recreational facilities, all lights shall be equipped with automatic timing
devices and comply with the following:
(a) Light fixtures to illuminate flags, statutes, or any other objects mounted
on a pole, pedestal, or platform, shall use a narrow cone beam of light that
will not extend beyond the illuminated object.
(b) Other upward directed architectural, landscape, and decorative light
emissions shall have at least 90% of their total distribution pattern within
the profile of the illuminated structure.
(c) Recreational and sports facility lighting shall be shielded whenever
possible. Such lighting shall have directional and glare control devices,
when necessary, to comply with Subsection C.
(d) Externally illuminated signs including commercial billboard, building
identification or similar illuminated signs, shall comply with the
following:
[1] Top mounted fixtures shall be shielded and are preferred.
[2] When top mounted fixtures are not feasible, illumination from other
shielded light fixtures shall be restricted to the sign area. Visors or
other directional control devices shall be used to keep spill light to
an absolute minimum.
(e) All other outdoor lighting shall use shielded light fixtures.
(3) All floodlight-type of fixtures, once properly installed shall be permanently
affixed in the appropriate position.
(4) Foundations supporting lighting poles not installed four feet behind the curb,
shall be not less than 24 inches above the ground.
D. Light trespass.
(1) All light fixtures, except streetlighting and those used on one- or two-family
dwellings, shall be designed, installed, and maintained to prevent light
trespass, as specified in Subsection D(1)(a) and (b) below.
(a) At the property line of subject property, illumination from light fixtures
shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle on residentially zoned property or 0.5
footcandle on business zoned property, in a vertical plane.
(b) Outdoor light fixtures properly installed and thereafter maintained shall
be shielded and directed so that there will be no objectionable direct light
emissions.
§ 94-8.22 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.22
94:209
(2) NOTE: Light fixtures near adjacent property may require special shielding
devices to prevent light trespass.
E. Illuminance and luminance requirements shall be set forth in the current edition of
the IESNA Lighting Handbook.
(1) Streetlighting. Avenue IESNA illuminance recommendations shall not be
exceeded. IESNA average to minimum illuminance uniform ratios are to be
used as a guide for designing safe and adequate roadway lighting.
(2) Outdoor parking facilities. Outdoor parking lot illuminances shall be based on
certain illuminance specifications recommended by the IESNA, as contained
in Schedule A.
Schedule A
Maintained Illuminance for Parking Lots
Basic Enhanced Security
Horizontal illuminance
Minimum 0.2 fc 0.5 fc
Average 1.0 fc 2.5 fc
Uniformity ratios:
Average to minimum 5:1 5:1
Maximum to minimum 20:1 15:1
Minimum vertical illuminance 0.1 fc 0.25 fc
(a) Minimum horizontal illuminance shall be no lower than 0.2 fc.
(b) Average horizontal illuminance shall not exceed 2.5 fc.
(c) Uniformity ratios are to be used as a guide.
(d) Minimum vertical illuminance shall be measured at 5.0 feet above
parking surface at the point of lowest horizontal illuminance, excluding
facing outward along borders.
(e) For typical conditions. During periods of nonuse, the illuminance of
certain parking facilities should be turned off or reduced to conserve
energy. If reduced lighting to be used only for the purpose of property
security, it is desirable that the minimum (low point) not be less than 0.1
hfc. Reductions should not be applied to facilities subject to intermittent
night use, such as apartments, hospitals and active transportation areas.
(f) If personal security or vandalism is a likely and or severe problem, an
increase above the basic level may be appropriate.
(g) High vehicular traffic locations should generally require the enhanced
level of illumination. Exits, entrances, internal connecting roadways and
such would be some examples.
§ 94-8.22 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.22
94:210
(h) Increasing the above illuminance is not likely to increase safety and
security. Variance requests for higher levels will generally be for "retail"
reasons and should not be granted unless shown to be necessary and at an
illuminance not to exceed 3.6 footcandles.
(3) Freestanding lighting standards or poles for outdoor parking lots shall not
exceed by more than 10 feet the height of adjacent buildings served by the
parking lot.
(4) All major pedestrian walkways and sidewalks which are not within a street
right-of-way or abutting a private internal street serviced by streetlighting and
which are used by the public after sunset shall be illuminated with a minimum
lighting level of 1/2 horizontal footcandle average at the surface of the walk.
(5) All other illuminance shall not exceed IESNA recommendations, and shall use
shielded light fixtures as necessary.
(6) Internally illuminated signs shall not exceed IESNA recommendations.
F. Outdoor lighting energy conservation.
(1) All outdoor lighting not necessary for security purposes shall be reduced,
activated by motion sensor or turned off during nonoperating hours.
Illuminated signs are excluded from this requirement.
(2) All lighting shall be designed to prevent misdirected or excessive artificial
light and to maximize energy efficiency.
G. Illuminated signs. All illuminated signs shall comply with the provisions of this
section as well as those of § 94-8.34, Signs and flagpoles.82
H. Submission of plans. Plans and evidence of compliance shall include the following:
(1) A description of outdoor light fixtures including component specifications
such as lamps, reflectors, optics, angle of cutoff, supports, poles and include
manufacturers catalog cuts.
(2) Location and description of every light fixture and hours of operation.
(3) Maintained horizontal illuminance shown as footcandles (after depreciation).
(a) Maximum.
(b) Minimum.
(c) Average, during operating and nonoperating hours.
(d) Average to minimum uniformity ratio.
(4) Computer-generated photometric grid showing footcandle readings every 10
feet and the average footcandles.
(5) Foundation details for light poles.
82. Editor's Note: See § 94-8.34, Signs; see also § 9-8.35, Flags and flagpoles.
§ 94-8.22 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.22
94:211
§ 94-8.23. Lots.
(6) When not using IESNA recommendation, submit reasons and supply
supporting documentation.
I. Prohibitions. Searchlights or flashing or animated signs are prohibited, other than
for a period of seven days of the opening of a new establishment.
A. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, lot area and dimensions shall not be less
than the requirements of the respective zoning districts as set forth in this chapter.83
(1) The municipal agency may require larger lots where additional area will
partially or completely eliminate the necessity of changes in grade, which, in
the opinion of the Board, would cause unreasonable destruction of the
topography or environment or would create drainage or erosion problems.
(2) The municipal agency may require larger lots adjacent to collector or arterial
streets where, in the opinion of the Board, the larger lots would promote the
health, safety and general welfare of the public and the residents of the
development.
(3) The municipal agency may require larger lots where such lots are plotted on a
tract or tracts containing tidal or freshwater wetlands, steep slopes in excess of
8%, lakes and ponds, stream corridors, floodways and floodplains. Where such
conditions exist, the Board may require that each lot contain an area
unencumbered by the aforementioned conditions equal to the minimum area
requirement of the respective zone district.
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight streets and
radial to curved streets.
C. Lot line on widened street. Where extra width is to be provided for the widening of
existing streets, lot measurements shall begin at the proposed right-of-way line, and
all setbacks shall be measured from such lines unless otherwise provided by this
chapter.
D. Unsuitable lots. All lots shall be suitable for the purpose for which they are intended
to be used. To prevent the use of lots which are not suitable because of adverse
topography, flood conditions, shallow depth to water table or similar circumstances:
(1) The municipal agency may withhold approval of such lots or require revisions
in a layout of the subdivision to provide that the area of the unsuitable lot is
included in other lots by increasing the size of the remaining lots.
(2) Unsuitable lots may be included in an area to be deeded to the Borough or
other public or quasi-public body and will be held in its natural state for
conservation and/or recreation purposes.
(3) Some other suitable arrangement could be derived to alleviate the condition.
E. A minimum of five substantially different front elevations with varied setbacks, as
83. Editor's Note: See Art. X of this chapter.
§ 94-8.22 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.23
94:212
§ 94-8.24. Monuments and iron stakes.
Monuments shall be of a size and shape required by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11 and N.J.A.C.
13:40-5.1, and amendments and supplements thereto, and shall be placed in accordance
with said statute and Administrative Code. In addition to the required monuments after
the grading is finished, the developer shall install a solid steel stake one inch in diameter
and 30 inches in length on lot corners, lot line angle points or other changes in direction
not marked by monuments and at all angle points or discontinuities in easement lines
where such easements are not parallel to property lines.
§ 94-8.25. Off-street loading.
approved by the municipal agency, shall be used for dwellings in each subdivision.
F. Only those trees shall be removed as shall be necessary to permit construction of
streets, driveways, lawns and dwellings and other authorized structures.
G. In accordance with the Tax Map Specifications of the State of New Jersey, dated
May 1975, prepared by the State of New Jersey, Department of the Treasury, as
amended, subdivided lots and blocks shall generally bear the original numbers with
a decimal and a number added as a subscript. Lot and block numbers shall be
assigned by the Borough Tax Assessor. A line shall be provided on the map for the
Tax Assessor to sign acknowledging that he (she) has assigned the lot and block
numbers.
H. House numbers shall be assigned to each lot prior to final plat approval by the
municipal agency.
I. Lot frontage. Each lot shall front on an approved street accepted or to be accepted
by the Borough.
J. All structures must be accessible by means of an approved driveway. The driveway
must be not less than 10 feet wide and must have a center-line grade of not less than
0.5% and not greater than 10%. For all non-single-family uses, driveways must
provide turnarounds to eliminate the necessity of any vehicle backing onto any
street.
A. For every building, structure or park thereof having over 5,000 square feet of gross
floor area erected and occupied for commerce, business, hospital, laundry, dry
cleaning, places of public and quasi-public assembly, industry and other similar
uses involved in the receipt and distribution by vehicles of materials, or
merchandise, there shall be provided and permanently maintained adequate spaces
for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference
with the public use of streets or alleys.
(1) Every building, structure or addition thereto having a use which complies with
the above definition shall be provided with at least one truck standing, loading
and unloading space on the premises, not less than 12 feet in width, 35 feet in
length and 14 feet in height.
(2) Such buildings that contain an excess of 15,000 square feet of gross building
area will be required to provide additional off-street loading spaces as
§ 94-8.23 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.25
94:213
§ 94-8.26. Off-street parking. [Amended 3-14-1988 by Ord. No. 569; 4-9-1990 by
Ord. No. 608; 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 737; 8-3-1998 by
Ord. No. 751; 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
determined by the municipal agency during site plan review.
B. No part of any off-street truck loading or unloading space and backup area shall be
located within the right-of-way of the public street, including the sidewalk area.
Off-street truck loading and unloading spaces will be located and designed to
permit any truck to maneuver from a driveway into and out of such space without
encroaching upon any portion of a public street, existing or proposed right-of-way,
including the sidewalk.
C. Whenever an off-street loading and unloading area shall be located next to a
residential zone, said loading and unloading area shall be suitably screened and
buffered subject to approval by the municipal agency.
D. Off-street loading and unloading areas shall be surfaced with an adequately
designed durable, all-weather pavement of either bituminous concrete or portland
cement concrete, clearly marked for loading spaces.
E. Access to truck standing, loading and unloading spaces shall be provided directly
from a public street or alley or from a right-of-way that will not interfere with public
convenience and will permit orderly and safe movement of truck vehicles.
F. Loading spaces as required under this section shall be provided in addition to offstreet
parking spaces and shall not be considered as supplying off-street parking
spaces.
G. Unless otherwise permitted, fire zones shall not be used as standing, loading or
unloading areas.
H. Off-street loading and unloading areas shall conform, as applicable, to all design
and locational standards set forth for off-street parking, including but not limited to
those set forth in § 94-8.26 of this chapter.
A. In all zones and in connection with every industrial, commercial, institutional,
professional, recreational, residential or any other use, there shall be provided offstreet
parking spaces in accordance with the requirements and parking lot standards
as contained in this section.
(1) Each off-street parking space may be perpendicular with the aisle, parallel
with the aisle or at any angle between 60° and 90°. No angle parking layout
shall be permitted with an angle less than 60°.
(2) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as further specified in this chapter
with necessary passageways and driveways.
(3) All such space shall be deemed to be required space on the lot of which it is
situated and shall not be encroached upon or reduced in any manner.
(4) No parking area provided hereunder shall be established for less than five
spaces, except for detached single-family dwellings on individual lots.
§ 94-8.25 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.26
94:214
(5) No commercial vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000 pounds
shall be parked out of doors overnight in a residential zone.
B. Parking for all uses in all zones shall not be located in any required front yard area,
unless otherwise specified, nor between any existing or proposed building (or the
extension of the plans of the exterior surface of any existing or proposed building
to the lot boundaries) and any street right-of-way line.
(1) Parking for single- and two-family dwellings shall not be subject to yard area
location restrictions, except that such parking shall be set back at least five feet
from all property lines.
(2) Parking shall only be permitted with access aisles meeting the requirements of
§ 94-8.12.
(3) No parked vehicles shall block or obstruct sidewalks or walkways, and no
parking shall be permitted on lawn or landscaped areas or other areas not
intended, designed and/or approved for such parking.
(4) Parking areas for nonresidential uses shall not be located within 50 feet of any
residential zone; except that when the residential zone is on or along a railroad
right-of-way, the parking area shall not be located within 20 feet of the
property line.
(5) Parking areas of five or more spaces shall not be located within 20 feet of any
street or right-of-way line; except for private streets and drives, the minimum
distance shall be eight feet.
(6) Parking facilities in business zones or industrial zones may be located in any
rear or side yard space but shall not be closer than five feet from any side or
rear property line. The location of parking shall not conflict with the
requirements of § 94-8.6, Buffer areas and screening.
(7) No area shall be used for parking unless it is large enough to provide for at
least two contiguous stalls. For single- and two-family dwellings, the
following shall apply:
(a) Garage space may provide for one of the required spaces, and the second
space may be arranged in tandem.
(b) Garage space shall comply with requirements of § 94-8.19D of this
chapter.
(8) All required parking spaces and facilities shall be located on the same lot or
parcel as the structure or use they shall serve.
(9) Off-street parking areas shall be designed to prevent the maneuvering of
vehicles into or out of parking spaces or the storage of vehicles within any
portion of an entrance driveway or driveway lane that is within 20 feet of the
right-of-way line of a public street.
(a) Off-street parking areas shall be so designed to permit all vehicles to turn
around on the site in order to prevent the necessity of any vehicles
§ 94-8.26 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.26
94:215
backing onto a public street from such site.
(b) No required off-street parking space, including adjacent parking access
lanes or maneuvering space, shall be located within the existing or
proposed right-of-way of public streets.
(10) Any site that provides temporary stopping space or maneuvering space for
vehicles of customers or patrons seeking service at a roadside business
establishment, such as a drive-in bank, and others shall be located so that the
stopping, stacking and maneuvering aisles are set back at least 20 feet from
any existing or, where applicable, future right-of-way line of a public street.
(11) Where parking, other than for single- or two-family dwellings, is permitted
between the street and the front building line, a safety island or raised median
separating the public street from the parking area shall be provided in
accordance with the following minimum requirements. (See Figures 5 and 6.84)
(a) The width of the safety island shall be that width between the proposed
curbline and a point eight feet inside the property line. When this width is
less than 20 feet, the parking area shall be reduced to provide a minimum
width for the safety island of 20 feet. All required tree and shrub plantings
shall be placed on the on-site portion of the safety island.
(b) When perpendicular or angled parking spaces abut the safety island, the
stall depth shall be measured from a point one foot outside the face of the
curb for perpendicular spaces or angled spaces greater than 60° and two
feet outside the face of the curb for 60° angle spaces. Such parking spaces
shall be separated from access drives by curbed islands with a minimum
width of 10 feet.
(c) Safety islands shall be landscaped, topsoiled and seeded, except that they
may, as an alternative to seeding, be provided with a cover of mulch of
maintenance-free materials which provide a clear and unmistakable
distinction between the parking area and the safety island.
(d) No commercial signs, light standards or other aboveground obstructions,
other than plantings, shall be permitted within 10 feet of the street rightof-
way.
C. Each perpendicular or angle off-street parking space shall occupy a rectangular area
of not less than nine feet in width and 18 feet in depth, exclusive of access drives
and aisles, except that parking spaces at shopping centers or commercial areas,
where people will be entering vehicles while carrying packages, should be 10 feet
wide, and parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be 12 feet wide.
(1) Uses that own, rent or service motor vehicles larger than automobiles which
must be parked and/or stored on the site shall indicate in the statement of
operations submitted with the site plan the size of such vehicles and the
anticipated largest number of such vehicles to be stored and/or parked on the
site at any single time.
84. Editor's Note: Figures 5 and 6 are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 94-8.26 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.26
94:216
(a) The site plan shall show a sufficient number of parking and/or storage
stalls at any adequate size for the largest number of such vehicles to be
parked and/or stored on the site at any one time.
(b) Aisles providing for access to such parking and/or storage stalls shall be
of adequate width for the vehicles to be served.
(c) Failure of an applicant to indicate, where applicable, in the statement of
operations that vehicles larger than automobiles are to be parked and/or
stored on the site and provide for such parking and/or storage on the site
plan shall be a violation of this chapter, and any building permit or
certificate of occupancy that has been issued shall not be valid and may
be revoked.
(d) Any change of use to a use which requires parking and/or storage space
for a greater number of vehicles, larger than automobiles, than the
previous use shall be required to make application for site plan approval.
D. All parking areas, passageways and driveways shall be surfaced with a properly
designed, durable, all-weather pavement of either bituminous concrete or portland
cement concrete and clearly marked for parking spaces.
(1) Parking areas for less than 50 cars which the municipal agency determines are
not likely to be utilized by heavy truck traffic or drive-up window service may
be paved with one-and-one-half-inch compacted thickness of bituminous
concrete surface course, Type FABC-1, over a four-inch bituminous stabilized
base course, all in accordance with the specifications contained in § 94-8.30.
(2) In parking areas for 100 or more cars, access drives and aisles which the
municipal agency determines are likely to be utilized by heavy trucks or
unusually high traffic volumes shall provide paving in accordance with the
requirements for streets other than local streets set forth in § 94-8.30 of this
chapter.
E. Sidewalks shall be composed of Class B portland cement concrete. Sidewalks with
a minimum width of four feet and a minimum thickness of four inches shall be
provided in all parking areas for five or more vehicles, between parking areas and
principal structures, along aisles and driveways, and wherever pedestrian traffic
shall occur.
(1) Sidewalks must be raised and curbed six inches above the parking area except
where crossing streets or driveways and wherever pedestrian traffic shall
occur.
(2) Sidewalks and parking areas must be arranged to prevent cars from
overhanging or extending over sidewalk areas.
(3) Sidewalk areas crossing driveways shall be six inches reinforced with welded
wire fabric (66-10 by 10) or equivalent approved by the Borough Engineer.
F. Curbing.
(1) The perimeter of all parking areas and internal islands within all parking areas
§ 94-8.26 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.26
94:217
open to the general public shall have continuous cast-in-place concrete curbing
(see Figure No. 3 attached to this chapter) with a six-inch face or continuous
granite block curb (see Figure No. 3A, included as an attachment to this
chapter). The use of granite block curb shall be approved by the municipal
agency at the time of site plan approval.
(2) Concrete curbing shall be composed of Class B portland cement concrete.
G. All portions of every site not utilized for pedestrian paths, parking, access drives,
loading areas or approved outdoor storage and not covered by buildings or other
construction shall be landscaped as provided in § 94-8.21 of this chapter.
(1) This shall include areas immediately adjacent to the site on public rights-ofway
between the curb and sidewalk or the property line of the site.
(2) Whenever off-street parking areas shall be located next to a residential zone,
said parking areas shall be suitably screened and buffered subject to approval
by the Land Use Board.
(3) Every parking lot with more than 100 spaces shall be divided as nearly as
possible into smaller lots of 50 spaces separated by landscaped dividing strips,
except the area for access aisles.
(4) The plantings required within the parking areas shall be considered exclusive
from any other plantings that may be required for screening or safety island
planting.
H. All parking areas, appurtenant passageways and driveways serving commercial and
industrial uses with more than five parking spaces shall be illuminated adequately
during the hours between sunset and sunrise when the use is in operation. Adequate
shielding shall be provided by commercial and industrial users to protect residential
zones from the glare of such illumination and from that of automobile headlights.
I. All parking areas shall provide paint striping to delineate parking stalls, barrier
lines, lane lines, directional arrows, stop lines, fire lanes and other striping as may
be required to ensure safe and convenient traffic circulation. Such striping shall be
in substantial conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
except that all parking stall marking shall be hairpin style with eight inches between
parallel stall dividing lines.
J. All parking areas shall provide traffic control signs and devices necessary to ensure
safe and convenient traffic circulation. Such devices shall be in substantial
conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
K. Parking areas shall be so arranged as to provide adequate access to all buildings in
case of fire or other emergencies.
(1) No parking shall be allowed within 20 feet of the outer walls of any
nonresidential structure or within such other adequate distance as the
municipal agency in consultation with Borough fire officials may approve.
(2) The developer shall post adequate signs and provide pavement markings,
approved by the municipal agency, prohibiting such parking in designating
§ 94-8.26 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.26
94:218
such areas as fire zones.
L. Vehicular access between parking areas on adjacent properties, if allowed by the
municipal agency, shall be limited to one opening providing two lanes of traffic and
shall be located as far from the street line as practical.
M. In the event that parking is proposed on a lot or site having a slope greater than
10%, regardless of size, it shall be terraced, utilizing retaining walls or properly
reinforced embankment slopes and providing for adequate safety, stability and
drainage.
(1) At no time should an embankment slope that is not reinforced, or any other
earthen material having a greater elevation than the adjacent parking area, have
a slope exceeding a ratio of 3:1.
(2) When retaining walls, terraces, embankment slopes or similar types of earthen
retaining devices are necessitated adjacent to or within the parking area, they
shall be kept in good repair or otherwise maintained so as to keep the parking
area free of debris and dirt.
N. Required parking spaces for the physically handicapped should be located to
provide convenient access to building entrances by way of depressed curbs and
ramps in accordance with state and Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA)
requirements. The number of parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall
be a minimum of 12 feet in width, and the number of spaces to be provided shall be
determined by the following table:
Required Accessible Parking Spaces
Total Parking Spaces in Area
Minimum Number of Accessible
Spaces to Be Provided*
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
1,001 and over 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
§ 94-8.26 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.26
94:219
Notes:
* In addition, one in every eight accessible parking spaces (but not less than
one) must be served by an access aisle at least 96 inches wide and must be
designated "van accessible." Provision of all required spaces in conformance
with the "Universal Parking Space Design" which accommodates both cars
and vans is permitted.
(1) Where possible, such spaces shall be located so that persons in wheelchairs or
using braces or crutches are not compelled to wheel or walk behind parked
cars.
(2) Lines designating the handicapped spaces shall be painted in yellow paint, and
a sign(s) shall be posted and maintained, said sign(s) to conform to regulations
adopted by the Director of Motor Vehicles and/or be in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 39:4-198.
(3) All signing, pavement markings, depressed curbing and/or ramps shall be
maintained in good and proper condition, including, but not limited to, the
condition of required markings and signs which should remain distinctly
visible at all times.
(4) Any owner of premises required to provide barrier-free accessible parking
stalls who fails to maintain stalls, curbing, signs or markings in proper
condition shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $250. Each day that an owner fails to satisfy the obligations of this
subsection shall constitute a separate violation and shall be punishable as such.
O. Parking lots having 50 or less spaces shall be designed in accordance with the
minimum design requirements contained herein.
(1) A five-foot unbroken landscaping strip along side and rear property lines. The
ten-foot landscaping strips shall have the same minimum planting
requirements as safety islands, except that:
(2) No more than one two-way access drive or two one-way access drives shall be
permitted on any street.
(3) Where possible, access drives shall not be located closer than 100 feet from
the nearest right-of-way line of an intersecting street.
(4) No parking stall shall be located to require a vehicle to back into any portion
of the right-of-way in order to enter or exit the parking stall.
(5) All parking areas for five or more vehicles shall have artificial lighting that
will provide a minimum lighting level of 0.5 horizontal footcandle throughout
the parking area and access drives. Shielding shall be required where
necessary to prevent glare upon adjacent properties or streets.
P. Parking lots which have a capacity for parking more than 50 vehicles shall be
designed in accordance with the minimum design standards contained herein:
(1) All the minimum design standards for small parking areas.
§ 94-8.26 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.26
94:220
(2) No parking stalls shall utilize the required entrance and exit drives or major
circulation drives as access aisles.
(3) Wherever feasible, access drives located along one-way streets or divided
highways shall be separate one-way drives. Said drives shall be located so that
vehicles enter the parking area at the beginning of the property and exit at the
far end of the property unless other considerations, such as a median opening,
dictate otherwise.
(4) Access drives shall not be located closer than 100 feet from the nearest rightof-
way line of an intersecting street, except that for uses, such as shopping
centers, which, in the opinion of the municipal agency, will generate large
traffic volumes, access drives shall not be located closer than 200 feet from the
nearest right-of-way line of an intersecting street.
(5) No driveway shall be located less than 10 feet from the side property line or
within 30 feet of an existing drive, whichever is greater.
(6) Properties having a frontage in excess of 500 feet on any one street shall be
permitted two-way and one-way access drives providing for not more than two
entrance and two exit movements on the street. Properties having a frontage in
excess 1,000 feet on any one street may be permitted have additional access
drives, subject to the approval of the Land Use Board.
(7) Where the municipal agency determines that the total number of off-street
parking spaces required by this chapter may not be immediately required for a
particular use, it may permit a staged development plan which requires that
only a portion of the parking area, but not less than 75% of the required spaces,
be completed initially, subject to the following regulations:
(a) The site plan shall clearly indicate both that portion of the parking area to
be initially paved and the total parking needed to provide the number of
spaces required by this chapter.
(b) The site plan shall provide for adequate drainage of both the partial and
total parking areas.
(c) The portion of the parking area not to be paved initially shall be
landscaped in accordance with § 94-8.6 of this chapter.
(d) The applicant shall post separate performance guaranties in addition to
the performance guaranties required under Article VII of this chapter,
which shall reflect the cost of installing the additional parking facilities
necessary to provide the total number of parking spaces required.
(e) In lieu of a permanent certificate of occupancy, a temporary certificate of
occupancy shall be issued for a period of two years. Prior to the expiration
of the two-year period, the applicant may either install the additional
parking shown on the site plan and apply to the Construction Official for
issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy or apply to the
municipal agency after the use has been in operation a minimum of 18
months for a determination as to whether or not the initial parking area
§ 94-8.26 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.26
94:221
provided is adequate.
[1] If the municipal agency determines that the parking facility is
adequate as originally constructed, the performance guaranties may
be released and a permanent certificate of occupancy issued.
[2] If, however, the municipal agency determines that the partial offstreet
parking area is not adequate, the applicant shall be required to
install the additional parking facilities in accordance with the terms
of the performance guaranties prior to issuance of a permanent
certificate of occupancy.
(f) Any change of use on a site for which the municipal agency may have
approved a partial paving of an off-street parking area to a use which
requires more parking spaces than are provided on the site shall require
submission of a new site plan.
Q. The following minimum off-street parking spaces are required:
(1) Automotive repair garage or body shop: one parking space for each 400 square
feet of gross floor area.
(2) Automotive sales and service: one parking space for each 400 square feet of
gross floor area shall be provided for customer and employee parking. These
areas shall be in addition to areas utilized for display and storage of vehicles.
Site plans shall specify which parking spaces are designated for customers,
employees, display and storage.
(3) Automotive service station: five parking spaces for each service bay, exclusive
of vehicle service area. In no instance shall there be less than five off-street
parking spaces.
(4) Banks, savings and loan associations and similar financial institutions: one
parking space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area.
(5) Bars, cocktail lounges, nightclubs, including restaurants with bars: one parking
space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area.
(6) Barber- and beauty shop: three parking spaces for each chair, if known, but not
less than one parking space per 200 square feet of floor area.
(7) Bowling alley: three parking spaces for each alley. Other commercial uses
within the same building will be computed separately in accordance with this
section.
(8) Business offices and mixed office uses: one parking space for each 250 square
feet of gross floor area.
(9) Car washes: five parking spaces for employees, plus off-street storage
(stacking) space equal to at least five times the number of cars that can be in
the wash process at one time. For self-wash or self-service car washes, the
requirement for employee parking shall be eliminated.
(10) Churches, temples or chapels: one parking space for each four seats in the
§ 94-8.26 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.26
94:222
main congregation seating area. Where no individual seats are provided, 20
inches of bench shall be considered as one seat. Where seats or benches are not
provided, or are provided only in a portion of the main congregation seating
area, one parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area within the main
congregation seating area.
(11) Community center, library, museum, art galleries: one parking space for each
200 square feet of gross floor area.
(12) Community clubs, private clubs, lodges: one parking space for each 100
square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 1/2 spaces for each boat slip where
applicable.
(13) Drive-in restaurants: one parking space for each 35 square feet of gross floor
area.
(14) Dwellings:
(a) Two parking spaces for each single-family dwelling;
(b) Parking requirements for senior citizen residential development in the
R-1B Zoning District shall be as follows:
[1] Type of unit and number of spaces.
Type of Unit Number of Spaces*
Assisted living residence 0.50
Efficiency 1.00
1-bedroom 1.25
2-bedroom 1.50
Notes:
* These parking standards may be reduced if the development
is restricted to occupants 65 years of age and over. Parking
for projects for residents 65 years of age and older may be
based upon New Jersey Housing Mortgage Finance Agency
or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
standards for comparable uses.
(c) Garage parking spaces in senior citizen residential developments shall be
counted as one space for each vehicle housed within the garage. Tandem
parking spaces in front of a garage shall not be counted as a parking space
for determining the total number of parking spaces.
(d) In a senior citizen residential development, common parking spaces with
accessible guest parking of one space for every five selling units in the
areas to be served shall be provided.
(15) Dental or medical office: one parking space for each 100 square feet of gross
floor area; except that, if located within a building housing three or more
separate, unassociated practitioners, the requirement shall be one parking
§ 94-8.26 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.26
94:223
space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area.
(16) Furniture and appliance store or similar type of use requiring large amounts of
storage: one parking space for each 400 square feet up to 4,000 square feet,
plus one parking space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area above 4,000
square feet.
(17) Government office: to be determined by the Land Use Board, except that
governmental offices within privately owned buildings shall provide a
minimum of one parking space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area.
(18) Hardware and auto supply store: one parking space for each 400 square feet of
gross floor area.
(19) Hotel and motel: one parking space for each rental unit. Each commercial use
within the building shall be computed separately according to the requirements
for such use set forth herein. The Land Use Board may allow up to 50% of the
required parking for commercial uses in the hotel or motel to be satisfied by
guest room parking.
(20) Laundromat or similar coin-operated cleaning: one parking space for each 200
square feet of gross floor area.
(21) Manufacturing or industrial establishment, research or testing laboratory,
bottling plant or similar use: one parking space for each 500 square feet of
gross floor area.
(22) Meeting room or assembly or exhibition hall: one parking space for each 50
square feet of gross floor area.
(23) Mortuary and funeral home: one parking space for every 100 square feet of
gross floor area.
(24) Nursery school, day camp or similar use: one parking space for each 500
square feet of gross floor area.
(25) Nursing, convalescent or rest home: one space per each three beds, plus one
space for each two employees, including nurses and staff.
(26) Professional office (other than medical): one parking space for each 200
square feet of gross floor area.
(27) Public and private utility, electrical substation, gas regulator, waterworks,
pumping station and similar facility: to be determined by the Land Use Board
based on the specific need of the use.
(28) Restaurant, cafe and diner: one parking space for each 50 square feet of gross
floor area.
(29) Recreation facility: Those not specifically mentioned herein shall be
determined by the Land Use Board.
(30) Retail store, except as otherwise specified: one parking space for each 150 feet
of gross floor area.
§ 94-8.26 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.26
94:224
(31) Studio: art, music, dance, gymnastics and similar for the purpose of giving
instruction rather than shows or exhibitions: one parking space for each 100
square feet of gross floor area.
(32) Shopping center: 4.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. If
more than 5% of the enclosed gross floor area of any shopping center is
occupied by malls, lobbies, corridors, heating plants or other space not utilized
for direct commercial purposes, which, in the opinion of the Land Use Board,
will not generate a need for parking, the Land Use Board shall allow the
parking required to be based on the gross leasable area of the shopping center
at the above rate. The "gross leasable area," for the purposes of this chapter,
shall be defined as the total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and
exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and upper floors.
(33) Theaters: one parking space for each 35 square feet of gross floor area.
(34) Veterinary clinic or hospital or animal care facility: one parking space for each
400 square feet of gross floor area.
(35) Warehouse, wholesale, machinery or large equipment sales: one parking space
for each 1,500 square feet of gross floor area, plus one parking space for each
vehicle used in connection with the business.
(36) Enclosed garage: At least one enclosed garage must be provided for each
dwelling unit constructed.
(37) Existing buildings: None of the off-street parking facilities as required in this
chapter shall be required for any existing buildings or use, unless said
buildings or use shall be enlarged, altered, amended or changed.
R. In computing the number of the above required parking spaces, the criteria
contained herein shall apply:
(1) Where fractional spaces result, the required number shall be construed to be
the nearest whole number.
(2) The parking space requirements for a use not specifically mentioned herein
shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature as determined by the
municipal agency upon that use mentioned. If there is no use enumerated
herein having sufficient similarity to the use proposed to enable the municipal
agency to establish rational parking requirements, the municipal agency may,
in its discretion, direct the applicant to furnish the municipal agency with such
data as may be necessary to enable the municipal agency to establish rational
parking requirements.
(3) Nothing in the above requirements shall be construed to prevent the joint use
of off-street parking facilities by two or more uses on the same site, provided
that the total of such spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements
for various individual uses computed separately by the above requirements.
The collective provisions of off-street parking facilities by two or more
buildings or uses located on adjacent lots is permitted, provided that the total
of such off-street parking facilities shall not be less than the sum of the
§ 94-8.26 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.26
94:225
§ 94-8.27. Public open space and common open space.
requirement for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance
with the standards contained in this chapter, and further provided that the land
is owned by one or more of the collective users.
A. Public open space or common open space shall be proposed to be provided in
conjunction with applications for development for subdivisions or site plans in
accordance with requirements contained herein.
B. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be preserved
whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing such features.
C. If the Master Plan or the Official Map provides for the reservation of designated
streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or public areas within the
proposed development, before approving a subdivision or site plan, the municipal
agency may further require that such streets, ways, basins or areas be shown on the
plat in locations and sizes suitable to their intended uses.
(1) The municipal agency may reserve the location and extent of such streets,
ways, basins or areas shown on the plat for a period of one year after the
approval of the final plat or within such further time as may be agreed to by
the developer.
(2) Unless during such period or extension thereof the Borough shall have entered
into a contract to purchase or institute condemnation proceedings according to
law for the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such streets, ways,
basins or areas, the developer shall not be bound by such reservations shown
on the plat and may proceed to use such land for private use in accordance
with applicable development regulations.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to streets and roads, flood control
basins or public drainageways necessitated by the subdivision or land
development as required for final approval.
(4) The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss found to be
caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation of use.
(a) In such instance, unless a lesser amount has previously been mutually
agreed upon, just compensation shall be deemed to be the fair market
value of an option to purchase the land reserved for the period of
reservation, provided that determination of such fair market value shall
include, but not be limited to, consideration of the real property tax
apportioned to the land reserved and prorated for the period of
reservation.
(b) The developer shall be compensated for the reasonable increased cost of
legal, engineering or other professional services incurred in connection
with obtaining subdivision approval or site plan approval, as the case may
be, caused by the reservation.
(5) Any land shown on the Master Plan as proposed for park, playground, school
§ 94-8.26 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.27
94:226
site or other public use shall be designated and reserved for such use.
D. Where it is considered appropriate by the municipal agency, portions of proposed
open spaces may be designated for passive and/or active recreational activities.
(1) Passive recreational activities may include, but are not limited to, pedestrian
paths, bicycle paths, sitting areas and naturally preserved areas.
(2) Active recreation activities may include, but are not limited to, swimming
pools, tennis courts and ballfields.
(3) The location and shape of any land to be designated for recreational activities
shall be approved by the municipal agency based on, but not limited to, the
standards contained herein:
(a) The municipal agency shall consider the natural topography and shall
attempt to preserve the same to the greatest extent possible.
(b) The municipal agency shall attempt to tailor the location and shape of
recreational areas to harmonize with the shape of the entire development.
(c) The municipal agency shall consider the extent to which specific
recreational areas shall be used for passive or active recreational
purposes.
(d) The municipal agency shall consider the sequence of development.
E. Within open space areas, the municipal agency may require a developer to make
certain site preparation improvements, which may include, but are not limited to,
those contained herein:
(1) Removal of dead or diseased trees.
(2) Thinning of trees or other growth to encourage more desirable growth.
(3) Removal of trees in areas planned for ponds, lakes, active recreational
facilities or pathways.
(4) Grading and seeding.
F. Open space areas shall be subject to these requirements:
(1) Open space areas should not be less than 50 feet in width at any location,
except, where such open space is to be utilized primarily for walkway access
from a public street to the open space at the rear of building lots, it may have
a minimum width of 20 feet for a length not to exceed 250 feet.
(2) Where possible, certain land areas and features as follows shall be preserved
as open space:
(a) Floodway and flood hazard areas.
(b) Areas containing a significant number of trees 12 inches or greater in
diameter.
§ 94-8.27 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.27
94:227
(c) Existing watercourses or ponds.
(d) Land with a seasonal high-water table of less than two feet.
(e) Wetlands as defined by the New Jersey Wetlands Act of 1970 and the
Freshwater Wetlands Act of 198785 and delineated on wetlands maps
prepared by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and
Energy or delineated in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:7A. [Amended
12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
G. The type of ownership of land dedicated for open space purposes shall be selected
by the owner, developer or subdivider subject to the approval of the municipal
agency.
(1) These shall include:
(a) The Borough of Shrewsbury, subject to acceptance of the Borough
Council.
(b) Other public jurisdictions or agencies, subject to their acceptance.
(c) Quasi-public organizations, subject to their acceptance.
(d) Homeowners' or condominium associations or organizations.
(e) Shared, undivided interest by all property owners in the development.
(2) Any lands dedicated for open space purposes shall contain appropriate
covenants and deed restrictions approved by the municipal agency, which
ensure that:
(a) The open space area will not be further subdivided in the future.
(b) The use of the open space areas will continue in perpetuity for the
purpose specified.
(c) Appropriate provisions are made for the maintenance of the open space
areas.
(3) No final approval of a subdivision or site plan containing open space created
pursuant to this section shall be granted until the developer has submitted, and
the municipal agency has approved, the master deed for such open space and
the bylaws of the organization established pursuant to § 94-8.27H below.
H. The Borough or other governmental agency may, at any time and from time to time,
accept the dedication of land or any interest therein for public use and maintenance,
but the municipal agency shall not require, as a condition of approval, that land
proposed to be set aside for common open space be dedicated or made available to
public use.
(1) The developer shall provide for an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of any open space for the benefit of owners or residents of the
85. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 94-8.27 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.27
94:228
development, if said open space is not dedicated to the Borough or other
governmental agency.
(a) Such organization shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any open
space, by sale or otherwise, except to an organization conceived and
established to own and maintain the open space for the benefit of such
development.
(b) Thereafter, such organization shall not be dissolved or dispose of any of
its open space without first offering to dedicate the same to the Borough.
(2) In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the open space in
reasonable order and condition, the administrative officer (Zoning Officer)
may serve written notice upon such organization or upon the owners of the
development setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to
maintain the open space in reasonable condition.
(a) Said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance
be cured within 35 days thereof and shall state the date and place of a
hearing thereon which shall be held within 15 days of the notice.
(b) At such hearing, the administrative officer (Zoning Officer) may modify
the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and may give a
reasonable extension of time not to exceed 65 days within which they
shall be cured.
(c) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the modification
thereof shall not be cured within said 35 days or any permitted extension
thereof, the Borough, in order to preserve the open space and maintain
the same for a period of one year, may enter upon and maintain such land.
Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use
the open space by the owners.
[1] Before the expiration of said year, the administrative officer (Zoning
Officer) shall, upon his initiative or upon the request of the
organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the open
space, call a public hearing upon 15 days' written notice to such
organization and to the owners of the development to be held by the
administrative officer (Zoning Officer), at which hearing such
organization and the owners of the development shall show cause
why such maintenance by the Borough shall not, at the election of
the Borough, continue for a succeeding year.
[2] If the administrative officer (Zoning Officer) shall determine that
such organization is ready and able to maintain said open space in
reasonable condition, the Borough shall cease to maintain said open
space at the end of said year.
[3] If the administrative officer (Zoning Officer) shall determine that
such organization is not ready and able to maintain said open space
in a reasonable condition, the Borough may, in its discretion,
continue to maintain said open space during the next succeeding
§ 94-8.27 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.27
94:229
§ 94-8.28. Recreation areas.
Where recreation areas and facilities are required or provided, the regulations and
standards contained herein shall apply, along with appropriate sections of § 94-8.27 of
this chapter.
§ 94-8.29. Residential units.
In order to preserve and assure the harmonious relationship of residential units to
the comprehensive neighborhood pattern and to prevent undue similarity of design
which may lead to undue impairment of the stability and value of residential units and
produce neighborhood degeneration and blight with attendant deterioration of conditions
affecting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants thereof and
year, subject to a similar hearing and determination, in each year
thereafter.
[4] The decision of the administrative officer (Zoning Officer) in any
such case shall constitute a final administrative decision subject to
judicial review.
(d) The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed pro rata
against the properties within the development that have a right of
enjoyment of the open space in accordance with assessed value at the
time of imposition of the lien and shall become a lien and tax on said
properties and be added to and be a part of the taxes to be levied and
assessed thereon and enforced and collected with interest by the same
officers and in the same manner as other taxes.
A. Sufficient outdoor play and activity equipment shall be installed in accordance with
standards of the National Parks and Recreation Association for the expected
number of residents in the development.
(1) It should be located in an area which will not be detrimental to adjacent
properties or uses.
(2) The provision and location of such equipment shall be subject to municipal
agency approval.
B. Private swimming pools in residential areas shall have a gross area of water and
deck designed for the needs of the residents of the development.
(1) All swimming pools shall be fully enclosed by a four-foot chain-link or other
fully approved fence equipped with gates and locks.
(2) All swimming pools shall have adequate lifesaving equipment.
(3) Within accessory building(s), all such pools shall have adequate lavatory
facilities, plus, under lock and key, storage facilities wherein shall be kept all
pool chemicals and equipment.
(4) All swimming pool facilities shall comply with the regulations set forth in
§ 94-8.45 of this chapter.
§ 94-8.27 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.29
94:230
the ownership at large, no major subdivision shall be approved until the planned
construction (including front, side and rear elevations) of residential units has been
reviewed and approved by the Design Committee in accordance with the standards
enumerated below, or unless a waiver of these requirements has been granted by the
municipal agency as provided for elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 94-8.30. Roadway construction.
A. The residential unit shall be of such character, quality or architectural design and
construction materials as will assure that the proposed structure will be in keeping
with the general character of the area in which it is located and that:
(1) The proposed structure will have a harmonious relationship with area
residential structures; and
(2) The proposed structure is not likely to produce any of the harmful effects
which lead to neighborhood degeneration and blight with attendant
deterioration of conditions affecting the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the Borough at large.
B. The front facade for each residential unit shall be substantially different from the
front facade of any existing or planned residential unit within five lots in either
direction on the same side of the street from any portion of the above-described lots;
in the case of the corner lots, the side and rear elevations of any existing or planned
residential unit or any other corner lot at the same street intersection. To be deemed
substantially different, the facade or side and rear elevation thereof, as the case may
be, must be different in at least three of the following five respects:
(1) The relative location of a garage, if attached, a portico, if any, or any other
such structural appurtenance with respect to the residential unit itself.
(2) The relative location or type of windows and doors.
(3) The type or pitch of the roof.
(4) The type of siding material.
(5) The type of roofing material or the color thereof or the pattern.
A. Roadways and all appurtenances, including subgrade, subbase, base courses and
pavements, shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable requirements of
the standard specifications as modified herein. All subsurface utilities, including
service connections (terminating at least two feet behind the sidewalk), to each lot
and all storm drains shall be installed in all roadway areas prior to the construction
of final pavement surfaces.
B. All roadways shall be constructed with either a bituminous concrete flexible
pavement structure or a portland cement concrete rigid pavement structure. Only
one type of pavement shall be utilized throughout any development.
C. The pavement structure design for each particular development utilizing either a
flexible or rigid pavement type must be approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 94-8.29 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.30
94:231
(1) The pavement design shall be based upon traffic loading projections and field
sampling and laboratory analysis of the subgrade soils to be encountered in
roadway areas in the development and shall follow current design
recommendations of the Asphalt Institute, the Portland Cement Concrete
Association or such other generally recognized standards as may be acceptable
to the Borough Engineer.
(a) As minimum requirements, rigid portland cement paving shall be
expansion-joint-type paving utilizing joints similar to Type A expansion
joints, according to the Standard Construction Details of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
(b) Such paving shall be reinforced, constructed with Class B air-entrained
concrete and shall have a minimum thickness of 6 1/2 inches for local,
local collector and minor collector streets and eight inches for other
classifications.
(2) Pavement on local, local collector and minor collector streets shall be a fiveinch
compacted thickness of bituminous stabilized base course with one-andone-
half-inch compacted thickness of bituminous concrete surface course. On
all other streets, not county or state maintained, the pavement should be a sixinch
compacted thickness of bituminous stabilized base course with a two-inch
compacted thickness of bituminous concrete surface course.
D. All subgrade shall be prepared in accordance with the applicable requirements of
the standard specifications for bituminous concrete and reinforced concrete
pavements.
E. Where granular subbase courses are included in the pavement design section
proposed by the developer, they shall be constructed in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the standard specifications.
(1) Bituminous concrete pavements and stabilized bases may be constructed on
subgrade without subbase or aggregate base courses, provided that the
subgrade can be satisfactorily prepared as hereinbefore described.
(2) Dense graded aggregate base courses shall comply with the requirements of
the Standard Specifications for Soil Aggregate, Type 5, Class A or Type 2.
Class A or B.
(3) Portland cement concrete pavements must be constructed with a minimum of
six inches of a granular-type subbase meeting the requirements of the Standard
Specifications for Soil Aggregate, Type 4, Class E.
(4) Any subbase course of aggregate base course to be utilized with any type of
pavement shall have a minimum thickness of four inches.
F. Bituminous base course for use with bituminous concrete pavements shall consist
of plant-mixed bituminous stabilized base course (stone mix or gravel mix) in
accordance with the requirements of the standard specifications, except that the
requirements for the construction of the base course shall be amended to allow the
laying of the base course with a single-lift maximum thickness not exceeding four
§ 94-8.30 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.30
94:232
§ 94-8.31. Screening of equipment or machinery. [Amended 4-9-1990 by Ord. No.
606]
inches. Prior to placement of any bituminous stabilized base course, the finished
surface of any underlying subbase or aggregate base shall receive a prime coat in
accordance with the requirements of the standard specifications.
G. Bituminous pavements shall consist of a bituminous concrete surface course Type
FABC-1, in accordance with the requirements of the standard specifications.
(1) The bituminous pavement wearing surface should generally not be installed
until just prior to the time the streets are prepared for final acceptance.
(a) Prior to the installation of a bituminous concrete surface, the bituminous
base course shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer.
(b) Any areas of the base course in need of repair shall be removed and
replaced at the direction of the Borough Engineer.
(c) If the Borough Engineer directs, a leveling course of FABC material shall
be placed on any uneven or below grade base courses prior to the
placement of finished pavement.
(2) No pavement surfaces shall be placed unless permission to do so has been
granted by the Borough Engineer.
H. Concrete pavements shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the
standard specifications.
I. In areas where alternate pavement-types are proposed or desired either for
decorative purposes, because of physical restrictions or existing conditions or
because of limitations or shortages in certain types of construction materials, a
detail of the type and/or location of alternate pavement-types proposed shall be
submitted for approval with the preliminary and/or final plat.
(1) The use of alternate pavement-types may only be permitted if the applicant
submits for review and approval details and specifications concerning the
equipment, materials and methods proposed for use and if the Borough
Engineer has inspected the installation of and tested and approved of a suitable
sample section of such pavement.
(2) In the event that the Borough Engineer does not approve the sample section of
pavement, the developer shall remove the same section and replace it with a
type of pavement permitted by this chapter or such other alternate as may be
approved by the municipal agency.
A. When utilitarian devices, machinery, motors, generators, transformers, meters or
antennas are placed outside or on top of any structure, they shall be screened from
public view. This screening shall consist of either:
(1) Densely planted evergreen shrubs which shall grow to not less than five feet
after one growing season;
§ 94-8.30 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.31
94:233
§ 94-8.32. Sewage disposal.
§ 94-8.33. Sidewalks and aprons.
(2) A solid and uniform fence at least five feet in height on four sides of said
equipment;
(3) A masonry wall at least five feet in height on four sides of said equipment;
(4) Extensions of parapet walls or mansard rooflines or structural or ornamental
screens or baffles; or
(5) Any similar type of solid or uniform screening which will prevent exposure of
such equipment to public view.
B. All installations shall be painted in colors that blend with the surroundings.
C. The above requirements shall not be construed to prevent an opening in any
required screening for maintenance or operating purposes. However, any such
opening shall be made as inconspicuous as is possible so as not to present any
unsightly display of said equipment to public view.
D. All structures shall be visually screened with plant materials on all sides and to their
full height up to a height of 36 feet. The area in front of a satellite dish antenna's
reception window need not be screened. Screening shall include evergreen trees,
tall evergreen shrubs and low evergreen shrubs designed to provide total
obscuration at maturity. All plants shall be installed at not less than 1/3 of the
required height.
A. Prior to the approval of any final plat, the full approval of any sanitary sewage
disposal system must have been obtained from the Northeast Monmouth County
Regional Sewerage Authority and filed with the municipal agency, or the final
approval will be conditioned upon full approval of the Northeast Monmouth County
Regional Sewerage Authority.
B. The public sewage disposal system shall be installed in accordance with the rules
and regulations of the New Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners and in
accordance with other requirements of law and subject to the approval of the
Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority.
A. Sidewalk construction shall be required on both sides of all streets within a
development and entirely around the perimeter of all culs-de-sac. Where the
development abuts an existing street, the sidewalk shall be constructed only on that
side. Sidewalks shall also be constructed at any other places, such as pedestrian
walkways or access points to open space, as shown on or required at the approval
of the final plat.
(1) Installation of sidewalks may be waived by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, with the written permission of the Borough Council, at
the request of the developer or on its own initiative, provided that, upon
granting such a waiver, the developer shall be required to pay the Borough of
Shrewsbury an amount equal to the reasonable cost of installing said
§ 94-8.31 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.33
94:234
§ 94-8.34. Signs.
sidewalks, said amount to be determined by the Borough Engineer upon
submission and consideration of various estimates and other documentation
from the developer, other interested parties and the office of the Borough
Engineer itself.
(2) All funds collected by the Borough from developers as a result of waivers
granted in accordance with this subsection shall be maintained in a sidewalk
construction account, the proceeds of which shall be available to install
sidewalks throughout the Borough where and as authorized by the Borough
Council.
(3) Nothing contained herein shall affect the right of the Borough to enact
ordinances requiring assessments for sidewalks from property owners as
authorized under N.J.S.A. 40:65-2 or other statutory rights granted to
municipalities.
B. Sidewalks within street rights-of-way shall generally be located with the sidewalk
edge farthest from the roadway placed one foot from the property line. Sidewalks
not within street rights-of-way shall be located to provide for the most likely routes
of pedestrian travel. In cases where the topography dictates or a proposed
development provides for the extension of an existing street or abuts an existing
street, where sidewalks have already been installed in a location other than as
specified above or where such variations in sidewalk locations are needed to
preserve trees or natural features, the municipal agency may approve alternate
sidewalk locations in order to provide for the preservation of physical features or
the continuation of the existing sidewalks.
C. Sidewalks shall be four feet wide and four inches thick of Class B, air-entrained
portland cement concrete. Joints shall be cut in the sidewalk at intervals equal to the
width of the sidewalk. Preformed cellular bituminous expansion-joint filler shall be
placed at joints not more than 20 feet on centers.
D. Curb ramps for the physically handicapped shall be provided at all curb returns on
the side(s) of the street where the sidewalk either exists or is proposed and in all
curblines intersected by sidewalk. The ramps shall be constructed in accordance
with the details shown in Figure 8A or 8B.86 Details of the proposed ramps shall be
shown on the preliminary plans of the proposed development.
A. General provisions.
(1) Any signs not specifically permitted are hereby prohibited.
(2) No signs, except window or special event signs, shall be placed on private or
public property except for the purpose of identifying a use or uses actually
conducted upon the premises upon which such signs are erected and for no
other purpose.
(3) No sign shall be located in such a manner as to materially impede the view of
86. Editor's Note: Figures 8A and 8B are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 94-8.33 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.34
94:235
any street or intersection.
(4) Except where otherwise provided, no sign or any part thereof shall be located
closer than 20 feet to any lot line.
(5) All height limitations shall be measured from ground level to the highest part
of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher.
(6) The maximum height for freestanding signs, unless otherwise provided, shall
not exceed 10 feet above ground level.
(7) Except where specifically prohibited, all signs may be double-faced, and the
maximum area shall apply to each side. The area of the sign shall include each
and every part of the sign, including moldings and frames. Where the sign is
supported by a post or pylon whose surface is being used for advertising
purposes, the areas of this post, pylon or other supporting members shall be
considered as part of the total sign area.
(8) Wherever the name or advertising message on a sign is divided between a
number of panels or parts, the total area of all of the panels or parts shall be
considered as one sign, and where a sign consists of individual letters or
numbers, the area of the sign shall be considered as the total area of the
smallest rectangle or rectangles which can collectively enclose all of the letters
or numbers.
(9) Signs erected flat against the side of a building shall not extend above the
height of the vertical wall or cornice to which they are attached.
(10) No permanent marquees or canopies shall be permitted.
(11) Unless specifically prohibited, all signs may be illuminated as provided for in
Subsection E below.
(12) Whenever a parcel is bordered by more than one street, additional signage may
be permitted by the municipal agency, in accordance with the standards of this
section, for each major street upon which the parcel fronts.
B. Permits.
(1) All signs and advertising displays other than those expressly excluded herein
shall require sign permits. To obtain such permits, the owner of the proposed
sign shall make application to the Zoning Official on forms provided by him.
The applicant shall also provide all plans and specifications of the proposed
construction as provided below. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 795]
(2) Application should first be made to the Zoning Officer for issuance of a sign
permit accompanied by a fee of $35 by check or cash payable to the order of
the Borough of Shrewsbury, which fee shall not be returnable for any reason.
It shall be the responsibility of Zoning Official to determine whether the
proposed signs will be in compliance with all the provisions of this section and
all other laws and ordinances of the Borough and that the same will be erected
in such manner as not to constitute any hazard to the public or not likely to
cause damage to property. The Zoning Official shall approve or deny the
§ 94-8.34 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.34
94:236
issuance of a sign permit within 30 days of the receipt by him of the completed
application form and fee. In the event that the Zoning Official approves
the issuance of the sign permit, he shall promptly forward the same to the
applicant. In the event that the Zoning Official denies permission, the Zoning
Official shall so notify the applicant. Upon such denial, the applicant may
appeal the determination of the Zoning Official, pursuant to § 94-3.2K(1) of
this chapter and all other applicable sections thereof. If the work authorized
under a sign permit shall not be completed within one year after the date of its
issuance, the permit shall become null and void. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord.
No. 795; 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
(3) Application for zoning permit shall be made in duplicate on forms to be
furnished by the Borough. The application shall contain the following
information hereinafter set forth. [Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 795]
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the premises
upon which the sign is sought to be erected, and if the applicant is a
person other than the owner, then the applicant, in addition, shall set forth
his, her or its name, address and telephone number as well as his, her or
its relationship to the owner.
(b) The name of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting the sign.
(c) Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to which
or on which the sign is to be erected, if the applicant is other than the
owner.
(d) Attached to each copy of the application shall be a sketch plat prepared
by the applicant or on his behalf which shall include the following
information:
[1] The location of the premises on which the sign is to be erected, in
relation to surrounding properties, and showing the Tax Map, block
and lot numbers of said premises along with the names of the owners
of all adjoining properties and their respective Tax Map, block and
lot numbers and the names of all streets which abut said premises.
[2] The location and dimension of all boundary lines of the premises.
[3] The location and dimensions of all buildings and structures,
including existing signs, on said premises, showing their respective
setbacks from the boundary lines.
(e) Also attached to each copy of the application shall be an additional sketch
prepared by the applicant or on his behalf which shall include the
following information:
[1] A diagram of the proposed sign, with all its dimensions and height
above ground shown and a description of the message, trademark,
symbol or insignia to be contained thereon. Sample signs which are
considered aesthetically acceptable by the Borough of Shrewsbury
are shown on the reverse side of the application form.
§ 94-8.34 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.34
94:237
[2] The method and materials of construction of said sign, including the
mode of illumination, if any, and the manner in which it will be
connected to the ground or building. In any business, commercial or
industrial zone, this information shall be supplied by virtue of being
set forth in blueprint plans.
(4) Nonconforming signs.
(a) Continuance. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the lawful use
of any sign existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may be
continued, although such sign does not conform to the regulations
specified by this section for the said sign; provided, however, that no
nonconforming signs shall be enlarged, extended or increased or changed
in material, character, location or illumination.
(b) Abandonment. A nonconforming sign shall be presumed to be abandoned
when there occurs a cessation of any use or activity pursuant to this
chapter.
(c) Restoration. If any nonconforming signs shall be destroyed by reason of
windstorm, fire, explosion or other act of God or the public enemy, to the
extent in excess of 50% of its then true value, said sign shall not be rebuilt
or reconstructed except in conformance with the provisions of this
section.
(d) Reversion. No nonconforming sign shall, once changed into a
conforming sign, be changed back again into a nonconforming sign.
C. Construction.
(1) All signs shall conform to the structural requirements of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
(2) Following the issuance of a sign permit, an application for a construction
permit shall be made to the Construction Official. It shall be the responsibility
of the Construction Official to ensure that the sign shall be erected in
accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Construction Code. In the event
the Construction Official approves the issuance of a construction permit, he
shall promptly forward the same to the applicant upon payment of the fee as
specified by Chapter 88 of the Code of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
[Amended 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 795]
(3) Any sign attached flat against the surface of a building shall be constructed of
durable material and attached securely to the building with nonrusting metal
hardware. When a sign is to be installed on a masonry building, holes shall be
drilled in the masonry and proper nonrusting hardware of the expansion type
shall be used. The use of wood or fiber plugs is prohibited. Freestanding signs
shall be set securely in the ground or concrete so that the sign will be capable
of withstanding high winds. No other bracing or guy wire shall be permitted.
(4) Any sign attached flat against the surface of a building shall be constructed of
durable material and attached securely to the building with nonrusting metal
§ 94-8.34 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.34
94:238
hardware. When a sign is to be installed on a masonry building, holes shall be
drilled in the masonry and proper nonrusting hardware of the expansion type
shall be used. The use of wood or fiber plugs is prohibited.
D. Maintenance. If the Construction Official shall find that any sign is unsafe, insecure
or in need of repair or is not maintained in proper painted condition, the
Construction Official shall give written notice to the permittee thereof. If the
permittee fails to repair or remove it within 10 days after such notice, such sign may
be removed in order to comply by the Construction Official at the expense of the
permittee or owner of property on which it is located. The Construction Official
may cause any sign or other advertising structure which is an immediate peril to
persons or property to be removed summarily at the expense of the permit holder or
owner of the premises upon which the sign is located and without notice to said
persons. The owner of any sign or other advertising structure in the Borough shall
have the same painted at least once every two years in all its parts, including the
supports of said sign. Any parts consisting of rustless metal and so manufactured as
not to required painting need not be painted, except that, if once painted, the same
shall be maintained as other painted signs.
E. Illumination [Amended 12-13-1994 by Ord. No. 702; 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 795]
(1) Wiring for illuminated signs shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with the Electrical Code of the Borough. Any fee for an electrical inspection
shall be in addition to the fee provided for in the sign permit.
(2) Where illuminated signs are permitted, illumination may be provided by
incandescent floodlights, spotlights or ordinary incandescent bulbs,
fluorescent tubes; mercury vapor, metal halide, quartz or high pressure sodium
lamps. Gas-filled light tubes shall be permitted for indirect illumination and
for internally lighted or diffused lighting of exterior signs. Gas-filled light
tubes shall not be permitted as visual signage or as part of the exposed sign
fascia for exterior signs. Gas-filled light tubes may be utilized for indoor
window signs, provided that such signs are not flashing, rotating, live action,
animated or moving signs of any kind or which contain reflective elements
which sparkle or twinkle from sunlight or lighting. Regardless of the type of
illumination employed, all illuminated signs shall be properly shielded and so
located as to prevent glare or blinding effects upon motor vehicle traffic and
so as not to cause a nuisance to residents of the area. Applicant shall submit
the specifications for the mode of illumination, if any, in accordance with the
provisions of § 94-8.22, Lighting. This information shall be supplied by virtue
of being set forth in blueprints.
(3) Whenever the Zoning Officer determines that the lighting on any sign now or
hereafter erected constitutes a safety hazard to motor vehicle traffic in the
vicinity, he shall serve written notice of his determination upon the property
owner and owner of the sign, directing them to correct the condition with 15
days from the date of the mailing of the notice. Failure to correct the condition
or file an appeal within the time specified shall constitute a violation of this
section by both the sign owner and property owner.
F. Signs permitted without a permit. The following signs shall be permitted in any
§ 94-8.34 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.34
94:239
zone in the Borough without a permit:
(1) Nonilluminated directional signs identifying parking areas, loading zones,
entrances, exits and similar locations. The signs may include a business name
or professional name but shall not include any advertising message and shall
not exceed three square feet.
(2) Temporary and permanent traffic signs and signals installed by the Borough,
county or state for the purpose of directing and regulating the flow of traffic.
(3) Signs indicating public transportation stops when installed by the Borough or
a public transportation utility.
(4) Historical tablets, cornerstones, memorial plaques and emblems which do not
exceed six square feet in area and which are installed by government agencies
or civil religious organizations.
(5) Warning and no-trespassing signs, not exceeding three square feet in area.87
(6) The name and number plates identifying residents and affixed to a house,
apartment or mailbox, not exceeding 50 square inches in area.
(7) Lawn signs identifying residents, not exceeding 1 1/2 square feet in area for
each side. The signs shall not contain any advertising message and shall be
nonilluminated, except by a light which is an integral part of a lamppost if used
as a support.
(8) Signs posted by governmental agencies or pursuant to governmental statute,
order or regulation.
(9) Signs which are an integral part of vending machines, including gasoline
pumps and milk machines, provided that they do not exceed two square feet in
area.
(10) Real estate signs, announcing the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which
the sign is located, such sign not to exceed four square feet in area. If doublefaced,
the sign shall not exceed eight square feet in area for both sides. The
sign shall be nonilluminated. Such sign shall not be closer to the lot line than
1/2 the distance between the building line and the lot line, as defined by this
chapter. Such signs shall not be located closer to other such signs than one in
every 200 feet, measured either along the front of a lot or along the depth of a
lot.
(10.1) Real estate open house signs. [Added 8-3-2009 by Ord. No. 931; amended
3-1-2010 by Ord. No. 938]
(a) Real estate open house signs shall be permitted, provided that such signs
must be placed in the public right-of-way only and shall not block any
sight triangles.
87. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(6), regarding flags and emblems, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 795. This ordinance also renumbered Subsections F(7) through (15) as Subsections F(6)
through (14), respectively.
§ 94-8.34 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.34
94:240
(b) These signs shall not be larger that four square feet for one-sided signs or
eight square feet for double-sided signs, and the top of each such sign
shall not be higher than 30 inches above the ground. The use of any
balloons or streamers attached to such signs is strictly prohibited.
(c) If the open house is being conducted by a real estate licensee, the sign or
signs shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the
licensee.
(d) Real estate open house signs shall only be displayed on Sundays between
11:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Open house signs shall be removed immediately
upon the end of the event or at 5:00 p.m., whichever is earlier.
(11) Temporary signs or other advertising materials attached to a window shall be
removed at the expiration of the event sale for which it was erected or posted.
Not more than 20% of the square footage of any single window or single
window display area shall be devoted to signs or other advertising material
attached thereto or otherwise exposed to public view.
(12) Temporary signs for advertising public functions or fund-raising events for
charitable or religious organizations shall be permitted for a period of 21 days
prior to and during the event and shall be removed within five days after the
event. The sign shall be nonilluminated, not larger than 12 square feet in area,
not exceeding eight feet in height and may be erected flat against the building
or freestanding.
(13) Temporary political signs, which shall be removed five days after the election.
Political signs shall not exceed six square feet in area nor four feet in width.
[Amended 9-15-2008 by Ord. No. 919]
(14) Path-marking signs for garage sales, provided that not more than two signs not
exceeding two square feet in size are posted no earlier than two days before
the beginning of the sale, are removed the day following the sale and are not
otherwise prohibited in Subsection G below.
G. Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in all zones in the Borough.
(1) Signs using red, yellow and green lights which, in the judgment of the Chief
of Police, interfere with the operation of any traffic control signal.
(2) Moving or revolving signs and signs using blinking, flashing, vibrating,
flickering, tracer or sequential lighting.
(3) Signs using neon lights or any material which sparkles or glitters, but nothing
herein contained is intended to prohibit the use of reflective paint on signs
directing traffic or identifying various locations within a lot or parcel.
(4) Any sign which, in the judgment of the Chief of Police, unreasonably tends to
distract drivers or otherwise constitutes a traffic hazard.
(5) Roof signs.
(6) Signs or advertising matter of an indecent or obscene nature.
§ 94-8.34 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.34
94:241
(7) Signs using words, such as "stop," "look," "danger," etc., which are placed in
a manner or position which, in the judgment of the Chief of Police, constitute
a traffic hazard or otherwise interfere with the free flow of traffic.
(8) Signs which attempt to imitate or otherwise cause confusion with existing
signs erected by any governmental board, body or agency.
(9) Except where specifically permitted, signs advertising a product or service not
sold on the premises, signs advertising or directing attention to another
premises and any other signs unrelated to the premises on which the sign is
erected.
(10) Signs causing interference with radio or television reception.
(11) Signs obstructing doors, fire escapes or stairways or keeping light or air from
windows used for living quarters.
(12) Flags, banners, strings of banners, pinwheels, A-type signs, sandwich-type
signs, sidewalk signs, curb signs and similar advertising devices.
(13) Any commercial sign or banner spanning a public street.
(14) Signs placed on awnings, trees, fences, utility poles or light poles, signs
attached to other signs and signs placed upon motor vehicles which are
continuously or repeatedly parked in a conspicuous location to serve as a sign,
but nothing herein contained is intended to prohibit the placement of signs
directing traffic or identifying various locations within a lot or parcel on light
poles and utility poles erected therein.
(15) Any series of two or more signs placed along a street or highway carrying an
advertising message, part of which is contained on each sign.
(16) A sign on a motor vehicle, truck or trailer, whether or not operational and
whether or not self-propelled, which is used or parked or designated to be
parked for advertising purposes. Specifically exempted from this section are
those signs, nameplates or letters affixed to or printed upon commercial
vehicles regularly used in the course of business for regular deliveries, pickups
or other such purposes and/or in compliance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-46. Specifically included are signs on vehicles, trailers and the like which
have as their prime purpose the advertising of goods, wares or services of a
business which are maintained in a stationary manner at one or more locations
for extended periods of time.
H. The following signs are permitted in residential zones R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, R-4,
R-4.5, R-5 and PSC-3: [Amended 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
(1) Residential nameplates, lawn signs and real estate signs as specified in
§ 94-8.34F.
(2) Signs in connection with each housing or land development, as follows:
(a) At the main entrance to the development, two nonilluminated
freestanding signs which shall state the name of the development and no
§ 94-8.34 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.34
94:242
other advertising material. Each sign shall not exceed 25 square feet in
area and eight feet in height.
(b) At each entrance other than the main entrance, one nonilluminated
freestanding sign not exceeding 15 square feet in area and not more than
eight feet in height.
(c) At the rental or sales office of the development, one freestanding
illuminated sign advertising the office, not to exceed 15 square feet in
area and not more than five feet in height.
I. The following signs are permitted in the R-1B Residential (Senior Citizen) Zone:
(1) Residential nameplates as specified in § 94-8.34F.
(2) One freestanding, externally illuminated, or nonilluminated project
identification sign for each direction of travel on any public street on which
the R-1B development has frontage, not to exceed 30 square feet in area nor
six feet in height and located not less than 20 feet from any street or adjacent
property line. Such signs may bear only the name of the development and the
owner, the street address and the presence or lack of vacant units.
(3) Real estate signs, the sole purpose of which is to direct the public to the R-1B
development. Four temporary freestanding nonilluminated signs shall be at
key intersections. Each sign shall not exceed 15 square feet in area and eight
feet in height above the ground. The sign permit shall be issued for a period of
six months and shall be renewable for additional periods of six months during
the period of construction.
(4) Such other signs as the approving authority may in its discretion deem
appropriate.
J. The following signs are permitted in Limited Industrial Research (LIR-60 and
LIR-88) Zones:
(1) One freestanding entry sign located on each street providing access to the
limited industrial research or office project. Where this zone is not surrounded
by or adjacent to residential zones, the applicable freestanding sign standards
of the adjacent zone shall apply. Where residential zones abut the zone, one
freestanding sign, not exceeding 25 square feet in area nor 10 feet in height,
shall be permitted.
(2) Each use in an LIR Zone may erect one freestanding sign not exceeding 50
square feet in area nor 10 feet in height; provided however, that where more
than one use exists in a building, or where two or more buildings share
common site elements or are located on the same lot, as indicated on an
approved site plan, only one freestanding sign shall be permitted.
(3) One facade sign for each building may be placed or inscribed upon one facia
of the building. Said signs shall not exceed an area equal to 10% of the facade
upon which the sign is to be located.
(4) Nonilluminated directional signs, none of which shall exceed 25 square feet in
§ 94-8.34 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.34
94:243
area nor eight feet in height, may be permitted by the municipal agency so as
to facilitate interior traffic flow.
K. The following signs are permitted in the P-1 Professional Zone:
(1) One facade sign may be placed or inscribed upon the front facade of a building
for each permitted use or activity. Said signs shall not exceed an area of one
square foot for each two feet in width of the front of the building or portion
thereof devoted to such use of activity.
L. The following signs are permitted in the B-1 and B-3 Business Zones: [Amended
10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
(1) One facade sign may be placed or inscribed upon the front facade of a building
for each permitted use or activity. Said signs shall not exceed an area equal to
10% of the front wall area of the building or portion thereof devoted to such
use or activity.
(2) Each use may erect one freestanding sign not exceeding 50 square feet in area
nor 10 feet in height; provided however, that where more than one use exists
in a building, or where two or more buildings share common site elements or
are located on the same lot as indicated on an approved site plan, only one
freestanding sign shall be permitted. No freestanding sign shall be located in
an area within 25 feet of any boundary of a residential zone.
M. Signs permitted in the B-2 Business and HC/PO Highway Commercial/Professional
Office Zone.
(1) One facade sign may be placed or inscribed upon the front facade of a building
for each permitted use or activity. Said sign shall not exceed an area equal to
10% of the front wall area of the building, or portion thereof, devoted to such
use or activity.
(2) Each use in a B-2 or HC/PO Zone may erect one freestanding sign in
accordance with the table shown below; provided, however, that where more
than one use exists in a building, or where two or more buildings share
common site elements or are located on the same lot as indicated on an
approved site plan, only one freestanding sign shall be permitted.
(a) The maximum size of the sign shall be determined in accordance with the
following table:
Street Frontage
(feet)
Maximum Height
(feet)
Maximum Size of Sign Face
(square feet)
Minimum Setback
(percent of building setback)
Up to 500 10 50 75%
500 to 700 12 50 75%
Over 700 15 50 75%
(b) For sites with more than one use, an additional 10 square feet may be
added for each additional use, provided that in no case shall any such sign
exceed 100 square feet.
§ 94-8.34 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.34
94:244
§ 94-8.35. Flags and flagpoles. [Added 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 794]
N. The following signs are permitted in the L-I Industrial Zone:
(1) One freestanding sign not exceeding 28 square feet in area on any one side, set
back at least 25 feet from the street line.
(2) One facade sign which does not exceed 10% of the area of the facade on which
it is placed.
(3) Other directional, instructional or safety signs, subject to approval of the
municipal agency at the time of site plan approval.
A. General provisions.
(1) Flags.
(a) Flags or emblems of religious, educational, civic or governmental
organizations flown on the buildings or grounds occupied by the
organization shall be permitted in any zone in the Borough.
(b) The flag of the United States shall be displayed in accordance with the
rules and regulations promulgated by the federal government (U.S. Code
Table 36, Chapter 10).
(c) In residential zones, the flag of the United States is permitted to be flown
on flagpoles that do not exceed the maximum height of buildings
permitted in the residential zone and shall be flown in accordance with
the rules and regulations promulgated by the federal government.
(d) Placement of flags on flagpoles. When the flags of states, cities or
localities, or pennants of societies or the P.O.W.-M.I.A. flags are flown
on the same halyard with the flag of the United States, the latter shall
always be at the peak. No such flag may be placed above the flag of the
United States.
(e) Size of flags. The size of the flag of the United States shall be determined
by the exposed height of the flagpole from which it is flying and shall not
exceed the flag sizes recommended by federal rules and regulations.
(f) Maintenance.
[1] When a flag is in such condition that it is no longer a fitting emblem
for display, the flag shall be replaced.
[2] When the flag of the United States requires replacement, the flag
shall be destroyed in accordance with rules and regulations
promulgated by the federal government.
(2) Flagpoles.
(a) One freestanding flagpole to display the flag of the United States of
America and/or the State of New Jersey shall be permitted on a property
in business, commercial, industrial or professional zoning districts.
§ 94-8.34 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.35
94:245
(b) The flagpole shall be located in a curbed and/or landscaped area.
(c) The height of the flagpole may be no greater than 10 feet above the
maximum building height permitted in the zoning district, but in no case
may the height exceed 45 feet.
(d) All height limitations shall be measured from ground level to the highest
part of the flagpole.
B. Permits.
(1) Residential zones. All flagpoles other than those installed in residential zones
shall require permits. To obtain such permit, the owner of the proposed
flagpole shall make application to the Zoning Official on forms provided by
the Borough of Shrewsbury.
(2) Fee. Application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee of $25 by cash or
check payable to the order of the Borough of Shrewsbury, which fee shall not
be returnable for any reason.
(3) Applications. The application shall contain the following information:
(a) The name, address of the owner of the premises upon which the flagpole
is sought to be installed, and if the applicant is a person other than the
owner, then the applicant, in addition shall set forth his/her name, address
or telephone number as well as the relationship to the owner.
(b) The name of the person, firm, corporation or association installing the
flagpole.
(c) Written consent of the owner of the land on which the flagpole is to be
installed, if the applicant is other than the owner.
(d) Applicants shall submit copies of an approved site plan if the property has
previously received site plan approval, of, if not, a survey of the property
on which the flagpole is to be located. In the event a site plan or a survey
is not available, the applicant shall have the location staked for review.
(e) Applicants shall provide a location of the flagpole on the survey or site
plan, which reflects the proposed flagpole and distances to other
structures and property lines.
(f) Applicants shall submit the flagpole specifications for the footings and/or
mode of illumination, if any, in accordance with the provisions of
§ 94-8.22, Lighting, Subsection C(2)(a). This information shall be
supplied by virtue of being set forth in blueprints.
(g) If, in the opinion of the Zoning Official, the changes to the original site
plan are solely for the purpose of locating a flagpole and the site will
continue to operate so as to promote the public health, safety, and the
general welfare, an administrative approval may be given.
(h) In the alternative, if the Zoning Official finds that the proposed location
of the flagpole to be a detriment to the public health, safety, and general
§ 94-8.35 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.35
94:246
§ 94-8.36. Soil erosion and sediment control.
§ 94-8.37. Solid waste storage.
welfare, or does not comply with the specifications in § 94-8.35B,
Permits, the Zoning Official shall not grant an administrative approval.
A site plan application before the appropriate municipal board shall be
made.
(4) Installation. Flagpoles are to be installed in accordance with the specifications
submitted with the application for a zoning permit and are subject to inspection
of the Construction Official and for applicable fees for said inspection.
(5) Nonconforming flagpoles.
(a) Continuance. Except as provided in this section, the lawful use of any
flagpole existing at the date of the adoption of this section may be
continued.
(b) Reversion. No nonconforming flagpole shall, once changed into a
conforming flagpole, be changed back to a nonconforming flagpole.
A. All developments shall protect streams, lakes and ponds from sedimentation and
shall control erosion in accordance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey, set forth in the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, Chapter 251, Laws of 1975, as amended and supplemented.88
B. Certification of the soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be required from
the Freehold Soil Conservation District unless:
(1) Land disturbance is associated with the construction of a single-family
dwelling unit unless such unit is a part of a subdivision, site plan, zoning
variance or building permit application involving two or more such singlefamily
dwelling units.
(2) Land disturbance is 5,000 square feet or less of the surface area of land for the
accommodation of construction for which the Standard Building Code of the
State of New Jersey would require a building permit.
(3) Land disturbance associated with agricultural use of lands when operated in
accordance with a farm conservation on a plan approved by the Freehold Soil
Conservation District or where the soil district has determined that such use
will not cause excessive erosion and sedimentation.
(4) Land disturbance associated with gardening primarily for home consumption.
A. Solid wastes from all uses other than single- or two-family homes, if stored
outdoors, shall be placed in metal receptacles within a screened refuse area.
B. The screened refuse area shall not be located within any front yard area.
88. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24:39 et seq.
§ 94-8.35 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.37
94:247
§ 94-8.38. Storm drainage facilities. [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 860]
C. The refuse storage area shall be surrounded on three sides by a solid uniform fence
or wall not less than five feet nor more than eight feet in height. Such fence shall be
exempt from the provisions of any ordinance of the Borough regulating the height
of fences and requiring permits therefor.
D. A five-foot minimum width landscaping area shall be provided along the fence or
wall enclosing the refuse storage area. The landscaping to be provided shall be
shown on the site plan submitted for municipal agency approval.
E. The opening in the enclosed refuse area should be provided with a solid gate not
less than five feet in height to permit access to the refuse enclosure and screening
from adjoining properties and public streets.
F. If located within or adjacent to a parking area or access drive, the enclosed refuse
area shall be separated from such parking area or access drive by curbing.
G. The enclosed refuse area shall not be located so as to interfere with traffic
circulation or the parking of vehicles.
H. All refuse shall be deposited in containers maintained within the refuse area. No
containers shall be maintained anywhere on a site except in a refuse area meeting
these requirements.
I. If outdoor storage of solid waste is not proposed, the site plan submission shall
detail the methods proposed for accommodating solid waste within the structure.
The municipal agency may require that a suitable area be set aside, but not
improved, for a future solid waste storage area meeting these requirements even if
indoor accommodations for solid waste are proposed.
A. Storm drains, culverts, catch basins and other drainage structures shall be installed
in each development in accordance with plans, reports, and design computations
approved by the municipal agency.
(1) All storm drainage facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the NJDOT Standard specifications for road and
bridge construction, current edition.
(2) The developer shall submit complete calculations, specifications, plans and
details for all proposed storm drainage facilities, in accordance with the design
standards contained herein.
(3) Any field samples or laboratory tests required to substantiate the conclusions
of such calculations shall be conducted at the sole expense of the developer.
B. All development applications which require the regrading, reshaping, or other
alteration of land, or that alter the existing patterns of drainage or runoff shall be
accompanied by a grading plan, meeting the following minimum requirements:
(1) A grading plan which includes the design of public improvements must be
prepared by a Professional Engineer, licensed in the State of New Jersey.
§ 94-8.37 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.38
94:248
(2) The plan shall clearly depict the intended pattern of runoff, including
accurately drawn contour lines, sufficient spot elevations, finished flood
elevations of all structures, and any other information requested by the
municipal agency during review.
(3) The minimum overload gradient permitted on grassed surfaces shall be 2.0%.
Properly designed water quality swales, or other nonstructural drainage
elements shall be permitted at a lesser gradient, where detailed design
computations are furnished demonstrating proper function.
(4) The minimum overload gradient permitted on durable surfaces (pavement,
concrete, gravel, etc.) shall be 1.0%.
(5) Where new or enlarged structures are proposed, finished grades shall be
included at a minimum of four building corners, as well as all doorways.
(6) When basements are proposed, it must be demonstrated that the basement
floor shall lie a minimum of two feet above the seasonal high groundwater
elevation.
C. Stormwater management: scope.
(1) Stormwater management measures meeting the requirements of this chapter
shall be provided for all developments. Stormwater management systems
prepared by design engineers shall emphasize a natural, as opposed to an
engineered, drainage strategy. To the maximum extent practicable, stormwater
management standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into a design. Where more than one design or method
may be used to comply with the rules, the choice of design approach and the
methods used shall rest with the design engineer.
(a) For projects that fall below the threshold of major development, as
defined, the control of runoff rate and routing from any site that is the
subject of a site plan or subdivision application shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements of the subchapter.
(2) The applicability of a natural approach depends on such factors as site storage
capacity, open channel hydraulic capacity, and maintenance needs and
resources. Applicability of a stormwater approach also can be limited by
regulatory constraints that govern certain structures (e.g., dams) or areas (e.g.,
development in a floodplain or wetland).
(3) The person submitting the application for review shall identify the
nonstructural strategies incorporated into the design of the project. If the
applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management
strategies, identified in Subsection C(4) below, into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy and provide a basis for the
contention or infeasibility.
(4) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated into site design
shall:
§ 94-8.38 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.38
94:249
(a) Protect areas that provide water-quality benefits or areas that are
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the flow of
runoff over necessary impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in "time of concentration" from preconstruction to
post-construction. "Time of concentration" is defined as the time it takes
for runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the
drainage area to the point of interest in the watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages retention and
planting of native vegetation, and minimizes the use of lawns, fertilizers,
and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems discharging into
and through stable vegetated areas; and
(i) Provide preventative source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at a site that the release of pollutants into
stormwater runoff will be prevented or minimized. The source controls
include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of trash and
debris in drainage systems;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and debris
in the drainage system; and
[3] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance, applying
fertilizer in accordance with the Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey at N.J.A.C. 2:90, as administered
by the New Jersey Department of Agriculture.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is available in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual (hereafter
Best Management Practices Manual), April 2004 edition.
(6) All stormwater collection and conveyance structures shall be designed in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. Any structures designed to
control stormwater runoff volume, flow rate, quality, or groundwater recharge
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with these provisions. Where
more than one design or method may be used to comply with the rules, choices
among design options to meet the volume, rate, quality, and recharge
provisions of this subchapter shall rest with the design engineer.
(7) Construction practices shall conform to Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 2:90.
§ 94-8.38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.38
94:250
(8) The standards of this subchapter do not apply to development if alternative
design and performance standards exist under a regional stormwater
management plan adopted in accordance with the DEP rules, N.J.A.C. 7:15.
The standards must be at least as protective as those of this subchapter.
(9) Stormwater management facilities for developments which do not require site
plan and subdivision review, shall be provided in accordance with the
Municipal Stormwater Management Plan of the Borough, meeting the
following minimum requirements:
(10) Any impervious coverage surfaces which exceed the maximum coverage
permitted in the zone shall be mitigated through the use of dry wells or similar
means.
(11) A sketch including the location of drywells, along with sizing calculations
acceptable to the Borough Engineer shall be furnished at the time of building
permit application.
(12) Any stormwater management device proposed shall meet the minimum
requirements of the NJDEP Best Management Practices Manual.
(13) A premanufactured drywell may be used provided same is sized and installed
in accordance with written instructions of the manufacturer.
D. Runoff estimation techniques.
(1) Drainage area stormwater management requires the determination of a
watershed runoff hydrograph that displays the peak discharge rate and volume.
The hydrograph shall compare pre- and post-development conditions. In
computing preconstruction stormwater run-off, the design engineer shall
account for all significant land features and structures, such as ponds,
wetlands, depressions, hedgerows or culverts that reduce preconstruction
stormwater runoff rates and volumes. For the purpose of calculating runoff
coefficients and groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the
preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with
good hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both the
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) methodology of the TR-55 program. {See
Subsection D(3)(a)[3] below.} Both the Rational and Modified Rational
Methods {See Subsection D(3)(a)[1] and [2], respectively, below.}. Both the
Rational and Modified Rational Methods are described in "Appendix A-9 —
Modified Rational Method" in the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey at N.J.A.C. 2:90. A runoff coefficient or a groundwater
recharge land cover for an existing condition may be used on all or a portion
of a site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has
existed on the site or a portion of the site for at least five years without
interruption immediately prior to the time of application. If more than one land
cover has existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the time
of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for
the computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good
hydrologic condition (if the land-use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good
cover (if the land-use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
§ 94-8.38 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.38
94:251
conservation treatment (if the land use is cultivation).
(2) Design engineers shall use the runoff hydrograph peak rate to determine the
configuration and sizes of pipes, channels, and other routing or flow-control
structures. They also shall use runoff volume calculations generated by the
hydrograph to determine the size of detention and retention facilities.
(3) For the runoff peak rate of discharge calculation, design engineers shall have
the option to choose the methodology to estimate peak rate of discharge.
(a) Design engineers shall calculate peak rate of runoff in accordance with
the following procedures and methods, incorporated herein by reference:
[1] For relatively small drainage areas of up to one-half square mile
(320 acres), the peak rate of runoff may be calculated by the Rational
Method, its derivatives, or the referenced methods that follow.
[2] Where the project necessitates reduction in the rate of runoff or the
calculation of runoff volume in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.5,
the Modified Rational Method must be used. The use of the
Modified Rational Method is limited to drainage areas of 20 acres or
less.
[3] NRCS's urban hydrology for small watersheds. Technical Release
No. 55 (TR-55).
[4] NRCS's computer program for project formulation-hydrology,
technical release No. 20 (TR-20).
[5] HEC-HMS Hydrologic Modeling System, version 2.2, May 2003,
Hydraulic Engineering Center, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, used
in appropriate conditions with appropriate values.
(b) The equation for the Rational Method is:
Qp = CIA
Where:
Qp = The peak runoff rate in cubic feet per second.
C = The runoff coefficient.
I = The average rainfall intensity in inches per hour
occurring at the time of concentration tc.
tc = The time of concentration in minutes.
A = The size of the drainage area in acres.
[1] Typical C values for 100-year frequency storm events appear in
Table 1.
[2] The Rational Method is most accurate when dealing with uniform
drainage areas. Design engineers may divide nonuniform drainage
areas into "uniform" sub-drainage areas and calculate the runoff
§ 94-8.38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.38
94:252
from each of these areas separately, or they may use the weighted
average technique for a composite drainage area. Design engineers
also may use runoff coefficients from the following sources,
incorporated herein by reference:
[a] HEC-22—Urban Drainage Design Manual, Second Edition,
FHWA-NH1-01-021, August 2001, U.S. Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, as
supplemented or amended to date.
[b] New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) Roadway
Design Manual, November 2001, as revised through March 28,
2003.
(c) Design engineers may estimate time of concentration (tc) with Figure 1,
Time of Concentration nomograph from Roadway Design Manual,
NJDOT, November 2001, as revised through March 28, 2003. Use of this
figure is limited to the design of storm sewer systems. For other purposes,
design engineers shall use the procedures outlined in Chapter 3 of Urban
Hydrology for Small Watersheds, Technical Release No. 55 (TR-55).
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, NCRS.
(d) The National Engineering Handbook, Part 630 (Hydrology) and Part 650
(Engineering Field Handbook) also may be used.
(e) When using the Rational Method, rainfall intensity as a function of
duration and storm frequency shall be based upon Figure 2, Rainfall
Intensity Curves, and/or local rainfall frequency data, where available for
the two-, ten-, twenty-five-, and 100-year storms. Design engineers shall
use the Cumulative and Incremental Rainfall Distribution in Table 7.3 for
the water quality storm. Figure 2 shows rainfall intensity curves for
Trenton, New Jersey. Design engineers may use this information for other
parts of the state or they may substitute local rainfall frequency data,
when available. More current data for Trenton and other areas of the state
may be obtained from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration's (NOAA) National Weather Service, which is a part of
the U.S. Department of Commerce. See http://www.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc.
In all instances, design engineers shall use a minimum time of
concentration of 10 minutes. For storm sewer design, a ten-year to
twenty-five-year storm frequency consistent with localized circumstances
should be considered as a minimum, unless special circumstances are
involved such as inadequate downstream stormwater facilities, lack of
positive overland relief, or evidence of local flooding. In such special
circumstances, design engineers shall design facilities to accommodate,
as a minimum, the following storm frequencies:
[1] Ten-year storm for storm drain systems where excess flow, up to the
100-year storm, can continue downgrade in the street and not exceed
the gutter capacity. Also, ten-year storms shall be used at low points
in storm drain systems with overland relief that is routed through the
stormwater quantity control structure.
§ 94-8.38 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.38
94:253
[2] Twenty-five-year storm where flow in a storm drain is totally carried
by pipe when conditions under 5:21-7.2(c)4.i above do not apply,
provided all overland relief up to the 100-year storm is routed
through the stormwater control structure.
[3] Twenty-five-year storm for culvert design where the culvert will be
located in streams shown on the New Jersey State Atlas or the
United States Coast and Geodetic Survey maps. Culverts with an
upstream drainage area of 50 acres or more shall be designed to
accommodate a 100-year frequency storm in accordance with Flood
Hazard Area Control Regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.16.
[4] Twenty-five-year storms for open channels where the upstream
drainage area is less than 50 acres. When the upstream drainage area
is 50 acres or more, design engineers shall design open channels to
accommodate the 100-year storm in accordance with Flood Hazard
Area Control Regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.16.
(f) The size of the drainage area shall include on-site and off-site lands
contributing to the design point.
(g) Computer software adaptations of the Rational Method or the Soil
Conservation Service's TR-55 are acceptable, provided their data and
graphic printout allow review and evaluation.
(4) Design engineers shall use a consistent method to calculate peak rate of runoff
and volume when computing runoff hydrographs. If TR-55, TR-20, or HEC-1
is used to calculate peak rate of runoff, then the same method shall be used to
determine volume. If the Rational Method is used for peak flow calculations,
design engineers shall use the Modified Rational Method to calculate peak
volume to be used for basin routing. Both the Rational and Modified Rational
Methods are described in "Appendix A-9—Modified Rational Method" in the
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey at N.J.A.C.
2:90. A maximum drainage area of 20 acres shall be used for the Modified
Rational Method.
(5) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design engineer
shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or volumes from
pervious and impervious surfaces separately to accurately compute the rates
and volume of stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate runoff from
unconnected imperious cover, urban impervious area modifications as
described in NCRS TR-55. Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, or other
approved methods may be employed.
E. Design of runoff collection systems.
(1) Design engineers shall determine pipe size based on design runoff, closedconduit
flow based on the Manning Equation, or charts/monographs based on
this equation. The hydraulic capacity is termed "Q" and expressed as discharge
in cubic feet per second as follows:
§ 94-8.38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.38
94:254
Q = (1.486/n) AR2/3 S1/2
Where
n = Manning's roughness coefficient
A = Cross-sectional area of flow in square feet
R = Hydraulic radius in feet, R=A/P, where P is equal to the
wetted perimeter, measured in feet and defined as the length
of a line of contact between the flowing water and the channel
S = Slope of energy grade line in feet per foot
The Manning's roughness coefficients used by design engineers appear
in N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.2, Table 2.89
(a) A direct application of Manning's Equation may be used for piped storm
sewer systems. As an option, design engineers can use a standard step
backwater calculation for storm sewer systems if the use of this approach
is deemed appropriate by the designer. For other than pipe storm sewer
systems, design engineers shall apply Manning's Equation only when
there is uniform flow, as defined by the following conditions:
(b) The bottom slope of the channel, energy grade line, and water surface
(hydraulic grade line) are parallel;
(c) The flow regime is in the turbulent range of Reynolds number; and
(d) The boundaries of the cross section of the channel do not move.
(2) The design of open channels and conduits shall take tail water effects into
consideration.
(3) Velocities in open channels, excluding water quality swales, at design flow
shall not be less than 0.5 of a foot per second and not greater than a velocity
that will begin to cause erosion or scouring of the channel. Design engineers
shall determine permissible velocities for swales, open channels, and ditches
using methods presented in Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
in New Jersey at N.J.A.C. 2:90.
(4) Velocities in closed conduits at design flow shall be at least two feet per
second, but not more than the velocity that will cause erosion damage to the
conduit, per the manufacturers specifications. Minimum allowable pipe slopes
shall produce velocity of at least three feet per second when the flow depth is
full or half the pipe diameter.
(5) Design engineers shall base culvert capacity on inlet/outlet analysis, as
specified in Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts, Hydraulic Design Series
(HDS) No. 5, Report No. FHWA-IP-85-15. U.S. Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, September 1985,
incorporated herein by reference.
89. Editor's Note: Table 2, Manning's Roughness Coefficients, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-8.38 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.38
94:255
(6) Design engineers shall determine pipe size based on design runoff, conduit
entrance conditions, and hydraulic capacity.
(7) In general, no pipe size in the storm drainage system shall be less than 15
inches in diameter. Design engineers may use a twelve-inch diameter pipe as
a cross-drain to a single inlet. Design engineers shall use the Manning
Equation to determine hydraulic capacity of pipes.
(8) All discharge pipes shall terminate with an appropriate precast concrete or
flared-end section or concrete headwall with or without wing walls, as
conditions require. Design engineers shall consider such site conditions as
slope, soil stability, vegetation, grade, and size of conduit to determine
whether or not to use wingwalls.
(9) Materials used in the construction of storm sewers shall be constructed of
reinforced concrete, ductile iron, or corrugated polyethylene, or when
approved by the municipal engineer, corrugated metal. The most cost-effective
materials shall be permitted that conform to local site conditions and reflect
the relevant operations, maintenance, and system character of the municipal
stormwater system. Specifications referred to, such as ASTM or AWWA, etc.,
should be the latest revision in effect at the time of application.
(a) The following apply to reinforced concrete pipe:
[1] Circular reinforced concrete pipe and fittings shall meet the
requirements of ASTM C76.
[2] Elliptical reinforced concrete pipe shall meet the requirements of
ASTM C507.
[3] Joint design and joint material for circular pipe shall conform to
ASTM C443.
[4] Joints for elliptical pipe shall be bell and spigot or tongue and grove
sealed with butyl, rubber tape, rubber ring gaskets, or external
sealing bands conforming to ASTM C877.
[5] All pipe shall be Class III minimum unless loading conditions call
for stronger pipe (i.e., higher class).
[6] The minimum depth of cover over the concrete pipe shall be as
designated by the American Concrete Pipe Association in Table 4.
[7] Minimum depth of cover standards for ductile iron and corrugated
polyethylene pipe shall conform to manufacturer standards.
(b) Ductile iron pipe shall conform to ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51. Joints
shall conform to ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11 or ANSI/AWWA C115/
A21.15, as appropriate. Pipe shall be designed in accordance with ANSI/
AWWA C150/A21.50. The outside of the pipe shall be coated in
accordance with ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51 and the inside lined in
accordance with ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4. Ductile iron pipe shall be
installed in accordance with AWWA C600.
§ 94-8.38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.38
94:256
Table 4: Minimum Depth of Coverage Over Concrete Pipe
Pipe Diameter
(inches) ASTM Class Pipe
Minimum Cover
(surface to top of pipe in
inches)
12 III 17
IV 12
V 7
15 III 16
IV 11
V 7
18 III 16
IV 10
V 6
24 III 15
IV 6
V 6
30 III 10
IV 6
V 6
36 and above III 6
IV 6
Minimum cover as designated by the American Concrete Pipe
Association
(c) Corrugated polyethylene pipe shall conform to AASHTO M252 for three
through 10 inches and AASHTO M294 for sizes 12 inches and larger. All
pipes greater than 12 inches in diameter shall be Type S, unless
conditions dictate otherwise. Materials shall conform to ASTM D3350,
Standard Specification for Polyethylene Plastics Pipe and Fittings
Materials. Pipe joints and fittings shall be compatible with the pipe
material and shall conform to the same standards and specifications as the
pipe material. Pipe couplers shall not cover less than one full corrugation
on each section of pipe. Installation shall be in accordance with ASTM
D2321, Standard Practice for Underground Installation of Thermoplastic
Pipe for Sewers and Other Gravity-Flow Applications. Backfill Material
shall be placed in six-inch lifts and compacted to 95% minimum dry
density, per AASHTO T99. In areas of high groundwater tables, design
engineers shall check for flotation.
(d) Corrugated metal pipe, when approved by the municipal engineer, shall
meet the requirements and be installed in the manner specified in
§ 94-8.38 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.38
94:257
Appendix A of this subchapter.
[1] Pipe bedding and backfill shall be provided as specified in Design
and Construction of Urban Stormwater Management Systems,
ASCE Manuals and Reports of Engineering Practice No. 77, 1993,
incorporated herein by reference. Bedding and backfill for any pipe
material not covered by this manual shall be installed in accordance
with manufacturer's recommendations. The municipal engineer may
require the developer to provide professional certification as to the
suitability of backfill material and where such suitability does not
exist, any modifications needed to use on-site material and the
appropriate methods to install this material. The municipal and/or
utility engineer shall rely on this certification.
(10) No pipe shall be placed on private property unless the owner of the land is to
own or operate the pipe, or an easement deeded to the municipality is obtained.
All easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide unless depth of pipe, soil
conditions, or additional utilities require wider. Where the easement is located
adjacent to a right-of-way, the municipality may approve a narrower easement.
F. Inlets, catch basins, manholes, and outlets.
(1) Design engineers shall design inlets, catch basins, and manholes in accordance
with the New Jersey Department of Transportation's Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction (2001). Design engineers shall use bicyclesafe
grates. For Type A inlets, they should use a frame and single grate. Type
B inlets require a frame, grate, and curb-type inlet with back piece. Type E
inlets require a frame and double grate.
(2) Design engineers shall use one of the following grate types for stormwater
inlets:
(a) The NJDOT bicycle-safe grate, as described in the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines
(April 1996).
(b) If there is no bicycle traffic, a grate where each individual clear space in
that grate has an area of no more than seven square inches or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
(c) Another grate design may be used, provided that:
[1] There will be no bicycle traffic; and
[2] Runoff discharging through the inlet is routed through a trash rack
that complies with N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.8(d)1.ii.
(3) Whenever a curb-opening inlet is used, the clear space in that curb opening (or
each individual clear space if the curb opening has two or more clear spaces)
shall have an area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(a) Exception: Compliance with the above dimensional requirements for
§ 94-8.38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.38
94:258
curb openings shall not be required, provided that runoff discharging
through the inlet is routed through a trash rack that complies with
N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.8(d)1.ii.
(4) Inlet spacing depends on the inlet capacity. Maximum gutter line flow is 400
feet. The maximum capacity of a curb inlet shall be six cubic feet per second.
Area inlets in parking lots should be limited to three cubic feet per second.
(5) Manholes shall be precast concrete or concrete block coated with two coats of
portland cement mortar outside the manhole. Masonry brick may be used to
make vertical adjustments to rims, as long as the adjustments are 12 inches or
less. In acidic soils, all manholes shall have two coats of black bitumastic
waterproofing applied per manufacturer's instruction.
(6) If precast manhole barrels and cones are used, they shall conform to ASTM
Specification C478, with round rubber gasketed joints conforming to ASTM
Specification C923. Both ASTM specifications are incorporated herein by
reference. Maximum absorption shall be 8% in accordance with ASTM
Specification C478, Method A.
(7) If precast manholes are used, the top riser section shall terminate less than one
foot below the finished grade and the manhole cover shall be flush with the
finished grade.
(8) Manhole frames and covers shall be of cast iron, conforming to ASTM
Specification A48, Class 30, incorporated herein by reference, and be suitable
for H-20 loading capacity. Manhole covers in remote locations may have a
locking device.
(9) Outlet grates, fences, and other safety features for stormwater management
facilities shall conform with NJDEP Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C.
7:8. Safety requirements for detention basins and other stormwater facilities
are incorporated in N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.5(f)6.
(10) The channel should be, insofar as possible, a smooth continuation of the pipe.
The pipe may be laid through the manhole and the top half removed by saw
cut. The completed channel should be U-shaped. The channel height shall be
3/4 of the diameter of the pipe.
(11) The bench should provide good footing for a workman, and a place where
minor tools and equipment can be laid. It must have a slope of four to 8%.
G. Stormwater management: quantity control.
(1) The control of the quantity of runoff for major development shall comply with
the Control Ordinances found in § 94-8.39.
(2) For developments not meeting the definition of major development,
stormwater management facilities shall be designed to satisfy the requirements
of § 94-8.39D(6)(a)[3].
H. Stormwater management: water quality.
§ 94-8.38 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.38
94:259
(1) Water quality for stormwater management systems, including special water
resource protection areas for Category One Waters and their perennial or
intermittent tributaries, shall comply with the Stormwater Control Ordinance
found at § 94-8.39.
(2) For developments not meeting the definition of major development,
stormwater management facilities shall be designed to satisfy the requirements
of § 94-39D(6)(a)[3].
I. Recharge.
(1) Groundwater recharge of stormwater shall be in accordance with the
Stormwater Control Ordinances found at § 94-8:39.
J. Detention basins and other stormwater management facilities.
(1) When structural measures are used, they shall comply with the requirements
of these rules and the Best Management Practices Manual, April 2004 edition.
(2) Design engineers shall locate detention facilities (either "wet" or "dry") so as
to not interfere with or adversely affect existing surface waters on the site or
adjacent to the site. Excavation for detention facilities shall be designed to be
the maximum practical distance above seasonal high groundwater elevation.
In the case of "wet" detention facilities, storage may only be presumed to be
available above the elevation of the seasonal high groundwater. If the facility
is designed as an infiltration basin, the bottom of the basin shall be a minimum
of two feet above the elevation of the seasonal high water table. The
determination of the seasonal high water table shall be made by the applicant's
engineer.
(3) Design of outlets from detention basins and other stormwater management
facilities shall account for tailwater effects up to the flood hazard design flood
elevation.
(4) The following list of general structural criteria shall be used to design
stormwater detention basins.
(a) Detention components: principal basin control structure (quantity
control), as follows:
[1] Principal basin control structures will consist of orifice and/or weir
control devices. Design engineers shall design orifices based upon
the following equation:
Q = C A (2gH)0.5
Where:
Q = The flow rate in cubic feet per second.
C = 0.6. (The orifice flow coefficient "C" may vary,
depending on entrance conditions. Design engineers
may use other coefficients with appropriate
references.)
§ 94-8.38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.38
94:260
A = Cross section area of flow in square feet.
H = The vertical distance in feet between the center of the
orifice and the water surface.
2g = 64.4 feet per second2.
To minimize the chance of clogging, orifices intended solely for
runoff quantity control will be at least six inches in diameter (or its
equivalent). All joints are to be watertight. In addition, trash racks
and/or anti-vortex devices shall be required. When weirs are used
alone or in conjunction with orifices, design engineers shall use the
following equation:
Q = CwL(h)3/2
Where:
Q = The flow rate in cubic feet per second.
Cw = 3.2 (design engineers may use other coefficients
with appropriate references).
L = Length of the weir in feet.
h = The vertical distance in feet between water surface
elevation and the crest of the weir.
All weirs shall be constructed as part of a reinforced concrete
structure with appropriate grates
[2] Trash racks and/or anti-vortex devices shall be installed at the intake
to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel bars
with one-inch spacing between bars to the elevation of the water
quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water quality
design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall be spaced
no greater than one-third the width of the diameter of the orifice or
one-third the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing between
bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of six inches.
The spacing shall be designed so as not to adversely affect the
hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure. In addition, the
design of trash racks shall comply with the requirements of
Subsection J(4)(d)[6] below.
[3] Eight-inch-thick, anti-seep collars are to be installed along outlet
pipes when required by the municipal engineer. Reinforcement steel
shall be No. 5 bars at 12 inches both ways, with two inches of cover
on both faces (minimum).
[4] Where necessary for stability of the outlet pipe, a concrete cradle
shall be provided.
[5] All principal basin control structures shall be precast or reinforced
concrete. All joints are to be watertight.
§ 94-8.38 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.38
94:261
[6] Suitable lining shall be placed upstream and downstream of
principal basin control structures, as necessary, to prevent scour and
erosion. Such lining shall conform to Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 2:90.
(b) Detention components: emergency spillways, as follows:
[1] Vegetated emergency spillways shall have side slopes not exceeding
three horizontal to one vertical.
[2] Maximum velocities in emergency spillways shall be checked based
on the velocity of the peak flow in the spillway resulting from
routing the spillway design storm hydrograph as defined in the NJ
DEP Dam Safety Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:20) for all detention facilities
classified as dams and the 100-year storm hydrograph for all other
facilities. The design of the emergency spillway will be based on the
100-year inflow to the basin except for Class IV dams, which shall
comply with the Dam Safety Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:20. The design
of the emergency spillway assumes the principal spillway is
malfunctioning and will not allow any discharge or flow. Where
maximum velocities exceed those contained in Table 5, suitable
lining shall be provided.
[3] Where maximum velocities exceed the allowable velocities for soil
stability as determined in the Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 2:90, suitable lining
should be provided. Design engineers also may check maximum
velocities in emergency spillways based on the velocity of the peak
flow in the spillway resulting from routing the spillway design storm
hydrograph as defined in the NJ DEP Dam Safety Rules (N.J.A.C.
7:20) for all detention facilities classified as dams and the 100-year
storm hydrograph for all other facilities. Where maximum velocities
exceed those contained in Table 5, suitable lining shall be provided.
Linings shall meet specifications required in Hydraulic Engineering
Circular No. 15—Design of Stable Channels with Flexible Linings,
published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration or Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey as sited above.
Table 5: Permissible Velocities for Emergency Spillways with Uniform Stands for Various Well-Maintained Grass Covers
Permissible Velocities On:
Ground Cover Slope Percent
Erosion-resistant soils
(fps)
Easily eroded soils
(fps)
Kentucky bluegrass 5% to 10% 6 4
Lawn grass mixture 0% to 5% 5 4
5% to 10% 4 3
§ 94-8.38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.38
94:262
Table 5: Permissible Velocities for Emergency Spillways with Uniform Stands for Various Well-Maintained Grass Covers
Permissible Velocities On:
Ground Cover Slope Percent
Erosion-resistant soils
(fps)
Easily eroded soils
(fps)
Weeping lovegrass
Alfalfa
Crabgrass
0% to 5% 3.5 2.5
NOTES:
fps = feet per second
Designs are not limited to the ground covers shown above, Design engineers may use reinforced grass technologies and other types of
ground cover in accordance with appropriate authoritative standards
SOURCE: Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1959). Cited
in Residential Stormwater Management: Objectives, Principles, and Design Considerations, ULI-ASCE-NAHB, Urban Land Institute,
Washington, D.C.: 1975
(c) Detention components: dams, as follows:
[1] "Dam" refers to any artificial dike, levee, or other barrier with
appurtenant works that is constructed to impound water on a
permanent or temporary basis and raises the water level five feet or
more above the usual, mean, low-water height when measured from
the downstream toe-of-dam to the emergency spillway crest, or in
the absence of an emergency spillway, the top of the dam.
[2] Design engineers shall design all dams in accordance with the Dam
Safety Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:20.
(d) Detention basin berms and embankment ponds, as follows:
[1] A detention basin berm is a water impoundment made by either
constructing an embankment (a facility referred to as an
embankment pond), or excavating a pit or dugout that does not
qualify as a dam. Detention basin berms constructed by the second
method are referred to as excavated ponds.
[2] Site conditions shall be such that runoff from the design storm can
safely pass through: a natural or constructed emergency spillway
designed to accept the entire 100-year flow; a combination of a
principal spillway and the emergency spillway designed to ensure
passage of the 100-year flow when either the principal spillway and/
or the emergency spillway flows are impeded by debris; or a
principal spillway designed so as to allow it to continue to function
reliably, passing the 100-year flow, when impeded by debris.
[a] The drainage area of the pond shall be protected against erosion
so that expected sediment does not shorten the planned
§ 94-8.38 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.38
94:263
effectiveness of the structure.
[b] When necessary, embankment ponds shall have foundation
cutoff walls of relatively impervious material under the berm.
The cutoff walls shall extend up to abutments as required and
be deep enough to extend into a relatively impervious layer, or
provide for a stable structure when combined with seepage
control. The cutoff trench shall have a bottom width adequate
to accommodate the equipment used for excavation, backfill,
and compaction operations. Cutoff wall side slopes shall not be
steeper than one horizontal to one vertical. The cutoff walls
shall extend up to the normal water line and the minimum depth
shall be at least three feet.
[c] Design engineers shall include seepage controls if any of the
following conditions exist: pervious layers are not intercepted
by the cutoff, seepage creates swamping downstream, such
control is needed to insure a stable embankment, or special
problems may require drainage for a stable berm. Seepage may
be controlled by foundation, abutment, or embankment drains;
reservoir blanketing; or a combination of these measures.
[d] The minimum top width for a berm shall be six feet. The
minimum top width of dams should be 10 feet.
[e] All slopes must be designed to be stable. If needed to protect
the slopes of the berm, special measures such as rock riprap,
sand gravel, fabrics, geofabrics, geomembranes, or special
vegetation shall be provided, as specified by the standards in:
Guide for Design and Layout of Vegetative Wave Protection
for Earth Dam Embankments, TR-56, and Riprap for Slope
Protection Against Wave Action, TR-69. Both reports are
published by the NRCS and are incorporated herein by
reference.
[f] The minimum elevation of the top of the settled embankment
shall be one foot above the water surface in the detention basin,
with the emergency spillway flowing at the design depth. The
minimum difference in elevation between the crest of the
emergency spillway and the settled top width of the structure
shall be two feet for all berms having more than a twenty-acre
drainage area or more than 20 feet in effective height. Design
engineers shall increase the design height of the structure by the
amount needed to insure that, after settlement, the height of the
berms equals or exceeds the design height. This increase shall
not be less than 5%, except where detailed soil testing and
laboratory analysis show that a lesser amount is adequate.
[g] Design engineers shall place a pipe conduit with needed
appurtenances under or through the berm except where rock,
concrete, or other types of mechanical spillways are used, or
§ 94-8.38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.38
94:264
where the rate and duration of flow can be safely handled by a
vegetated or earth spillway.
[3] The design elevation of the top of all embankments and berms shall
be one-foot or greater than the maximum water surface elevation in
the basin, when stormwater from the 100-year flood passes over the
emergency spillway. The "design height," defined as the vertical
distance from the top to the bottom of the deepest cut, shall be
constructed to insure that the top elevation will be maintained
following all settlement.
[a] When the design discharge of the principal spillway is
considered in calculating peak outflow through the emergency
spillway, the crest elevation of the inlet shall be such that the
full flow will be generated in the conduit before there is
discharge through the emergency spillway. The inlets and
outlets of the principal spillway shall be designed to function
satisfactorily for the full range of flow and hydraulic head
anticipated. The capacity of the pipe conduit shall be adequate
to discharge long-duration, continuous, or frequent flows
without flow through the emergency spillways. The pipe
diameter shall be no less than six inches. If the pipe conduit
diameter is larger than 10 inches, its design discharge may be
considered when calculating the peak outflow rate through the
emergency spillway.
[b] Pipe conduits under or through the berm shall be capable of
withstanding external loading without yielding, buckling, or
cracking. Flexible pipe strength shall not be less than that
necessary to support the design load with the maximum of 5%
deflection. The inlets and outlets shall be structurally sound,
and made of materials compatible with those of pipe. All pipe
joints shall be made watertight by the use of couplings, gaskets,
or caulking.
[4] In earthen berms and embankment ponds, acceptable pipe materials
are corrugated polyethylene, reinforced concrete, polyvinyl
chloride, and ductile iron. When necessary for stability, concrete and
ductile pipe shall be laid in a concrete bedding. Corrugated
polyethylene pipe exposed to direct sunlight shall be made of
ultraviolet-resistant materials and protected by coating or shielding,
or provisions for replacement should be made as necessary.
Connections of corrugated polyethylene pipe to less flexible pipe or
structure must be designed to avoid stress concentrations that could
rupture the plastic. Design engineers shall follow specifications in
Table 6 for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. Design engineers shall
provide for seepage control if the conduit is of smooth pipe larger
than eight inches in diameter.
§ 94-8.38 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.38
94:265
Table 6: Acceptable PVC Pipe for Use in Earth Berms*
Normal Pipe Size
(inches)
Schedule for Standard Dimension Ratio
(SDR)
Maximum Depth of Fill Over Pipe
(feet)
4 or smaller Schedule 40 15
Schedule 80 20
SDR 26 10
6, 8, 10, 12 Schedule 40 10
Schedule 80 15
SDR 26 10
* Polyvinyl chloride pipe, PVC 1120 or PVC 1220, conforming to ASTM D1785 or ASTM D2241
[5] Seepage along pipes extending through embankments shall be
controlled by use of a filter and drainage diaphragm, unless it is
determined that anti-seep collars will adequately serve the purpose.
[a] The drain is to consist of sand meeting fine concrete aggregate
requirements (at least 15% passing through the No. 40 sieve,
but no more than 10% passing through the No. 100 sieve). If
unusual soil conditions exist, design engineers shall make a
special design analysis. The drain shall be a minimum of two
feet thick, and extend vertically upward and horizontally at
least three times the pipe diameter, and vertically downward at
least 18 inches beneath the conduit invert. The drain diaphragm
shall be located approximately parallel to the center line of the
embankment. The drain shall be outletted at the embankment
downstream toe, preferably using a drain backfill envelope
continuously along the pipe where it exits in the embankment.
Protecting drain fill from the surface erosion will be necessary.
[b] When anti-seep collars are used in lieu of a drainage
diaphragm, they shall have a watertight connection to the pipe.
Maximum spacing shall be approximately 14 times the
minimum projection of the collar measured perpendicular to
the pipe. Collar material shall be compatible with the pipe
materials. The anti-seep collar(s) shall increase by 15% the
seepage path along the pipe. When anti-seep collars are used in
lieu of a drainage diaphragm, the design engineers shall use the
following criteria to determine the size and number of anti-seep
collars.
§ 94-8.38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.38
94:266
Let V = vertical projection and minimum horizontal projection
of the anti-seep collar in feet.
Let L = length in feet of the conduit within the zone of
saturation, measured from the downstream side of the riser to
the toe drain or point where the phreatic line intercepts the
conduit, whichever is shorter.
Let n = number of anti-seep collars.
The ratio (L+2nV)/L shall be at least 1.15. Anti-seep collars
should be equally spaced along part of the barrel within the
saturated zone at distances of not more than 25 feet.
[6] Closed-circuit spillways designed for pressure flow must have
adequate anti-vortex devices. To prevent clogging of the conduit, an
appropriate trash guard shall be installed at the inlet or riser.
[7] Emergency spillways convey the design flow safely past earth
embankments when the principal or auxiliary spillway is disabled.
Design engineers shall provide for an emergency spillway for each
basin.
[a] Emergency spillways shall provide for passage of the design
flow at a safe velocity to a point downstream where the berm
will not be endangered. The maximum permissible velocity in
the exit channel shall be four feet per second, where only sparse
vegetative cover can be expected; where excellent vegetative
cover and a vigorous sod can be expected and maintained, the
maximum permissible velocity is six feet per second.
[b] If chutes or drops are used for the principal or emergency
spillways, they shall be designed according to standards in
NRCS's Part 650 (Engineering Field Handbook) and National
Engineering Handbook, Part 650 (Hydrology), Section 5,
"Hydraulics;" Section 11, "Drop Spillways;" and Section 14,
"Chute Spillways," incorporated herein by reference. The
minimum capacity of a structural spillway shall be that required
to pass the peak flow expected from the design storm.
[8] For excavated basins, provisions shall be made where needed for a
principal spillway, emergency spillway, and embankment in
accordance with the embankment and berm criteria described in this
section.
[a] Where soil conditions and safe maintenance practices allow,
side slopes of the excavated basin shall be stable and no steeper
than three horizontal to one vertical.
[9] The material placed in the fill shall be free of detrimental amounts
of sod, roots, frozen soil, stones more than six inches in diameter
(except rock fills), and other objectionable material.
§ 94-8.38 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.38
94:267
[a] Drain fill shall be kept from being contaminated by adjacent
soil materials during placement by either placing it in a cleanly
excavated trench, or by keeping the drain at least one foot
above the adjacent earth fill.
[b] Selected drain fill and backfill material shall be placed around
structures, pipe conduits, and anti-seep collars at about the
same rate on all sides to prevent damage from unequal loading.
Fill material shall be placed and spread beginning at the lowest
point in the foundation, and then bringing it up in continuous
horizontal layers thick enough that the required compaction can
be obtained. The fill shall be constructed in continuous
horizontal layers. If openings or sectionalized fills are required,
the slope of the bonding surfaces between the embankment in
place and the embankment to be placed shall not be steeper than
the ratio of three horizontal to one vertical. The bonding surface
shall be treated the same as that specified for the foundation to
insure a good bond with the new fill.
[c] The distribution and gradation of materials shall be such that no
lenses, pockets, streaks, or layers of material shall differ
substantially in texture or gradation from the surrounding
material. If it is necessary to use materials of varying texture
and gradation, the more impervious material shall be placed in
the center and upstream parts of the fill. If zoned fills of
substantially differing materials are specified, the zones shall
be placed according to lines and grades shown on the drawings.
The complete work shall conform to the lines, grades, and
elevations shown in the drawings or as staked in the field.
[d] The moisture content of the fill material shall be adequate for
obtaining the required compaction. Material that is too wet
shall be dried to meet this requirement, and material that is too
dry shall be wetted and mixed until the requirement is met.
Construction equipment shall be operated over each layer of fill
to insure that the required compaction is obtained. Special
equipment shall be used if needed to obtain the required
compaction. If a minimum required density is specified, each
layer of fill shall be compacted as necessary to obtain that
density.
[e] Fill adjacent to structures, pipe conduits, and drain fill or antiseep
collars shall be compacted to a density equivalent to that
of the surrounding fill by hand tamping, or by using manually
directed power tampers or plate vibrators. Fill adjacent to
concrete structures shall not be compacted until the concrete
has had time to gain enough strength to support the load.
[10] All permanent and temporary stabilization should be applied
pursuant to the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 2:90.
§ 94-8.38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.38
94:268
[11] In a principal spillway, pipe materials shall conform to the
appropriate specifications. Anti-seep collars shall be made of
materials compatible with that of the pipe and shall be installed
according to the manufacturer's instructions. It may be firmly and
uniformly bedded throughout its length, and shall be installed to the
line and grade shown on the drawings.
[12] The mix design and testing of concrete shall be consistent with the
size requirements of the job. Mix requirements or necessary strength
shall be specified. The type of cement, air entrainment, slump,
aggregate, or other properties shall be specified as necessary. All
concrete is to consist of a workable mix that can be placed and
finished in an acceptable manner. Necessary curing shall be
specified. Reinforcing steel shall be placed as indicated on the plans
and shall be held securely in place during concrete placement.
Subgrades and forms shall be installed to line and grade, and the
forms shall be mortar tight and unyielding as the concrete is placed.
[13] Foundation and embankment drains, if required, shall be placed to
the line and grade shown on the drawings. Detailed requirements for
drain material and any required pipe shall be shown in the drawing
and specifications for the job.
[14] Concerning excavated basins, the compacted excavation shall
conform to the lines, grades, and elevations shown on the drawings
or as staked in the field.
[15] Concerning embankment and excavated berms, construction
operations shall be carried out so that erosion and air and water
pollution are minimized, and held within legal limits. All work shall
be conducted in a skillful manner. The completed job shall present a
workmanlike appearance.
[a] Measures and construction methods that enhance fish and
wildlife values shall be incorporated as needed and practical.
Ground cover to control erosion shall be established as needed
and practical. Fencing shall be provided as needed.
(e) Detention facilities in flood hazard areas, as follows:
[1] Detention development must comply with all applicable regulations
under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et
seq.
(f) The following safety provisions shall apply to stormwater management
basins and parts thereof.
[1] Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet from the
stormwater management basin to ensure proper functioning of the
basin outlets.
[2] Bar spacing for trash racks shall be in accordance with Subsection
§ 94-8.38 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.38
94:269
J(4(a)[2] above.
[3] The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net area of
opening through the rack.
[4] Any outlet structure with an overflow grate must have the grate
secured but removable for emergencies and maintenance. Grate
spacing shall be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
[5] Trash racks and overflow grates shall be constructed and installed to
be rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per square
foot.
[6] Every outlet structure of a basin shall have escape provisions in or
on the structure. Escape provisions include the installation of
permanent ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide easily
accessible means of egress from the stormwater management basin.
Free-standing outlet structures may be excluded at the discretion of
the approving authority.
[7] Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new retention
basins, with a permanent pool of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet.
Ledges shall be comprised of two steps, each four to six feet in
width, one located approximately 2 1/2 feet below the permanent
water surface and the second located 1 to 1 1/2 feet above the
permanent water surface.
[8] In new stormwater management basins, maximum interior slopes for
earthen dams, embankments, or berms shall not exceed three
horizontal to one vertical.
(5) Guidelines for the following stormwater management practices are found best
in the Best Management Practices Manual, April 2004 edition.
(a) Bioretention systems;
(b) Constructed stormwater wetlands;
(c) Dry wells;
(d) Extended detention basins;
(e) Infiltration structures;
(f) Manufactured treatment devices;
(g) Pervious pavement;
(h) Sand filters;
§ 94-8.38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.38
94:270
(i) Vegetative filters; and
(j) Wet ponds.
(6) Detention basins shall be located in accordance with the following:
(a) Detention basins may either be constructed on a lot solely utilized for the
purpose of the basin or on a lot dedicated for the purpose of open space
or on a lot on which a dwelling is to be erected. If the basin is to be
constructed on its own lot, the lot may vary from the bulk requirements
of the zone in which it is located, however, a minimum of 20 feet of lot
frontage on an improved street shall be provided. The lot shall be of
sufficient size to contain the basin and all outfall structures entirely with
a minimum distance of 25 feet from the top of the slope to any property
line in any direction.
(b) If the basin is to be constructed on a lot on which a residential structure is
to be erected, the basin and all associated drainage structures shall be
construed a minimum of 25 feet from the top of the slope to any property
line in any direction. In addition, a minimum of 40 feet shall be
maintained from the top of the slope to any residential structure or
accessory structure. Final plats shall provide for a twenty-five-foot wide
drainage easement form the top of the slope around the basin and shall
provide for a twenty-foot wide minimum access to an improved street.
(c) Nonresidential developments. Detention basins shall be constructed so as
to take advantage of natural features as to the greatest extent possible.
Maintenance access shall be provided to the basin from either the
surrounding right-of-way or from within the site driveway or parking
areas. Basins shall not be screened from view from the developed
portions of the site.
K. Maintenance requirements.
(1) The maintenance of stormwater management measures shall comply with the
Stormwater Control Ordinance found at § 94-8.39.
(2) The maintenance of the basins and associated structures shall be clearly
identified within the homeowners' association documents submitted to the
Board's Attorney for review.
(3) Single-family homeowners' association. Where a detention basin is
constructed within common areas or single-family residential developments,
the maintenance of the basin and that of all drainage structures and collection
systems outside of rights-of-way dedicated and accepted by the Borough shall
be the sole responsibility of the single-family homeowners' association.
(4) Multifamily association. Where detention basins are constructed within
common areas of multifamily residential developments, the maintenance of
the basin and that of all drainage structures and collection systems outside of
rights-of-way dedicated and accepted by the Borough, shall be the sole
responsibility of the multifamily association.
§ 94-8.38 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.38
94:271
§ 94-8.39. Stormwater control. [Amended 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 735; 7-7-1998 by
Ord. No. 736; 11-2-1998 by Ord. No. 755; 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 861; 10-5-2020 by
Ord. No. 1076; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
(5) Nonresidential detention basins. All nonresidential detention basins shall be
maintained by the property owner. In the event that the basin also controls
stormwater from off-site runoff from Borough owned property rights-of-way
and/or easements, the owner of the property may request that the Borough
maintain the basin only if a pro-rated cash contribution has been deposited
with the Borough as calculated in § 94-8.39G(2)(b).
A. Scope and purpose.
(1) Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant reduction
through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be explored before
relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be integrated with
nonstructural stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance
plans. Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on the
site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans should be
developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the
anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established performance
standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater recharge.
(2) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls for "development" and "major
development," as defined in Subsection B.
(3) Applicability.
(a) This section shall be applicable to all development applications for the
following major developments, which require site plan or subdivision
review:
[1] Nonresidential major developments; and
[2] Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted by
the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(b) This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Shrewsbury.
(4) Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. Development
approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant to this section are to
be considered an integral part of development approvals under the subdivision
and site plan review process and do not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated
by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general
welfare. This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
§ 94-8.38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.39
94:272
other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from
those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of
law, the more-restrictive provisions or higher standards shall control.
B. Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage
and to give this section its most reasonable application. The definitions below are
the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the Stormwater
Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving the
surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to public
transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders90 to review municipal stormwater management plans and
implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan center
as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban, regional, town,
village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed in
New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not necessarily
be limited to, development of project requirements, creation and development of
project design and preparation of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or
enlargement of any building or structure; any mining excavation or landfill; and any
use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of
use of land, by any person, for which permission is required under the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural
(1) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5,
if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and
implementing ordinances.
(2)
90. Editor’s Note: Pursuant to P.L.2020, c. 67, effective 1-1-2021, the term “Board of Chosen Freeholders” shall be
renamed the “Board of County Commissioners.”
§ 94-8.39 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.39
94:273
lands, "development" means any activity that requires a state permit; any activity
reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments, or
dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body or to a particular point
along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New Jersey
Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including, but not limited to, stream corridors;
natural heritage priority sites; habitats of endangered or threatened species; large
areas of contiguous open space or upland forest; steep slopes; and wellhead
protection and groundwater recharge areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened
species are identified using the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water,
wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any "development" that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock
or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission concentrating
facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or phosphorus,
which is essential to and promotes the development of organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association,
Borough of Shrewsbury, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil; solid waste; incinerator residue; filter
backwash; sewage; garbage; refuse; oil; grease; sewage sludge; munitions;
chemical wastes; biological materials; medical wastes; radioactive substance
[except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42
U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)]; thermal waste; wrecked or discarded equipment; rock;
sand; cellar dirt; industrial, municipal, agricultural, and construction waste or
runoff; or other residue discharged directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters
or surface waters of the state, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes
both hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
§ 94-8.39 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.39
94:274
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into the
ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is being
transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or gravity as a
product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1)—An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map and
adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the focus for much
of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and the
official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow)
that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is captured by
separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities, or conveyed by snowremoval
equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment and
related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater management basin
may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or infiltration basin), retain
water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland
vegetation (most constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE—Any structural or nonstructural
strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other method intended to
control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated pollutants, or to induce or
control the infiltration or groundwater recharge of stormwater, or to eliminate illicit
or illegal nonstormwater discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF—Water flow on the surface of the ground or in storm
sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily caused
by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New Jersey
Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act,
N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of areas:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan Planning
Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(1)
§ 94-8.39 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.39
94:275
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as "hydrophytic
vegetation."
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
(4) Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhoods.
C. General standards.
(1) Design and performance standards for stormwater management measures.
(a) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge, stormwater
runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in Subsection D.
To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be met by
incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the
design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet these
standards shall be incorporated into the design.
(b) The standards in this section apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or
Water Quality Management Plan adopted in accordance with Department
rules.
D. Stormwater management requirements for major development.
(1) The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of a major development in
accordance with Subsection J.
(2) Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitats for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department' Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150,
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog
turtle).
(3) The following linear development projects are exempt from the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7):
§ 94-8.39 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.39
94:276
(a) The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(b) The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the existing
conditions are maintained to the maximum extent practicable; and
(c) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or trail
with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access is made of
permeable material.
(4) A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge, stormwater
runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality requirements of Subsection
D(6) and (7) may be obtained for the enlargement of an existing public
roadway or railroad, or the construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian
access, provided that the following conditions are met:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the project that
cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(b) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that, through
the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater management strategies
and measures, the option selected complies with the requirements of
Subsection D(6) and (7) to the maximum extent practicable;
(c) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements of
Subsection D(6) and (7), existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(d) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other rights to
areas, including the potential to obtain through condemnation lands not
falling under Subsection D(4)(c) above within the upstream drainage area
of the receiving stream, that would provide additional opportunities to
mitigate the requirements of Subsection D(6) and (7) that were not
achievable on site.
(5) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(a) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsection D(6) and
(7) shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management
strategies set forth at Subsection D(5) into the design. The applicant shall
identify the nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the
project. If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering,
environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in Subsection D(5)(b)
below into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify
the strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(b) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated into site
design shall:
[1] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas particularly
susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
§ 94-8.39 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.39
94:277
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the flow
of runoff over impervious surfaces;
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and vegetation;
[4] Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to post-construction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the hydraulically
most-distant point of the watershed to the point of interest within a
watershed;
[5] Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
[6] Minimize soil compaction;
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages retention and
planting of native vegetation and minimizes the use of lawns,
fertilizers and pesticides;
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems discharging
into and through stable vegetated areas;
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or minimize the
release of those pollutants into stormwater runoff. Such source
controls include, but are not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of trash
and debris in drainage systems, including features that satisfy
Subsection D(5)(c) below;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and
debris from drainage systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain spills or
other harmful accumulations of pollutants at industrial or
commercial developments; and
[d] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance, applying
fertilizer in accordance with the requirements established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq., and implementing rules.
(c) Site design features identified under Subsection D(5)(b)[9][b] above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash,
and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard, see Subsection D(5)(c)[3] below.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
§ 94-8.39 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.39
94:278
body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has
an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater than
0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
[c] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in
grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch
grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains.
Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways,
plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater
basin floors.
[2] Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space
in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb
opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more
than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the
smallest dimension.
[3] This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards;
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection D(7)(a) are conveyed through any device (e.g.,
end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or
a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent
delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass
through one of the following:
[i] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities.); or
[ii] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[c] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to the elevation of
the water quality design storm as specified in Subsection
D(7)(a); or
[d] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of
§ 94-8.39 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.39
94:279
Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an encroachment
or will damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed
historic property.
(d) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management measure
to meet the performance standards in Subsection D(6) and (7) shall be
dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a conservation restriction
filed with the appropriate County Clerk's office, or subject to an approved
equivalent restriction that ensures that measure or an equivalent
stormwater management measure approved by the reviewing agency is
maintained in perpetuity.
(e) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the address identified
in Subsection G or found on the Department's website at
www.njstormwater.org.
(6) Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(a) This subsection contains minimum design and performance standards to
control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and groundwater
recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major
development.
[1] The minimum design and performance standards for erosion control
are those established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
[2] The minimum design and performance standards for groundwater
recharge are as follows:
[a] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations at
Subsection E, either:
[i] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the site and its stormwater management measures
maintain 100% of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the site; or
[ii] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that the increase of stormwater runoff volume from
preconstruction to post-construction for the two-year
storm is infiltrated.
[b] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area" or to projects
subject to Subsection D(6)(a)[2][c] below.
[c] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
§ 94-8.39 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.39
94:280
[i] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. "High
pollutant loading areas" are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded or
stored; areas where hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas where recharge would be
inconsistent with a Department-approved remedial action
work plan or landfill closure plan; and areas with high
risks for spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[ii] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or machinery,
located at an industrial facility, that is directly or indirectly
related to process, manufacturing or other industrial
activities, which could be a source of pollutants in any
industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials;
intermediate products; final products; waste materials; byproducts;
industrial machinery and fuels; and lubricants,
solvents, and detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are
exposed to stormwater.
[d] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid adverse
hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic impacts include,
but are not limited to, exacerbating a naturally or seasonally
high water table so as to cause surficial ponding, flooding of
basements, or interference with the proper operation of
subsurface sewage disposal systems and other subsurface
structures in the vicinity or downgradient of the groundwater
recharge area.
[3] In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the design
engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for stormwater
runoff calculations at Subsection E, complete one of the following:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that,
for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction runoff
hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and 100-year storm events do
not exceed, at any point in time, the preconstruction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of stormwater leaving the
site for the two-, ten-, and 100-year storm events and that the
§ 94-8.39 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.39
94:281
increased volume or change in timing of stormwater runoff will
not increase flood damage at or downstream of the site. This
analysis shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land
uses and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
[c] Design stormwater management measures so that the postconstruction
peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and 100-year
storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%, respectively, of the
preconstruction peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only
to the post-construction stormwater runoff that is attributable to
the portion of the site on which the proposed development or
project is to be constructed. The percentages shall not be
applied to post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood
hazard areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will
not increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[d] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity analysis
in accordance with D(6)(a)[3][a],[b] and [c] above shall only be
applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff could
increase flood damages below the point of discharge.
(b) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of "major development" in Subsection B shall be submitted to
the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any applicable Soil
Conservation District guidelines for stormwater runoff quantity and
erosion control. For the purposes of this section, "agricultural
development" means land uses normally associated with the production
of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the
development of land for the processing or sale of food and the
manufacturing of agriculturally related products.
(7) Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(a) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the postconstruction
load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater runoff by
80% of the anticipated load from the developed site, expressed as an
annual average. Stormwater management measures shall only be required
for water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is
being proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a
numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey
Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) Rules, N.J.A.C.
7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit
from this requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into account
the distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as reflected
in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may take into account
the implementation of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management measures.
§ 94-8.39 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.39
94:282
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(b) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents the
presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in accordance with
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. The
BMP Manual may be obtained from the address identified in Subsection
G or found on the Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The
BMP Manual and other sources of technical guidance are listed in
Subsection G. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and
methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design engineer
provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(c) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required 80%
TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the following formula
to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs.
§ 94-8.39 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.39
94:283
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP.
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP.
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice
TSS Percent Removal
Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater wetland 90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See Subsection F(3)
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(d) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS removal rate
shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff from the subareas
converge on site, in which case the removal rate can be demonstrated
through a calculation using a weighted average.
(e) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to reduce, to
the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction nutrient load of the
anticipated load from the developed site in stormwater runoff generated
from the water quality design storm. In achieving reduction of nutrients
to the maximum extent feasible, the design of the site shall include
nonstructural strategies and structural measures that optimize nutrient
removal while still achieving the performance standards in Subsection
D(6) and (7).
(f) Additional information and examples are contained in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may be obtained
from the address identified in Subsection G.
(g) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent any
increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(h) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along all
waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category One
waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the County Soil
Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area. These areas shall
be established for the protection of water quality, aesthetic value,
§ 94-8.39 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.39
94:284
exceptional ecological significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional fisheries
significance of those established Category One waters. These areas shall
be designated and protected as follows:
[1] The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water resource
protection area in accordance with one of the following:
[a] A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured perpendicular
to the waterway from the top of the bank outwards or from the
center line of the waterway where the bank is not defined,
consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation allowed to
follow natural succession is provided.
[b] Encroachment within the designated special water resource
protection area under Subsection D(7)(h)[1][a] above shall only
be allowed where previous development or disturbance has
occurred (for example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall only be allowed
where applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection area
will be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection area
be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured perpendicular to
the top of bank of the waterway or center line of the waterway
where the bank is undefined. All encroachments proposed
under this subsection shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
[2] All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through the
special water resource protection area and shall comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
[3] If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the special
water resource protection area cannot comply with the Standard for
Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., then the
stabilization measures in accordance with the requirements of the
above standards may be placed within the special water resource
protection area, provided that:
[a] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet of the
Category One waterway;
[b] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this section
shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal rate;
[c] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on the
§ 94-8.39 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.39
94:285
receiving waterway;
[d] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall condition of
the special water resource protection area will be maintained to
the maximum extent practicable;
[e] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation District
staff to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
[f] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be subject
to review and approval by the Department.
[4] A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a regional
stormwater management planning committee as an element of a
regional stormwater management plan, or by a municipality through
an adopted municipal stormwater management plan. If a stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
D(7)(h)has been approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection, then the provisions of the plan shall be the applicable
special water resource protection area requirements for that
waterway. A stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject
to Subsection D(7)(h) shall maintain or enhance the current
functional value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in Subsection D(7)(h)[1] above. In no case
shall a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this subsection.
[5] Subsection D(7)(h) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
E. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge.
(1) Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(a) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the following
methods:
[1] The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS National
Engineering Handbook Section 4 – Hydrology and Technical
Release 55 – Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds; or
[2] The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(b) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
§ 94-8.39 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.39
94:286
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition of
a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good hydrologic
condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS
methodology at Subsection E(1)(a)[1] and the Rational and Modified
Rational Methods at Subsection E(1)(a)[2]. A runoff coefficient or a
groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may be used
on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies that the
hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of the site for at
least five years without interruption prior to the time of application. If
more than one land cover has existed on the site during the five years
immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with the
lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In addition,
there is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if
the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and conservation
treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(c) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design engineer
shall account for all significant land features and structures, such as
ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or culverts, that may reduce
preconstruction stormwater runoff rates and volumes.
(d) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to accurately
compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff from the site. To
calculate runoff from unconnected impervious cover, urban impervious
area modifications as described in the NRCS Technical Release 55 –
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and other methods may be
employed.
(e) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management measure
is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined at N.J.A.C.
7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the effects of tailwater in
the design of structural stormwater management measures.
(2) Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the following:
(a) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey, incorporated
herein by reference, as amended and supplemented. Information
regarding the methodology is available from the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual at http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/ or
at New Jersey Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427
Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
F. Standards for structural stormwater management measures.
(1) Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as follows:
(a) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to take
into account the existing site conditions, including, for example,
§ 94-8.39 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.39
94:287
environmentally critical areas; wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth
to seasonal high water table; soil type, permeability and texture; drainage
area and drainage patterns; and the presence of solution-prone carbonate
rocks (limestone).
(b) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and ensure
proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to the outlet
structure as appropriate and shall have parallel bars with one-inch spacing
between the bars to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the parallel bars at
the outlet structure shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the
diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum
spacing between bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between bars
of six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of Subsection H(4).
(c) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion-resistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions of the Residential
Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5
shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(d) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin, the
orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(e) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the minimum
safety standards for stormwater management basins at Subsection H.
(2) Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other stormwater
management measures may be utilized, provided the design engineer
demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will accomplish the
required water quantity, groundwater recharge and water quality design and
performance standards established by Subsection D of this section.
(3) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements of
Subsection D of this section, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified
by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified by the
Department.
G. Sources for technical guidance.
(1) Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be found in the
documents listed at Subsection G(1)(a) and (b) below, which are available
from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
telephone (609) 777-1038.
(a) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, as
amended. Information is provided on stormwater management measures
§ 94-8.39 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.39
94:288
such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater wetlands, dry
wells, extended detention basins, infiltration structures, manufactured
treatment devices, pervious paving, sand filters, vegetative filter strips,
and wet ponds.
(b) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater
Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as amended.
(2) Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
obtained from the following:
(a) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey"
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and incorporated
into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be obtained by
contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or any of the Soil
Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The location,
address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation District may be
obtained from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625; (609) 292-5540;
(b) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
(c) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation Committee,
P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609) 292-5540.
H. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety through the
proper design and operation of stormwater management basins. This
subsection applies to any new stormwater management basin.
NOTE: The provisions of this section are not intended to preempt morestringent
municipal or county safety requirements for new or existing
stormwater management basins. Municipal and county stormwater
management plans and ordinances may, pursuant to their authority, require
existing stormwater management basins to be retrofitted to meet one or more
of the safety standards in Subsection H(2)(a), (b) and (c)for trash racks,
overflow grates, and escape provisions at outlet structures.
(2) Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(a) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and prevent the
clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be installed at the intake to
the outlet from the stormwater management basin to ensure proper
functioning of the basin outlets in accordance with the following:
[1] The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six-inch
spacing between the bars.
[2] The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect the
hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
§ 94-8.39 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.39
94:289
[3] The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net area of
opening through the rack.
[4] The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid, durable,
and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to withstand a
perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per square foot.
(b) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the overflow
structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall
meet the following requirements:
[1] The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
[2] The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches across
the smallest dimension.
[3] The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant and shall be designed to withstand a
perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per square foot.
(c) For purposes of this Subsection H(2(c), "escape provisions" means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that
provide an easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include escape
provisions as follows:
[1] If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure, escape
provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure. With the prior
approval of the reviewing agency identified in Subsection H(3), a
freestanding outlet structure may be exempted from this
requirement.
[2] Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of water
deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be comprised of two
steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in width. One step shall be
located approximately 2 1/2 feet below the permanent water surface,
and the second step shall be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the
permanent water surface. See Subsection H(4) for an illustration of
safety ledges in a stormwater management basin.
[3] In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior slope
for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be steeper than
three horizontal to one vertical.
(3) Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption from
the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be granted only
upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality,
county or Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
§ 94-8.39 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.39
94:290
threat to public safety.
(4) Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
I. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
(1) Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(a) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater Plan
at Subsection I(3) below as part of the submission of the applicant's
application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(b) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the standards set
forth in this section.
(c) The applicant shall submit six copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection I(3) of this section.
§ 94-8.39 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.39
94:291
(2) Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site development
project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or site plan review
process by the municipal board or official from which municipal approval is
sought. That municipal board or official shall consult the engineer retained by
the Land Use Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) Checklist requirements.
(a) The following information shall be required:
[1] Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be submitted
which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits of the
proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or
greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as appropriate
may indicate the following: existing surface water drainage,
shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category One
waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate buffer
strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative
surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing and distances
of property lines, and significant natural and man-made features not
otherwise shown.
[2] Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of the
natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular attention
should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive
features and to those that provide particular opportunities or
constraints for development.
[3] Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas
where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover, including
lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high groundwater
elevations. A written description of the site plan and justification of
proposed changes in natural conditions may also be provided.
[4] Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide a
demonstration of how the goals and standards of Subsections C
through F are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to describe
how the site is being developed to meet the objective of controlling
groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater quantity
problems at the source by land management and source controls
§ 94-8.39 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.39
94:292
whenever possible.
[5] Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
[a] Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface contours,
land area to be occupied by the stormwater management
facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and details of the
proposed plan to control and dispose of stormwater.
[b] Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
[6] Calculations.
[a] Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in Subsection D of this section.
[b] When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
[7] Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Subsection J.
[8] Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this section may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection I(3)(a)[1] through [6] of this
section when it can be demonstrated that the information requested
is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
J. Maintenance and repair.
(1) Applicability. Projects subject to review as in Subsection A(3) of this section
shall comply with the requirements of Subsection J(2) and (3).
(2) General maintenance.
(a) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the stormwater
§ 94-8.39 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.39
94:293
management measures incorporated into the design of a major
development.
(b) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative maintenance
tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment,
debris, or trash removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of
the person or persons responsible for preventative and corrective
maintenance (including replacement). Maintenance guidelines for
stormwater management measures are available in the New Jersey
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public agency
or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such person's
agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the developer's obligation
to dedicate a stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(c) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred to the
owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential development or
project, unless such owner or tenant owns or leases the entire residential
development or project.
(d) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under Subsection
J(2)(b) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan and any future
revisions based on Subsection J(2)(g) below shall be recorded upon the
deed of record for each property on which the maintenance described in
the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
(e) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to maintain
the function of the stormwater management measure, including repairs or
replacement to the structure; removal of sediment, debris, or trash;
restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair or
replacement; restoration of vegetation; and repair or replacement of
nonvegetated linings.
(f) The person responsible for maintenance identified under Subsection
J(2)(b) above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative and
corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater management
measures incorporated into the design of the development, including a
record of all inspections and copies of all maintenance-related work
orders.
(g) The person responsible for maintenance identified under Subsection
J(2)(b) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the maintenance plan at
least once per year and adjust the plan and the deed as needed.
(h) The person responsible for maintenance identified under Subsection
J(2)(b) above shall retain and make available, upon request by any public
entity with administrative, health, environmental, or safety authority over
the site, the maintenance plan and the documentation required by
Subsection J(2)(f) and (g) above.
§ 94-8.39 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.39
94:294
§ 94-8.40. Street design and construction.
(i) The requirements of Subsection J(2)(c) and (d) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and accepted by
the municipality or another governmental agency.
(j) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger
to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of maintenance or
repair, the municipality shall so notify the responsible person in writing.
Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have 14 days to
effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved
by the municipal engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and
repair for good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
(3) Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the major
development is located from requiring the posting of a performance or
maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
A. All major and minor arterial, collector, local collector, local and marginal access
streets shall be designed in accordance with the proposals contained in the Master
Plan of the Borough and in accordance with this subsection.
(1) Upon receipt by the municipal agency of any subdivisions or site plans calling
for the installation of new streets or the extension of old streets, the plats shall
be referred to the Borough Engineer, Police Department, Fire Department and
the first aid squad for review.
(a) They shall make recommendations as to the acceptable minimum widths
of each street and shall base the recommendations upon such factors as
the location, proposed use and intensity of traffic, with an emphasis upon
safety considerations of a fire, first aid and police nature.
(b) These recommendations shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer to
be considered in conjunction with such studies and statistics and other
data which the Engineer shall have assembled as a basis for determining
minimum street widths within the Borough.
(2) The enumerated standards are to be construed as minimum standards and may
be increased where, because of high traffic volumes, steep grades or other such
reasons, the municipal agency determines that such action is necessary.
(3) In residential subdivisions, the minimum street width required by the attached
Schedule of Street Design Standards shall only be the minimum of 30 feet for
certain minor streets designed solely to allow access by residents to their
homes. Under no circumstances is the minimum width of any street in the
Borough of Shrewsbury to be less than 30 feet.
§ 94-8.39 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.40
94:295
Schedule of Street Design Standards
Street Classification
Local Collector Streets Arterial Highways
Normal traffic capacity (ADT) 400 3,000 10,000
Minimum right-of-way width (feet) 50 60 100
Minimum paving width (feet)
Two-way 30 40 60
One-way 22 — —
Shoulder (or parking area) width1 — — 2 at 8 feet
Sidewalks
Width (feet) 4 4 4
Setback, from face of curb (feet) 3 3 4
Design speed (mph)3 40 50 60
Minimum radius of horizontal curvature at center line
(feet)
150 500 2,000
Minimum tangent between reverse curbs (feet) 100 200 6004
Maximum longitudinal grade 8% 8% 4%
Minimum longitudinal grade
Desirable 0.75% 0.75% 0.75%
Absolute 0.40% 0.40% 0.40%
Maximum longitudinal grade for 200 feet from each side
of an intersection
3.5% 3.00% —
Minimum curb return radius at intersection2 (feet) 15 25 45
Vertical curve5
Crest: minimum length equals 100 feet; based on
stopping sight distance at design speed
Sag: minimum length equals 100 feet; based on
headlight illumination and stopping sight distance at
design speed
Maximum superelevation not required — — 6%
Pavement cross slope minimum 3.00%7 3.33%8 1.50%8
Curb face required6 (inches) 6 8 8
Minimum property line corner radius2 (feet) 5 15 30
§ 94-8.40 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.40
94:296
NOTES:
1 Shoulders or parking areas as may be required.
2 When dissimilar streets intersect, the larger radius will be used.
3 For sight distance and vertical curve calculation only.
4 As required to run out superelevation (1% per section of travel at design speed).
5 Not required if algebraic difference of intersecting grades does not exceed one.
6 Except in superelevation areas.
7 A six-inch crown.
8 An eight-inch crown.
B. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map shall be
such as to provide for the appropriate extension and/or realignment of existing
streets, except that local and collector streets should only be extended when such
extension is necessary, and the municipal agency concurs that such extension will
promote safety and conform to the street standards contained elsewhere in this
chapter.
C. Where developments abut existing roadways, sufficient right-of-way shall be
reserved to provide the right-of-way width proposed for the functional classification
of the street question.
(1) If the subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width shall
be dedicated.
(2) The new cross section for the existing road shall be constructed so as to
provide a parabolic contour constructed to the satisfaction of the Borough
Engineer.
D. Local streets shall be designed in accordance with the schedule of street design
standards and the requirements contained herein:
(1) No street or road shall be designed which has an elevation at the center line of
less than 12 feet above mean low tide and as indicated by the United States
Coast and Geodetic Survey.
(2) Local streets shall be arranged to discourage through traffic.
(3) Culs-de-sac (dead-end streets) should have a center-line length, from the
intersecting street center line to the center point of the turnaround of the culde-
sac of not less than 100 feet nor longer than 600 feet and should not provide
access to more than 25 lots.
(a) They shall provide an end turnaround with a pavement radius of not less
than 50 feet and a property line radius of not less than 60 feet and tangent
whenever possible to the right side of the street, when viewed toward the
closed end.
(b) In the event that it is contemplated that a dead-end street shall be
§ 94-8.40 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.40
94:297
extended in the future, a temporary turnaround, meeting the
aforementioned design criteria shall be required, and provisions shall be
made for future extension of the street and reversion of the excess rightof-
way to the adjoining properties.
(4) Loop streets should provide access to not more than 45 lots.
(a) Except that where access is provided by a combination of a short loop
street and culs-de-sac, the maximum shall be 60 lots, provided that the
length of the loop street alone will not exceed 3,000 feet.
(b) Loop streets shall have both of their termini located on the same street.
(5) P-loops, which are loop streets with a single access point, should have an
entrance not exceeding 700 feet in distance from the loop intersection.
(a) There should also be provided an emergency vehicular and pedestrian
right-of-way of 15 width from the loop providing access to a street which
is not a part of the P-loop.
(b) The loop of a P-loop should have a street length not exceeding 3,000 feet.
(c) P-loops should provide access to no more than 45 lots, and the entrance
street should be designed in accordance with the design standards for
collector streets.
(6) Use of reduced paving width may be considered by the municipal agency
when a cul-de-sac or loop street provides access to 25 or fewer lots, where, by
reason of topography, physical features or other conditions of the reduced
paving width would substantially reduce disruption of the development's
environment. In no case shall the paving width of a two-way cul-de-sac or loop
street be reduced to less than 36 feet.
E. In any development, it shall be the duty of the municipal agency to approve
classification of proposed streets according to their use, and in accordance with the
federal classification of roadways. In making decisions, the municipal agency shall
refer to the Master Plan and the Monmouth County Planning Board classification
of roadways and shall consider conditions within the development and the
surrounding areas and shall use as a guide the street classification and criteria
contained herein:
(1) A "local street" is a street serving only single-family residences and, where
feasible, should be either a cul-de-sac or a loop street meeting the requirements
hereinabove set forth:
(a) A street which serves traffic having origins and destinations other than
within the lots which abut the street shall not be considered a local street.
(b) The traffic normally expected on a local street shall be 400 vehicles per
day.
(2) A "collector street" is generally a street gathering traffic from local streets and
feeding it into a system of arterial highways.
§ 94-8.40 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.40
94:298
(a) Even if laid out as a local street, a street should be considered a collector
street if it provides access or could provide access to more than 150 lots,
or would be utilized by traffic other than residential in nature.
(b) Collector streets should generally be expected to carry traffic volumes of
approximately 3,000 vehicles per day.
(c) The design speed of collector streets, for alignment and sight distance
purposes, should be 50 miles per hour.
(3) "Arterials" are any federal, state or county highways intended to carry traffic
between other arterials and from the Borough to destinations outside the
Borough.
(4) Street classifications will be approved by the municipal agency in accordance
with the foregoing definitions, in accordance with the provisions of the Master
Plan and Official Map, if such is adopted, in accordance with the provisions of
applicable county and state regulations or plans or, in the absence of specific
information from the above, in accordance with its own best judgment
concerning the use to which the various streets in any development will be put.
F. All lots abutting collector streets should be provided with suitable driveway
turnarounds eliminating any necessity for vehicles to back into the collector street.
G. Other means of providing a satisfactory buffer separating through and local traffic
shall be provided as may be deemed proper by the municipal agency.
H. Dwellings on corner lots shall have their driveway access on the roadway designed
and intended to carry the lesser amount of traffic.
I. Street intersections shall be designed according to the standards contained herein:
(1) No more than two streets shall cross the same point. Street intersections shall
be at right angles wherever possible, and intersections of less than 60°
(measured at the center line of streets) shall not be permitted.
(2) Local streets should not enter the same side of collector streets at intervals of
less than 500 feet or arterials at intervals of less than 1,200 feet.
(3) Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
Streets which enter collectors or arterials from opposite sides shall be directly
opposite to each other or must be separated by at least 300 feet between their
center lines measured along the center line of an intersected collector; or 500
feet along the center line of an arterial.
(4) Four-way (cross) intersections involving minor or collector streets shall be
avoided.
J. Street layouts should be in accordance with the provisions contained herein:
(1) Curved local streets are preferred to discourage speed and monotony. The
maximum tangent distance between curves shall not exceed 1,000 feet.
(2) The municipal agency in all cases may require provisions for continuing
§ 94-8.40 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.40
94:299
§ 94-8.41. Street excavation permits.
A subdivision abutting public rights-of-way shall not be exempt from the requirement of
the Borough Street Excavation Ordinance.91
§ 94-8.42. Streetlighting. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; 12-7-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-1077]
circulation patterns onto adjacent properties and, for this purpose, may require
the provision of stub streets (street extensions) abutting adjacent properties.
(3) Residential development areas containing more than 100 lots or housing units
should have two access points from collector streets or arterial highways.
(4) A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on
arterial and collector streets.
K. Street names and development names shall not duplicate, nearly duplicate or be
phonetically similar to the names of any existing streets or developments in the
Borough or contiguous areas of other communities. Any continuation of an existing
street shall have the same street name.
L. The developer shall complete all improvements to the limits of the development,
unless other provisions have been made and approved by the municipal agency.
(1) In those instances where completion of certain improvements would not be
possible until the development of adjacent land takes place, alternate
temporary improvements may be constructed subject to the approval of the
municipal agency.
(2) Cash or a certified check representing the difference between the value of the
temporary improvements and the required improvements may be accepted by
the Borough Council to be credited toward the completion of such
improvements at such time as the adjacent land develops.
M. The right-of-way width and other standards for internal roads and alleys in
multifamily, commercial and industrial developments shall be determined by the
municipal agency on an individual basis and shall, in all cases, be of sufficient
width and design to safely accommodate maximum traffic, parking and loading
needs, and maximum access for firefighting equipment and shall generally conform
to the requirements herein.
N. There shall be no reserve strips or areas controlling access to streets except where
control and disposal of the land comprising such strips or areas have been placed
under jurisdiction of the Borough Council under conditions approved by the
municipal agency.
A. For all major subdivisions which require site plan approval, the developer shall
arrange with the serving public utility to provide streetlighting service upon the
appropriate tariff and prevailing government rules and regulations. The
91. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 220, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 94-8.40 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.42
94:300
§ 94-8.43. Street signs.
streetlighting shall be installed at the average pole spacing of 150 feet on center for
post-top luminaires at an approximate mounting height of 13 feet or 200 feet on
center for standard streetlighting luminaires on a six-foot bracket at an approximate
mounting height of 25 feet. The Land Use Board may alter the streetlighting
requirements as it deems appropriate due to special circumstances, including, but
not limited to, intersections, curves, culs-de-sac and collector or arterial roadways.
B. The serving public utility shall install wiring in addition to that on the approved
streetlighting plan where said additional wiring is required to accommodate the full
plan in accordance with the utility's filed tariff and approved procedure at the time.
C. The cost of this additional wiring shall be the responsibility of the subdivider.
D. Streetlighting shall be installed, as directed by and subject to approval by the
municipal agency, prior to the certificates of occupancy being issued.
E. The cost of the additional wiring and electricity for streetlighting for all streets
within the development shall be paid for by the owner or subdivider until streets are
accepted by the Borough, all certificates of occupancy have been issued and the
Borough Council has authorized the release of all performance bonds upon
completion of all improvements for the development.
F. No major subdivision plat shall receive final approval unless the suggested
streetlighting plan of the electric utility is shown thereon.
G. No subdivision plat shall receive final approval unless the suggested streetlighting
plan of the electric utility is shown thereon.
H. Where a condition of approval of an application for development pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. requires the installation of streetlighting on a dedicated
public street connected to a public utility, then, upon notification in writing by the
developer to the approving authority and the Borough Council that the streetlighting
on a dedicated public street has been installed and accepted for service by the public
utility and that certificates of occupancy have been issued for at least 50% of the
dwelling units and 50% of the floor area of the nonresidential uses on the dedicated
public street or portion thereof indicated by section pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38,
the Borough shall, within 30 days following receipt of the notification, make
appropriate arrangements with the public utility for and assume the payment of the
costs of the streetlighting on the dedicated public street on a continuing basis.
Compliance by the Borough with the provisions of this section shall not be deemed
to constitute acceptance of the street by the Borough.
I. After final acceptance, operation and maintenance costs of the streetlighting shall
be the responsibility of the Borough.
A. Street signs shall be appropriate metal street signs of a type and size approved by
resolution of the Borough Council and shall be properly installed at each street
intersection.
B. Street signs shall be placed two per intersection on the near right-hand corner as
§ 94-8.42 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.43
94:301
§ 94-8.44. Street trees.
viewed from both directions on the street which is expected to carry the greatest
traffic through the intersection at locations approved by the Borough Engineer.
C. Mountings shall be in accordance with the standard procedures of the Borough or
with requirements adopted by the Borough Council.
D. Street signs shall be placed before any certificate of occupancy for houses on the
subject street are issued.
A. Any person erecting or constructing any new buildings or residences within the
Borough which require site plan or subdivision approval shall plant pollutionresistant
shade trees on the property owner's side of the sidewalk adjacent thereto.
(1) In each subdivision of land, the developer shall plant between the sidewalk and
the right-of-way line proper shade and/or decorative trees of a type approved
by the municipal agency in consultation with the Shade Tree Commission.
(2) Planting sites shall be indicated on the preliminary plat.
B. Street trees shall be planted on the property owner's side of the sidewalk, not to lie
closer than five feet to existing or future sidewalks.
(1) In all cases, said trees shall be planted within the municipal right-of-way in a
place which shall not interfere with utilities.
(2) Trees shall be of pollution-resistant varieties selected from among species
determined by Shade Tree Commission.
(3) The municipal agency in consultation with the Shade Tree Commission may
reduce or waive such plantings if there are approved varieties of trees growing
along such right-of-way or on the property abutting the street line. A developer
shall make a donation to the Shade Tree Fund in lieu of the required plantings.
C. The subdivider or developer shall be required to plant such number of trees as shall
be necessary, when taking into consideration existing trees, to provide at least one
tree in every 30 feet of front yards.
(1) Pollution-resistant shade trees shall be planted along all private streets,
undedicated roads, drives and parking areas at intervals of not more than 30
feet of curbing or edge of pavement.
(2) No tree shall be planted less than 25 feet from an existing or proposed
streetlight or street intersection.
D. Pollution-resistant trees referred to above shall be selected from among species
determined by the Shade Tree Commission. Species may include those approved
for this purpose by the Monmouth County Shade Tree Commission. Suitable trees
shall be selected on the basis of specific site conditions.
E. All shade trees to be hereafter planted in accordance with this chapter shall be
nursery grown or of substantially uniform size and shape and shall have straight
trunks.
§ 94-8.43 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.44
94:302
§ 94-8.45. Swimming pools.
(1) Ornamental trees need not have straight trunks but must conform in all other
respects to the provisions for trees and tree plantings outlined in this chapter.
(2) All trees shall be of Grade A nursery stock, with a minimum caliper of 2 1/2
inches measured one foot from the butt.
A. All types of private swimming pools to be located within residential side or rear
yards are governed by the requirements contained herein, including:
(1) Permanent in-ground.
(2) Permanent aboveground: aboveground pools equipped with fences built above
the top level of the pool.
(3) Temporary aboveground: aboveground pools not equipped with fences built
above the top level of the pool.
B. All lighting fixtures for a private swimming pool shall be installed so as to comply
with all applicable safety regulations and shall be shielded so as to prevent any
direct beam of light from shining on any adjoining property.
C. No overhead electric lines shall be carried across any swimming pool or wading
area.
D. No activities shall be conducted at any private swimming pool which shall cause
undue noise or constitute a nuisance to any neighbor.
E. When an application is made for a permit to construct and locate a private
swimming pool, the applicant shall obtain approval from the Construction Official
as to the suitability and adequacy of design, materials and construction or
construction specifications of said pool, including all accessory equipment,
apparatus and appurtenances thereto. The application for a private swimming pool
building permit shall identify the building pool, all accessory equipment and
apparatus, the type of pool, all basic dimensions, the location of steps, diving
stands, boards and the location and detail specification of the enclosure and gate on
the lot.
F. An outdoor private swimming pool shall be located not less than eight feet from the
side or rear of the residence on a building lot, to the rear of the building setback
line.
G. The pump of a filtration or pumping station of a private swimming pool shall be
located not less than 10 feet from any side or rear property line.
H. Private pools situated or extended above ground level and less than 50 feet from an
abutting property shall be surrounded by a suitable drainage system leading to a
street or brook so as to be able to carry away all the water in the pool in the case of
a break.
I. Permanent in-ground pools shall be surrounded entirely by a substantial fence such
as a stockade or cyclone or chain-link fence, with no openings greater than two
§ 94-8.44 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.45
94:303
§ 94-8.46. Topsoil protection.
inches square and meeting the requirements of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.U.C.C.); however, sides of the residence that do not
provide direct access to the swimming pool may serve as part of the enclosure.
[Amended 4-11-1994 by Ord. No. 684]
(1) The fence shall be located not less than six feet from the closest edge of the
pool.
(2) Fences shall be at least four feet high.
(3) All supporting structures shall be on the inside of the fence, and the top of such
support shall be at least one inch lower than the top of the fence.
(4) Permanent aboveground pools constructed with an attached fence, being at
least four feet in height above ground level and meeting the requirements of
the New Jersey Construction Code, need no additional fencing.
(5) Temporary aboveground pools, when not in use, must be emptied or covered
with a suitable protective covering, securely fastened or locked in place unless
enclosed by a fence meeting the requirements for a permanent in-ground pool.
J. Any opening or openings in the fence to afford entry to the pool shall be equipped
with a gate similar to the fence and shall extend from not more than two inches
above the ground to the height of the fence. The gate shall be of a self-closing type,
opening outwardly only, and shall be equipped with a lock and key or padlock and
chain and shall be kept locked, except when the pool is in use.
A. Topsoil shall not be removed from the site during construction but shall be stored,
stabilized in accordance with the Standard for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
in New Jersey and subsequently redistributed to areas most exposed to view by
occupants and the public and to areas where landscaped open space is required.
B. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed to provide at
least six inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by
seeding or planting. Said seeding and planting must have attained a growth
sufficient to stabilize the soil before this section of the chapter will be considered
as being complied with.
C. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil unless topsoil is
remaining after all improvements have been installed in accordance with an
approved site plan or subdivision map and has been redistributed in accordance
with this subsection.
(1) Removal of topsoil from the site is also bound by provisions of § 94-5.25 of
this chapter.
(2) At least 48 hours prior to removing any excess topsoil, the developer shall
cause notice of the intent to perform such removal to be given to the Borough
Engineer and Construction Official.
D. If sufficient topsoil is not available on the site, topsoil meeting the requirements of
§ 94-8.45 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.46
94:304
§ 94-8.47. Traffic control devices.
§ 94-8.48. Utilities. [Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
the standard specifications shall be provided to result in a six-inch minimum
thickness.
A. The developer shall, prior to final acceptance, install all traffic control devices
required within any development or, with the consent of the Borough Council, may
pay to the Chief Financial Officer a nonrefundable sum, in cash or certified check,
in the amount set by the Borough Engineer equal to the cost of all necessary traffic
control devices not installed by the developer. [Amended 10-5-2020 by Ord. No.
1076]
B. Traffic control devices shall include, but are not limited to, signs, traffic lines,
lights, reflectors and channelizing markers.
(1) The number, type, legend, placement and size of all traffic control devices
shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
by the United States Department of Transportation and the requirements of
municipal, county and state regulations.
(2) Proposed devices shall be according to an approved plan submitted at the time
of final plat approval.
C. Construction details of all proposed traffic control devices shall be in accordance
with standards prepared by the Borough Engineer and approved by the Borough
Council.
A. All utility lines and necessary appurtenances, including, but not limited to, electric
transmission and electric and gas distribution, communications, streetlighting and
cable television, shall be installed underground within easements or dedicated
public rights-of-way in accordance with the Typical Utility Layout and Typical
Road Section92 or in such other configuration as set forth by the approving body,
Borough Engineer and utility companies where necessary and appropriately
coordinated.
(1) The installation of all underground utilities shall conform to the regulations of
the New Jersey State Board of Public Utilities.
(2) Installation of all utilities shall conform to the construction standards of the
appropriate utility.
B. Utilities may be required to be located along the rear property lines or elsewhere
with easements as provided in § 94-8.14 of this chapter.
(1) All utility installation shall be connected with a public utility system and shall
be adequate for all present and probable future development of the
subdivision.
92. Editor's Note: The Typical Utility Layout and Typical Road Section Drawings are included as attachments to this
chapter.
§ 94-8.46 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.48
94:305
§ 94-8.49. Water supply. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
Prior to the approval of any final plat, the full approval of any public water system must
have been obtained from the water supply utility and filed with the municipal agency, or
the final approval will be conditioned upon full approval from the water supply utility.
§ 94-8.50. Wooded areas.
(2) Wherever the utility is not installed in the public right-of-way, an appropriate
utility easement not less than 25 feet in width shall be provided and located in
consultation with the utility companies and/or Borough departments
concerned.
C. For all major subdivisions, the developer shall arrange with the serving utility for
the underground installation of the utility's distribution supply lines and service
connections in accordance with the provisions of the applicable standard terms and
conditions incorporated as part of its tariff as the same are then on file with the State
of New Jersey Board of Public Utilities and shall submit to the municipal agency,
prior to the granting of final approval, a written instrument from each serving utility
which shall evidence full compliance with the provisions of this section; provided,
however, that lots in such subdivisions which abut existing streets or public rightsof-
way where overhead utility distribution supply lines have theretofore been
installed on a portion of the streets involved may be supplied with service from such
overhead lines or extensions thereof, but the service connections from the overhead
lines shall be installed underground.
D. In any event, new building service connections for all multifamily developments
and for any industrial, commercial or office development containing a floor area of
10,000 square feet or more shall be installed underground. All other new service
connections shall also be installed underground unless a specific waiver is granted
by the municipal agency.
E. Where a state permit is required for utilities, the applicant shall submit said permit
prior to any final approval or issuance of building permit as determined by the Land
Use Board.
F. Meters may be mounted on exterior walls. All meters shall be screened so that they
are not visible from any internal or public street and access satisfactory to the
supplying utility is maintained.
A. In all districts in the Borough where the maximum percent of lot coverage is 15%
or less, no more than 20% of such wooded areas within the net tract area may be
cleared or developed. The remaining 80% shall be maintained as permanent open
space or preserved within the lot.
B. In zone districts in the Borough where the maximum percent of lot covered is
greater than 15%, no more than 40% of such wooded areas within the net tract area
may be cleared or developed. The remaining 60% shall be maintained as permanent
open space or preserved within the lot.
C. Individual healthy specimen and mature shade trees of twelve-inch caliper or
healthy specimen trees of eight-inch caliper or greater or individual healthy
§ 94-8.48 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.50
94:306
§ 94-8.51. Recyclable materials storage. [Added 3-12-1990 by Ord. No. 602]
Materials designated in Chapter 210, Article II, Recycling, shall be separated from other
solid waste by the generator, and a storage area for recyclable material shall be provided
as follows:
§ 94-8.52. Affordable housing multifamily overlay design standards. [Added
12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 924; amended 5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 1059]
Residential structures constructed in the AH-MF-8 Overlay Zone shall conform to the
following minimum standards:
ornamental trees of four-inch caliper or greater shall be preserved wherever
possible. All site plans shall take into consideration the location and quality of all
vegetation and shall incorporate the preservation of said trees in relationship to
buildings, parking and open space.
A. For each subdivision application for single-family units, the applicant shall provide
a storage area of at least 12 square feet within each dwelling unit to accommodate
a four-week accumulation of mandated recyclables, including but not limited to
newspaper, glass bottles, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal cans. The storage area
may be located in the laundry room, garage, basement or kitchen.
B. For each subdivision application for multifamily units, the applicant shall provide a
storage area of at least three square feet within each dwelling unit to accommodate
a one-week accumulation of mandated recyclables, including but not limited to
newspaper, glass bottles, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal cans. The storage area
may be located in the laundry room, garage or kitchen. Unless recyclables are
collected on a weekly basis from each dwelling unit, one or more common storage
areas must be provided at convenient locations within the development.
C. For each site plan application for commercial and industrial developments, the
applicant shall provide the municipal agency with estimates of the quantity of
mandated recyclable materials, including but not limited to newspaper, glass
bottles, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal cans, high-grade paper and corrugated
cardboard, that will be generated by the development during each week. A
separated storage area must be provided to accommodate a one-to-four-week
accumulation of recyclable material. The municipal agency may require the
location of one or more common storage areas at convenient locations within the
development.
A. No dwelling unit shall be less than 18 feet in width and the average width of all
dwelling units within a development shall not be less than 20 feet.
B. Each dwelling unit shall contain, at a minimum, a bedroom, a bathroom, and a
kitchen that shall be located separate and apart from other rooms except that a living
room and a dining area may be combined.
C. Building facades shall be varied in appearance in accordance with § 94-8.4,
Architectural and building site design standards.
D. Each multifamily residential unit shall be constructed with, and shall maintain, a
§ 94-8.50 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.52
94:307
§ 94-8.53. Affordable housing accessory apartment design standards. [Added
12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 925]
Sites containing accessory apartments constructed in all zones shall conform to the
following minimum standards:
private outdoor space that may be designed as a deck, patio, balcony, or terrace
containing a minimum of 50 square feet.
E. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit in accordance
with the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21). At
least one parking space shall be in an attached garage, except in the case of
affordable units. In addition, guest parking shall be provided at the ratio of 0.5
parking space per dwelling unit in accordance with the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21). Required parking spaces may be provided
in any combination: at least one per unit within attached garages, and the remaining
on driveways leading to attached garages, or within collective parking lots or areas.
At least one parking space for each dwelling unit shall be within 100 feet of that
dwelling unit measured along the route reasonably expected for access to and from
the dwelling unit.
F. If a driveway is used to satisfy some of the parking requirements, the driveway shall
be no less than 22 feet in length from the face of the garage to the back of the
sidewalk or the right-of-way. Where driveways are utilized to meet some of the
parking requirements, integrity and function of pedestrian walkways shall be
maintained.
G. Garages shall not be used as habitable living space or for any use inconsistent with
the use as a garage.
H. Association documents shall contain provisions mandating that at least one vehicle
be parked in the garage and prohibiting the conversion of garages to any other use,
including habitable living space.
I. The requirements of § 94-8-19, Garages, shall apply to the design of garages for
multifamily buildings, except that the requirement in § 94-8-19D is modified to
require rear- or side-entry garages to the extent feasible.
A. No dwelling unit shall be less than 18 feet in width, and the average width of all
dwelling units within a development shall not be less than 20 feet.
B. Self-contained residential uses shall contain, at a minimum, sleeping quarters,
sanitary facilities, a kitchen, and a private entrance.
C. Site improvements in developments which contain accessory apartments as a means
of meeting affordable housing obligations shall be designed to provide adequate
means of recycling and refuse storage areas, screened from public view on three
sides by landscaping or other means. Solid waste storage areas shall be
conveniently located to serve the residential units.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvements Standards, and shall be shared with nonresidential uses.
§ 94-8.52 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-8.53
94:308
E. Off-street parking shall be designed to be conveniently located for all accessory
apartments, and shall contain adequate means of illumination pursuant to the
requirements of § 94-8.22.
F. Site landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of §
94-8.21, and shall be designed to suitably buffer residential uses from solid waste
storage areas, delivery zones, and other nonresidential elements of the overall site
plan.
G. Entrances to accessory apartments shall be located in a such a manner to provide a
physical separation from loading zones or other portions of the site where access to
the general public would customarily be restricted to employees only.
§ 94-8.53 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-8.53
94:309

ARTICLE IX
Conditional Uses
§ 94-9.1. Guiding principles and general provisions.
Recognizing that certain uses, activities and structures are necessary to serve the needs
and to provide for the convenience of the citizens of the Borough and, at the same time,
appreciating that fact that they or any one of them may be or may become inimical
to the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, if located without
due consideration to existing conditions and surroundings, such uses are designated
as conditional uses subject to the standards and regulations hereby established. These
standards and regulations are intended to provide the municipal agency with a guide for
reviewing applications for conditional uses as provided for by this chapter. As a result
of the review procedure, the applicant may be required to meet additional standards
and regulations imposed by the municipal agency during site plan review which are
in keeping with and will further the intent of these standards and regulations. Such
standards and regulations shall be provided for and maintained as a condition of the
establishment and maintenance of any use to which they are a condition of approval. In
acting upon an application for conditional use approval, the municipal agency shall be
guided by the following standards and principles:
A. The use for which an application is being made is specifically listed as a conditional
use within the zone where the property is located.
B. The design, arrangement and nature of the particular use is such that the public
health, safety and welfare will be protected and that reasonable consideration is
afforded to the following:
(1) The compatibility of the proposed use(s) and/or structure(s) within the existing
neighborhood.
(2) The potential effect that the proposed use(s) and/or structure(s) will have upon
property values.
(3) The adequacy of the proposed parking and traffic circulation for the use(s)
and/or structure(s) and the potential for traffic congestion and/or the creation
of undue traffic hazards.
(4) The need for such facility or use(s) to serve the area in which it is to be located.
(5) The adequacy of proposed drainage facilities which will serve the use(s) and/
or the structure(s).
(6) The adequacy of plans for screening any adverse aspects of the use(s) and/or
structure(s) from adjoining properties.
(7) The adequacy of proposed outdoor lighting.
(8) Compliance with the standards, principles and objectives of the Master Plan.
(9) Compliance with the design standards, general provisions, submission
requirements and other appropriate provisions of this chapter.
§ 94-9.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-9.1
94:311
§ 94-9.2. Cemeteries.
Cemeteries may be permitted as a conditional use in those zones specified, provided that
the use and/or structures shall adhere to the minimum standards of the particular zone
and the following:
§ 94-9.3. (Reserved)93
C. All conditional uses shall also be required to obtain site plan approval, unless
otherwise specified in this chapter.
D. Conditional uses shall adhere to the additional standards specified for the particular
use under this article, except where no additional standards are specified herein.
E. No use specified within this article shall be considered a conditional use unless it is
specifically listed as a conditional use in the zone district regulations.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUFFER ZONE—A continuous strip of land required for the purpose of providing
physical, audible and visible separation through the use of trees and/or other natural
foliage.
HOURS OF OPERATION—Those hours during which normal cemetery activity,
including digging and filling of graves, burial services, visitation, maintenance and
repair of grounds and deliveries, are conducted on the cemetery premises.
MONUMENT — A tablet, a statue or other maker of stone, metal or another
durable substance set up over or adjacent to a grave to commemorate the person
interred therein.
B. Permitted activities, structures and buildings.
(1) Interment of the dead and related activities associated therewith.
(2) Erection of tombstones and monuments.
C. Building and construction regulations.
(1) The height of every other building, monument or other structure shall be
constructed in accordance with the existing requirements of federal, state and
local statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances.
(2) All excavations shall be made in accordance with the regulations issued and
promulgated by the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission and
all other applicable federal, state and local statutes, rules, regulations and
ordinances.
D. Buffer zone. Every cemetery created subsequent to the adoption date of this chapter
shall be required to provide a buffer zone at least 50 feet wide around its entire
perimeter along common boundaries with any abutting residential zones. No
interments shall be permitted within the buffer zone.
§ 94-9.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-9.4
94:312
§ 94-9.4. Educational uses.
Educational uses, including public, parochial or private elementary or secondary
schools, duly licensed by the State of New Jersey, attendance at which is sufficient
compliance with the compulsory education requirements of the state, may be permitted
as a conditional use in those zones specified, provided that the use and/or structures shall
adhere to the minimum standards of the particular zone and the following:
§ 94-9.4.1. Child-care centers. [Added 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670; amended
10-17-1994 by Ord. No. 700]
A. Convents, social halls and similar uses which are accessory to the educational use
shall be permitted.
B. Nursery schools with an attendance of more than 25 children shall be considered
educational uses and shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
C. Nursery schools serving more than 25 children shall contain a minimum lot area of
three acres, plus one acre for each 25 children or fraction thereof.
D. Educational uses other than nursery schools whose maximum enrollment is 300
students or less shall have a minimum lot area of five acres.
E. Educational uses other than nursery schools whose maximum enrollment exceeds
300 students shall adhere to the following:
(1) Elementary schools shall have a minimum lot area of five acres, plus one acre
for each 25 students in excess of 300 students.
F. Educational uses shall be screened from adjacent residential zones or existing
residences adjacent to the site in accordance with the provisions of § 94-8.6B of this
chapter and/or shall provide fencing along such property lines as may be deemed
adequate by the municipal agency. [Amended 12-13-1993 by Ord. No. 670]
G. Permitted signs: one freestanding sign not larger than 10 square feet in area and not
exceeding eight feet in height. In addition, facade signage occupying an area no
greater than 5% of the front facade.
H. Lot coverage shall not exceed 30%.
A. Child-care centers for infants and children shall be permitted as conditional uses in
all nonresidential zone districts. The floor area to be occupied in any building by a
child-care center shall be excluded in calculating the parking requirement and the
permitted density or intensity for that building or structure.
B. Child-care centers for infants and children shall be permitted only upon receipt of a
conditional use permit and provided that the following standards are met to ensure
that the health, safety and welfare of the children are protected and maintained:
(1) Child-care centers shall be licensed by the New Jersey Department of Human
Services in accordance with N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 to 30:5B-15.
93. Editor's Note: Former § 94-9.3, Community residences and other entities set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and
40:55D-66.2, was repealed 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989.
§ 94-9.4 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-9.4.1
94:313
§ 94-9.5. Places of worship.
Places of worship, as defined in Article II of this chapter, may be permitted as a
conditional use in those zones specified, provided that the use and/or structures shall
adhere to the minimum standards of the particular zone and the following:
(2) Child-care centers shall not be located near or adjacent to areas or uses
determined to be hazardous to the physical health and safety of the children as
required by N.J.A.C. 10:122-2.3.
(3) All child-care facilities shall provide a dropoff area for two cars with a staging
area sufficient to accommodate one waiting car for each 700 square feet of
gross floor area or for every 10 children, whichever is greater. This loading
and staging area shall be contiguous to the property on which the child-care
center is located and shall not be separated from the access to the building by
any vehicular passageway but shall permit the safe and efficient access of
children directly to the child-care center.
(4) All parking areas, pedestrian walkways and other exterior portions of the
premises subject to use by center occupants after dusk shall be illuminated to
provide safe entrance to and from the center.
(5) All child-care facilities shall provide an on-site contiguous play area which can
be accessed from the interior of the child-care center without crossing any
vehicular passageway. Play areas shall occupy a minimum of 150 square feet
of net outdoor space. Where more than five children are using the space at one
time, there shall be 30 square feet of net outdoor space for each additional
child in addition to the minimum requirement of 150 square feet. This
requirement for outdoor play areas shall not be applicable where the state shall
first have granted a waiver of the requirement prior to obtaining the
conditional use approval.
(6) All outdoor recreation areas shall be fully enclosed by a substantial fence or
wall having a height of not less than six feet with no openings greater than two
inches square and erected in a manner as to permit the flow of natural drainage.
All outdoor recreation areas shall be landscaped and visually screened from
adjoining residential properties in accordance with the provisions of § 94-8.6B
of this chapter. When adjacent to residential properties, usage of play areas
shall be limited to between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Play areas
shall not be located adjacent to uses which may prove detrimental to the
children and shall not be in areas where concentrations of carbon monoxide
equal or exceed 10 mg/m3.
(7) No play area shall be located nearer than 50 feet to any adjoining residential
property or zone.
A. The minimum lot area shall be three acres.
B. The minimum lot width shall be 300 feet.
C. No principal building shall be located closer than 50 feet to any side or rear property
line.
§ 94-9.4.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-9.5
94:314
§ 94-9.6. Professional office buildings.
Professional office buildings may be permitted as a conditional use in those zones
specified, provided that the use and/or structures shall adhere to the minimum standards
of the particular zone and the following:
D. No accessory building shall be located closer than 30 feet to any side or rear
residential property line.
E. Maximum lot coverage shall be 15%.
F. The height of structures to be constructed may exceed the maximum height
requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that the front, rear and side yard
requirements set forth above shall be increased by two feet for each foot by which
the height of the structure exceeds the maximum height which would be otherwise
permitted by this chapter, and further provided that in no case shall any proposed
structure exceed 50 feet in height.
G. Permitted signs shall be as follows:
(1) One freestanding sign not exceeding 10 square feet in area nor six feet in
height.
(2) Facade signage occupying no greater an area than 5% of the front facade of
the building to which the sign is attached.
A. The occupancy of the proposed professional office building shall be limited to
members of a recognized profession, such as doctors, dentists, ministers, architects,
engineers, lawyers, real estate brokers, accountants or such other similar
professional occupants which may be so designated by the Board.
B. The proposed structure shall be compatible with the established character of
development in the surrounding areas.
C. The lot on which the use is proposed shall be not less than 15,000 square feet.
D. The lot shall have a minimum frontage of 100 feet.
E. Required yard areas:
(1) Front and rear yard setbacks: 40 feet.
(2) Side yard setback: 25 feet.
F. The maximum building coverage of the lot shall not exceed 25%.
G. The maximum building height shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories.
H. The minimum gross floor area shall be 1,000 square feet.
I. Permitted signs:
(1) One freestanding sign which shall not exceed in area four square feet, plus one
square foot for each professional occupant, but in no case shall any sign exceed
10 square feet.
§ 94-9.5 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-9.6
94:315
§ 94-9.7. Public and quasi-public recreation areas. [Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-1077]
Public and quasi-public recreation areas, including parks, playgrounds, tennis courts,
swimming pools and other such activities, may be permitted as a conditional use in
those zones specified, provided that the use and/or structure shall adhere to the minimum
standards of the particular zone and the following:
§ 94-9.8. Public utilities.
Public utility uses, such as water towers, pumping stations, electric substations,
transmission lines, switching stations and radio and other transmission towers which
must be provided above ground, may be permitted as a conditional use in those zones
specified, provided that the use and/or structures shall adhere to the minimum standards
of the particular zone and the following:
(2) One facade sign located on the front facade of the building not exceeding 5%
of the area of that facade.
A. Swimming pools shall be subject to the provisions of § 94-8.45 of this chapter.
B. Minimum lot area: five acres.
C. Maximum lot coverage by buildings and structures, including swimming pools:
20% of the lot area.
D. Minimum unoccupied open space: 25%.
E. No building, structure, recreation area or parking area shall be located closer than
25 feet to a residential property line.
F. The use shall be screened from adjacent residential zones or adjacent existing
residences in accordance with the provisions of § 94-8.4B of this chapter and/or
shall provide fencing as may be deemed adequate by the municipal agency.
G. Off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the Land Use Board, except
that, where swimming pools are provided, the off-street parking requirements shall
be not less than the requirements under § 94-8.26, plus such additional parking as
may be deemed necessary by the municipal agency.
H. Permitted signs: one freestanding sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area nor six
feet in height.
A. A statement is submitted setting forth the reasons that the proposed installation
must be provided aboveground in a specific location and why it is necessary and
convenient for the efficiency of the public utility system or for the satisfactory and
convenient provision of service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in which
the particular use is to be located.
B. The design of any building in connection with such facility conforms to the general
character of the area and will not adversely affect the safe and comfortable
enjoyment of property rights of the zone in which it is located.
§ 94-9.6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-9.8
94:316
§ 94-9.9. Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas. [Added 6-4-2001 by
Ord. No. 780]
C. Adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices will be provided.
D. Sufficient landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawn, are provided and will be
periodically maintained.
E. The public utility use and lot meet all the applicable minimum requirements of the
district in which it is located, except that it need not have the minimum required lot
area.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations for the siting of wireless
telecommunications towers and antennas is to: protect residential areas and land
uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; encourage the location
of towers in appropriate locations; minimize the total number of towers throughout
the Borough; strongly encourage the joint use of approved tower facilities as a
primary option rather than construction of new or additional single-use towers;
encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in
areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; encourage users of
towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual
impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape
screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; enhance the ability of the
providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the
community quickly, effectively and efficiently; consider the public health and
safety of communication towers; and avoid potential damage to adjacent properties
from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. In
furtherance of these goals, Shrewsbury Borough shall give due consideration to the
Borough Master Plan, Zoning Map, existing land uses and environmentally
sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
B. Nonapplicability to amateur radio stations and to receive-only antennas. The
provisions of this section shall not govern any antenna that is owned and operated
by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively as a
"receive-only antenna" in accordance with Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) regulations.
C. Antennas and towers permitted on Borough property. Wireless communications
towers and antennas which are located on property owned, leased or otherwise
controlled by the Borough of Shrewsbury and which are approved by the Borough
Council shall be deemed to be permitted as a municipal facility in any zone district.
D. Antennas and towers which are not municipal facilities. Wireless
telecommunications towers and antennas that are not municipal facilities may be
permitted on nonmunicipal property in the LI Light Industrial Zone upon
submission and approval of a site plan and conditional use permit in accordance
with the regulations set forth below:
(1) General requirements.
(a) Principal or accessory use. Wireless telecommunications towers and
antennas may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A
§ 94-9.8 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-9.9
94:317
different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not
preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
(b) Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower
or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but
not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements and other
such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even
though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within
such lot.
(c) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the Borough as part of the application an inventory of its
existing towers, antennas or sites approved for towers or antennas that are
either within the jurisdiction of Shrewsbury Borough or within one mile
of the border thereof, including specific information about the location,
height and design of each tower. The Borough may share such
information with other applicants applying for approvals under this
section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the
jurisdiction of Shrewsbury Borough; provided, however, that the
Borough is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or
warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
(d) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
[1] Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to
any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as
to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
[2] At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening
and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and
surrounding buildings.
[3] If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
(e) Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the
FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
(f) State and federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of
the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and
antennas.
(g) Uniform Construction Code; safety standards. To ensure the structural
integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained
in compliance with standards contained in applicable state and municipal
§ 94-9.9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-9.9
94:318
codes, including the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic
Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If upon inspection,
the Borough concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and
standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon
notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have
30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure
to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days shall constitute
grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
(h) Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in
Shrewsbury Borough irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional
boundaries.
(i) Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation
of a wireless communication system in Shrewsbury Borough have been
obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the Borough.
(j) Public notice. For purposes of this section, any variance request or
request for site plan approval shall require public notice to all abutting
property owners and all property owners of properties that are located
within the corresponding separation distance listed in Subsection D(1)(s)
in addition to any notice otherwise required by this chapter.
(k) Signs. No advertising signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
(l) Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of
Subsection D(2).
(m) Multiple antenna/tower plan. Shrewsbury Borough encourages the users
of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of
multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of
multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.
(n) Maximum height.
[1] The tower shall meet the following maximum height and usage
criteria:
[a] For a single user, up to 90 feet in height.
[b] For two users, up to 120 feet in height.
[c] For three or more users, up to 150 feet in height.
[2] A licensed New Jersey professional engineer must certify that the
tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users
proposed by the applicant.
(o) Information required. In addition to any information required for
§ 94-9.9 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-9.9
94:319
applications for site plan review pursuant to this chapter, applicants for
approval for a tower shall submit the following information:
[1] A location plan drawn to scale and clearly indicating the location,
type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other
municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site and all
properties within the applicable separation distances set forth in
Subsection D(1)(s), adjacent roadways, proposed means of access,
setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed
tower and any other structures, topography and parking.
[2] Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable).
[3] The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties and unplatted
residentially zoned properties.
[4] The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory
of existing sites submitted pursuant to Subsection D(1)(s) shall be
shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall also
identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the
owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
[5] A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
[6] Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method
of camouflage and illumination.
[7] A description of compliance with Subsection D(1)(c), (d), (e), (f),
(g), (j), (l), (m) and (r) and all applicable federal, state or local laws.
[8] A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of
the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for
future users.
[9] Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned
or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
[10] A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers, other
structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers
or structures to provide the services to be provided through the use
of the proposed tower.
[11] A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or antennas
within the Borough based upon existing physical, engineering,
technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed
tower is erected.
(p) Factors considered in granting approval for towers. In addition to any
standards for consideration of site plans pursuant to this chapter, the
municipal agency shall consider at least the following factors in
§ 94-9.9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-9.9
94:320
determining whether to issue an approval:
[1] Height of the proposed tower.
[2] Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries.
[3] Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
[4] Surrounding topography.
[5] Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
[6] Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness.
[7] Proposed ingress and egress.
[8] Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures,
as discussed in Subsection D(1)(o)[10] of this section.
(q) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative
technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the municipal agency that
no existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require
the use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna. An applicant shall submit information requested by the
municipal agency related to the availability of suitable existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to
demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or alternative technology
can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of
the following:
[1] No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area which meet applicant's engineering requirements.
[2] Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
[3] Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
[4] The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures or
the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause
interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
[5] The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing
tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding
new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
§ 94-9.9 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-9.9
94:321
[6] The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that
render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
[7] The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does
not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell
network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached
to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology
that exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be
presumed to render the technology unsuitable.
(r) Minimum required setback. The following minimum setback
requirements shall apply to all towers for which site plan approval is
required:
[1] Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 100% of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line, but in no event shall
the tower be located in the minimum required yard area or buffer
area of the zone district.
[2] Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback and buffer requirements.
(s) Minimum separation requirement between uses. The following
separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which
site plan approval is required:
[1] Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
[a] Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas as
specified in Subsection D(1)(s)[2] below, except as otherwise
provided.
[b] Towers shall maintain a separation distance of 200 feet or
300% of the tower height, whichever is greater, from
residential dwelling units or from lands zoned for residential
use.
[2] Separation distances between towers. Separation distances between
towers shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed
tower and preexisting towers or other proposed towers. The
separation distances shall be measured by drawing or following a
straight line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed
base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation
distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown below in the table
of required separation distances between towers.
§ 94-9.9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-9.9
94:322
Required Separation
Distances Between Wireless Communications Towers
(in linear feet)
Tower Type Lattice Guyed
Monopole: 75 feet in
Height or Greater
Monopole: Less than 75
feet in Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole: 75 feet in height
or greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole: less than 75 feet in
height
750 750 750 750
(t) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less
than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anticlimbing
device; provided, however, that the municipal agency may
waive such requirements as it deems appropriate.
(u) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping
surrounding towers for which site plan approval is required; provided,
however, that the municipal agency may waive such requirements if the
goals of this section would be better served thereby.
[1] Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials
that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from
property used for residences.
[2] In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal,
the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
[3] Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall
be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such
as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the
property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
(v) In approving the tower, the municipal agency may impose conditions,
including the use of an alternative tower structure, to the extent the
municipal agency concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize
any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties.
(2) Buildings or other equipment storage.
(a) Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or
structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the
following:
[1] The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 200 square feet
of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in height. In addition, for
buildings and structures which are less than 65 feet in height, the
§ 94-9.9 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-9.9
94:323
§ 94-9.10. Sexually oriented business. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
Sexually oriented businesses are permitted as a conditional use in the LI Light Industrial
Zone District, provided that the use adheres to the requirements of the LI Zone District
and the following minimum standards:
related unmanned equipment structure, if over 200 square feet of
gross floor area or 10 feet in height, shall be located on the ground
and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
[2] If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures
shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
[3] Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
(b) Antennas located on towers, utility poles or light poles. The related
unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more than 200 square
feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in height and shall be
located in accordance with the minimum yard and buffer requirements of
the zoning district in which located and shall be screened from view of all
residential properties.
(3) Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any antenna or tower that is not
operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned,
and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within 90 days
of receipt of notice from the Borough of Shrewsbury notifying the owner of
such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within
said 90 days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's
expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision
shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. Upon the
dismantling and removal of a tower, the property on which the tower was
located shall be restored to a safe and landscaped condition compatible with
adjacent properties.
(4) Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers which are operating at the time of the
adoption of this section shall be allowed to continue theft usage as they
presently exist. Routine maintenance is permitted on such preexisting towers.
New construction other than routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall
comply with the requirements of this section. If the use of the tower has
terminated and the use is determined to be abandoned, the requirements for
removal in Subsection D(3) shall apply.
A. No person shall operate a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of any
existing sexually oriented business, or any church, synagogue, temple or other place
of public worship, or any elementary or secondary school or any school bus stop,
or any municipal or county playground or place of public resort and recreation, or
any hospital or any child-care center, or within 1,000 feet of any area zoned for
residential use. This subsection shall not apply to a sexually oriented business
already lawfully operating on the effective date of this act where another sexually
§ 94-9.9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-9.10
94:324
§ 94-9.11. Placement of small cell equipment and telecommunication facilities.
[Added 10-18-2021 by Ord. No. 2021-1090]
oriented business, an elementary or secondary school or school bus stop, or any
municipal or county playground or place of public resort and recreation, or any
hospital or any child-care center, is subsequently established within 1,000 feet, or a
residential district or residential lot is subsequently established within 1,000 feet.
B. Every sexually oriented business shall be surrounded by a perimeter buffer of at
least 50 feet in width with plantings, fence, or other physical divider along the
outside of the perimeter sufficient to impede the view of the interior of the premises
in which the business is located. The municipality may, by ordinance, require the
perimeter buffer to meet additional requirements or standards. This subsection shall
not apply to a sexually oriented business already lawfully operating on the effective
date of this act.
C. No sexually oriented business shall display more than two exterior signs, consisting
of one identification sign and one sign giving notice that the premises are off limits
to minors. The identification sign shall be no more than 40 square feet in size.
D. Sexually oriented businesses must confirm to the hours of operation ordinance.
A. Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section is to:
(1) Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications facilities, including
small cell equipment and wireless poles.
(2) Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in
public trust by the Borough and the county.
(3) Assure that any and all telecommunications carriers providing
telecommunications services in the Borough through telecommunications
facilities, including, but not limited to, small cell equipment and wireless
poles, comply with the laws, rules and regulations of the Borough.
(4) Assure that the Borough can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the
public health, safety and welfare.
(5) Enable the Borough to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly
evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition, and
technological development.
B. Definitions. The following words and phrases shall, for the purpose of this chapter,
have the meanings herein indicated:
CO-LOCATION — The use of a common wireless telecommunications tower or
a common structure by two or more wireless license holders or unlicensed holders
nevertheless regulated by the Federal Communications Commission or by one
wireless license holder for more than one type of communications technology and/
or the placement of a wireless telecommunications tower on a structure owned or
operated by a utility or other public entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface of, and the space above, any public
§ 94-9.10 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-9.11
94:325
street, road, lane, path, public way or place, sidewalk, alley, boulevard, parkway,
drive, and the like, held by the Borough or county as an easement or in feesimple
ownership, or any other area that is determined by the Borough or county
to be a right-of-way in which the Borough may allow the installation of
telecommunications facilities.
SMALL CELL EQUIPMENT and SMALL CELL FACILITY —
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — The transmission by wire, radio, optical, or any
electromagnetic system, between or among points specified by the user, of
information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the
information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER — Any provider of telecommunications
services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any structure or device used for the
purpose of providing, supporting, enabling, or otherwise facilitating
telecommunications, including, but not limited to, small cell equipment and
wireless poles, as defined herein.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE(S) —The offering of telecommunications
to the public, regardless of the telecommunications facilities used.
WIRELESS POLE — A column or post lawfully located in the Borough or county
right-of-way used solely to support small cell equipment and/or provide personal
wireless services, as defined by federal law.
Wireless facilities and transmission media, including femtocells, picocells and
microcells;
(1)
(2) Outside distributed antenna systems ("ODAS");
A personal wireless service facility as defined by the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended, that is attached, mounted or
installed on an existing pole or wireless pole in the public right-of-way and
used to provide telecommunications (defined herein) services.
(3)
A wireless service facility that meets both of the following qualifications:
Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than three cubic
feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary
enclosure of no more than three cubic feet; and
(a)
Primary equipment enclosures are not larger than 17 cubic feet in volume.
The following associated equipment may be located outside of the
primary equipment enclosure and, if so located, is not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, backup
power systems, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, and cutoff
switch.
(b)
(4)
C. Permitted zones and use for telecommunications facilities.
§ 94-9.11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-9.11
94:326
(1) Wireless poles, small cell equipment and small cell facilities existing or to
exist in the Borough or county rights-of-way shall be limited to placement
within the boundaries of Zoning Districts B-1, B-2, HC/PO, P-1, L1, LIR-60
and LIR-88, excluding any parcel designated as an historic site or structure or
any parcel adjacent thereto, or within the Historic District or any parcel
adjacent thereto, as defined in § 94-2.3, and as shown on the Official Zoning
Map of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
(2) Wireless poles, small cell equipment and small cell facilities existing or to
exist in the Borough or county rights-of-way shall be a conditional use within
Zoning District BD, and subject to all applicable local and state requirements
for conditional use approval, and the required notice as specified in
§ 94-9.11K below.
(3) Telecommunications facilities and new wireless poles shall not be permitted
in the following zones: R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5, R-5, PSC-1,
PSC-2, PSC-3, and within the Historic Overlay District and any parcel
adjacent thereto, as shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Borough of
Shrewsbury.
(4) Telecommunications facilities shall be located pursuant to Borough Code
§ 94-9.9.
D. Small cell facility license. The following shall apply to applications for all small
cell facilities and wireless poles:
(1) Any telecommunications carrier who desires to construct, install, operate,
maintain, or otherwise locate small cell facilities within the Borough,
including on any public right-of-way, for the purpose of providing
telecommunications services to persons and areas inside or outside the
Borough shall first obtain Land Use Board approval and a license from the
Borough in accordance with this section.
(2) For purposes of this section, the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance or location of telecommunications facilities includes the colocation
with any telecommunications facility.
(3) A telecommunications carrier who is issued a license pursuant to this section
who, during the license term [as defined in Subsection D(5) below], wishes to
add, supplement, or modify the telecommunications facility for which the
license was granted shall be required to obtain a new license in accordance
with the procedures established by this section, except that no new license
shall be required during the license term if the addition, supplement or
modification does not materially change the overall size, dimensions, technical
aspects, or appearance of the telecommunications facility, as reasonably
determined by the Borough Administrator in consultation with the Borough
Engineer. Nothing in this section shall be construed as eliminating or
otherwise altering the duration of the license term.
(4) No application to construct a new wireless telecommunications service facility
shall be approved unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Borough that no existing personal wireless
§ 94-9.11 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-9.11
94:327
telecommunications service facility within a reasonable distance, regardless
of municipal boundaries, can accommodate the applicant's needs. Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing personal wireless
telecommunications service facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed
facility shall consist of one or more of the following:
(a) No existing telecommunications facilities are located within the
geographic area required to meet the applicant's coverage demands.
(b) Existing telecommunications facilities are not of sufficient height to meet
the applicant's coverage demands and cannot be extended to such height.
(c) Existing telecommunications facilities do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
(d) Existing telecommunications facilities do not have adequate space on
which proposed equipment can be placed so it can function effectively
and reasonably.
(e) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antennas on the existing facility, or the antennas on
the existing facility would cause interference with the applicant's
proposed antenna.
(f) The applicant demonstrates that there are other compelling limiting
factors, including, but not limited to, economic factors, that render
existing facilities or structures unsuitable.
(5) License term. The term of a license issued pursuant to this section shall be no
less than five years and shall not exceed seven years.
E. Small cell facility license application process. Any person who desires a license
pursuant to this section shall file an application with the Borough Administrator.
The application shall include the following information:
(1) The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant.
(2) A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or
provided.
(3) A description of the telecommunications facility(ies).
(4) A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the licensee to
offer or provide telecommunications services.
(5) Preliminary engineering plans, a survey, specifications, and a network map of
the telecommunications facility to be located within the Borough, all in
sufficient detail to identify:
(a) The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed
telecommunications facility.
(b) The location of all antennas, cells and nodes for the applicant's proposed
§ 94-9.11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-9.11
94:328
telecommunications facility.
(c) The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunications, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in
the public way along the proposed route.
(d) The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions,
if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate or alter.
(e) Telecommunications facilities providers use various methodologies and
analysis tools, including geographically based computer software, to
determine the specific technical parameters of facilities, such as expected
coverage area, antenna configuration and topographic constraints that
affect signal paths. In certain instances there may be a need for expert
review by a third party of the technical data submitted by the provider.
The Borough may require such a technical review to be paid for by the
applicant for a telecommunications service facility. The selection of the
third-party expert may be by mutual agreement between the applicant and
the Borough or at the discretion of the Borough, with a provision for the
applicant and interested parties to comment on the proposed expert and
review its qualifications. The expert review is intended to be a sitespecific
review of technical aspects of the telecommunications facilities
and not a subjective review of the site selection. The expert review of the
technical submission shall address the following:
[1] The accuracy and completeness of the submission;
[2] The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies;
[3] The validity of conclusions reached; and
[4] Any specific technical issues designated by the Borough.
(f) A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
(g) Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the telecommunications
facilities.
(h) Information to establish the applicant's technical qualifications,
experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications facilities and
telecommunications services described in the application.
(i) Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the
telecommunications facilities and to offer or provide the
telecommunications services.
(j) Information to establish that the telecommunications facility meets the
current standards and regulations of any agency of the federal
government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities.
§ 94-9.11 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-9.11
94:329
(k) Information to establish that the proposed telecommunications facility
conforms to the requirements of the International Building Code and
National Electrical Code, as applicable.
(l) Proof of notice pursuant to the requirements set forth in Subsection K
below, Notification required by telecommunications facility providers.
(m) A copy of the Land Use Board approval.
F. Determination by the Borough Administrator for small cell facility licenses.
(1) Upon the Borough Administrator's determination that an application for a
license is complete, including obtaining Land Use Board approval, the
Borough Administrator, after consultation with the Borough Solicitor and
Borough Engineer, shall issue the determination.
(2) A determination shall be issued within 90 days of the applicant's submission
of a complete application.
(3) If the application is denied, the written determination shall include the reasons
for denial and be supported by facts upon which the denial is based.
G. Fees and escrows for small cell facility licenses.
(1) An application for a license under this section shall be accompanied by
payment of a $500 fee.
(2) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:30A-124, the Borough shall recover reasonable
professional fees for actual services incurred in the review of applications
under this section. The applicant shall make a deposit in an escrow for
professional fees in the amount of $2,500. If said escrow account contains
insufficient funds to enable the Borough to perform its review, the Chief
Financial Officer shall provide the applicant a notice of insufficient balance.
In order for review to continue, the applicant shall, within 15 days, post a
deposit to the account in an amount to be mutually agreed upon.
H. Assignment or transfer of small cell facility licenses. Ownership or control of a
license issued pursuant to this section may not, directly or indirectly, be transferred,
assigned or disposed of by sale, lease, merger, consolidation or other act of the
grantee, by operation of law or otherwise, without the prior consent of the Borough
as expressed by resolution.
I. General indemnification of Borough in connection with small cell facility licenses.
Each license grantee shall indemnify and hold the Borough and its officers,
employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any and all
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of suit
or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the
negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the
grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in
the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of its
telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering telecommunications
services over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed
or prohibited by this chapter or by a grant agreement made or entered into pursuant
§ 94-9.11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-9.11
94:330
to this chapter.
J. Revocation or termination of small cell facility licenses.
(1) The Borough may revoke a license granted under this section for the following
reasons:
(a) Construction or operation without a license.
(b) Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
(c) Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.
(d) Unauthorized assignment of a license.
(e) Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of the grantee's assets, or a
substantial interest therein.
(f) Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in any
application to the Borough.
(g) Abandonment of the telecommunications facility. A telecommunications
facility shall be deemed "abandoned" if it is either disconnected from
power service or unused for greater than six months. Abandoned
telecommunications facilities shall be removed by the owner. Should the
owner fail to remove the telecommunications facility, the Borough may
do so at its option, and the costs thereof shall be a charge against the
owner.
(h) Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
(i) Material violation of the Borough's Revised General Ordinances.
(2) In the event that the Borough believes that grounds exist for revocation of a
license, it shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or
noncompliance, providing a statement of the nature and general facts of the
violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of
time, not exceeding 30 days, to furnish evidence:
(a) That corrective action has been, or is being, actively and expeditiously
pursued to remedy the violation or noncompliance; and
(b) That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance; and
(c) That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction
less than revocation.
(3) The Borough shall consider the apparent violation or noncompliance in a
public meeting, with respect to which the grantee shall be given notice and a
reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.
K. Notification required by telecommunications facility providers.
(1) Any telecommunications carrier who desires to change the existing use of,
construct, install, operate, maintain, or otherwise locate a telecommunications
§ 94-9.11 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-9.11
94:331
facility in the Borough shall provide notice to property owners certified by
the Borough Administrator to be within 500 feet of the proposed
telecommunications facility.
(2) Notice.
(a) Notice shall be given to a property owner by:
[1] Serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown on the
current certified tax list, or his or her agent in charge of the property;
or
[2] Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail and regular mail to the
property owner at the address as shown on the said current certified
tax list, and service by mailing shall be deemed complete upon
deposit with the U.S. Postal Service.
(b) Notice pursuant to this section shall state the identity of the
telecommunications carrier; a description of the telecommunications
services that are or will be offered or provided; a description of the
location(s) of any telecommunications facilities; a description of the
telecommunications facilities to be installed; and the location of the
telecommunications facilities. The notice shall also advise that a copy of
the applicant's application is on file with the Borough Administrator and
may be reviewed by the public.
(3) Such other and further information as may be required by the Borough
Administrator.
(4) In the case of an application that seeks to construct, install, operate, maintain,
or otherwise locate a telecommunications facility or equipment on any
property owned or controlled by the county, including, but not limited to, a
county right-of-way, the applicant shall also provide notice to and obtain a
permit from the county authorizing the placement of such telecommunications
facility on any such property or right-of-way.
L. Land Use Ordinance not superseded. The requirements of this section shall be in
addition to, and shall not be in lieu of, any requirements imposed by the Borough's
Zoning Code. No license for a telecommunications facility shall be issued under
this section until an applicant obtains site plan approval, and the approval of any
variances from the Land Use Board.
M. Severability. If any subsection or provision of this section shall be held invalid in
any court of competent jurisdiction, the same shall not affect the other subsections
or provisions of this section, except so far as the subsection or provision so declared
invalid shall be inseparable from the remainder or any portion thereof.
§ 94-9.11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-9.11
94:332
ARTICLE X
Zoning District Regulations
§ 94-10.1. Zoning Map and schedule.
A. Establishment, authentication, maintenance and revisions of Zoning Map and
schedule.
(1) Zoning Map. The location and boundaries of the districts of the Borough are
hereby established as shown on the Zoning Map of the Borough of
Shrewsbury, New Jersey, which is attached hereto and is hereby made a part
of this chapter, together with all notations, references and designations shown
thereon.94
(2) Schedule. A schedule of area, yard and building requirements for zone districts
within the Borough of Shrewsbury is hereby established and is attached hereto
and is hereby made a part of this chapter, together with all notations,
references and designations shown thereon.95
(3) Authentication of Zoning Map and schedule. Subsequent to the adoption of
this chapter and any revisions to the Zoning Map and schedule of area, yard
and building requirements, copies of the Zoning Map and schedule shall be
referenced by ordinance number and date of adoption.
(4) Maintenance of the Zoning Map and schedule. Authenticated copies of the
Zoning Map and schedule shall be maintained in the office of the Borough
Clerk and Zoning Officer and shall be made available for public reference.
Copies of all or a part of the official Zoning Map may be reproduced for public
distribution. One authenticated copy shall be forwarded to the Monmouth
County Planning Board in accordance with § 94-3.13 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-16.
However, the copy of the official Zoning Map maintained in the office of the
Borough Clerk shall be the final authority as to the current status of zoning
districts in the Borough of Shrewsbury.
(5) Revisions to the Zoning Map and schedule.
(a) When, in accordance with the provisions of § 94-3.10 this chapter and of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., revisions are made in district boundaries or
other matters portrayed on the Zoning Map and changes or revisions are
made to the schedule, such changes will not become effective until the
Zoning Map has been amended, with an entry bearing the date of
adoption, ordinance number, a brief description of the change(s) and the
name of the person responsible for the Zoning Map or schedule change.
(b) Each ordinance amending the Zoning Map or schedule in any manner
shall include the provision that it shall not take effect until the Zoning
Map or schedule has been amended in accordance with these provisions.
(c) No changes of any nature shall be made to the Zoning Map or schedule
94. Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
95. Editor's Note: The Schedule of Zoning District Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 94-10.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.1
94:333
§ 94-10.2. Description of districts.
except in conformity with the above procedure. Any unauthorized
changes to the Zoning Map or schedule contents by any person or persons
shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
B. Interpretation of zone district boundaries.
(1) Zone district boundaries are intended to follow street, railroad, lot or property
lines or other natural lines, such as the center line of watercourses, ditches or
lagoons, unless such district or zone boundaries are fixed by dimension on the
Zoning Map or by description, and shall include contiguous riparian lands
subsequently acquired and/or filled, and lands acquired by the accretion or
stream diversion by natural causes.
(2) In constructing the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(a) Boundaries indicated as following the center lines of streets, highways or
alleys or streams, rivers or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such center lines.
(b) Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
(c) Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be
midway between the main tracks.
(d) Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in
Subsection B(2)(a) through (c) above shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Zoning Map shall be determined by the use
of the scale appearing thereon.
(e) Where a zone boundary fixed by dimensions approximately follows and
is not more than 20 feet distant from a lot line, such lot line shall be
construed to be the zone boundary.
A. The Borough of Shrewsbury is hereby divided into districts as follows:
R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone
R-1A Single-Family Residential Zone (Cluster Option)
R-1B Single-Family/Senior Citizen Residential Zone
R-2 Single-Family Residential Zone
R-3 Single-Family Residential Zone
R-4 Single-Family Residential Zone
R-4.5 Single-Family Residential Zone
R-5 Single-Family Residential Zone
PSC-3 Planned Senior Citizen Residential Zone [Added 6-21-2004 by Ord.
No. 837]
§ 94-10.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.2
94:334
AH-MF-8 Affordable Housing Multi-Family Overlay Zone [Added 12-15-2008
by Ord. No. 924]
B-1 Business Zone
B-2 Business Shopping/Office Center Zone
B-3 Business Service Zone [Added 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 925]
HC/PO Highway Commercial/Professional Office Zone
P-1 Professional Zone
LI Light Industrial Zone
LIR-60 Limited Industrial and Research Zone
LIR-88 Limited Industrial and Research Zone
B. The regulations set forth in this chapter for each district shall be minimum
regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class of structure or land within the
district, except as hereinafter provided.
C. No building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall be moved,
altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building or portion of a building
to be used, designed or arranged to be used for any purpose unless in conformity
with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which is it located.
D. Every main building shall be located on a lot as defined in this chapter.
E. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be reduced in
dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots
created after the effective date of this chapter shall meet the minimum requirements
established by this chapter.
F. For the purpose of this chapter, uses and structures in each district shall conform to
the standards of § 94-8.25, Off-street loading; § 94-8.26, Off-street parking; and
§ 94-8.34, Signs; which standards shall apply uniformly to each class of structure
or land within the district. Development applications not conforming to the
aforementioned sections shall require a variance or variances pursuant to this
chapter and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
G. Any application for a development which includes multifamily or single-family
attached residential development that is "approvable" and "developable," as defined
at N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.396, at a gross residential density of six units to the acre or more,
shall include an appropriate percentage of the residential units be set aside for lowand
moderate-income households. [Added 12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1055]
(1) This requirement shall apply to any multifamily or single-family attached
residential development, including the residential portion of a mixed-use
development, which consists of five or more new residential units, whether
permitted by a zoning amendment, a variance granted by a land use board, or
adoption of a redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan in areas in
need of redevelopment or rehabilitation, any of which has been adopted or
96. Editor's Note: Said statutory section is reserved.
§ 94-10.2 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.2
94:335
§ 94-10.3. Prohibited uses.
issued subsequent to the effective date of this Subsection G.
(2) For inclusionary projects in which the low- and moderate-income units are to
be offered for sale, the minimum set-aside percentage is 20%; for projects in
which the low- and moderate-income units are to be offered for rent, the
minimum set-aside percentage is 15%.
(3) This requirement does not create any entitlement for a property owner or
applicant for a zoning amendment, variance, or adoption of a redevelopment
plan or amended redevelopment plan in areas in need of redevelopment or
rehabilitation, or for approval of any particular proposed project.
(4) This subsection shall not apply to developments containing four or less
dwelling units.
(5) All subdivision and site plan approvals of qualifying residential developments
shall be conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this section.
(6) All subdivision and site plan approvals of qualifying residential developments
shall be conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of this section.
(7) Where a developer demolishes existing dwelling units and builds new
dwelling units on the same site, the provisions of this section shall apply only
if the net number of dwelling units is five or more.
A. Any use not specifically listed as a permitted use, an accessory use or a conditional
use shall be deemed a prohibited use. This provision shall be liberally construed as
protective of the zoning scheme, and any doubt shall be resolved in interpreting the
doubtful use as prohibited.
B. The following uses and activities are specifically prohibited in any zone in the
Borough of Shrewsbury:
(1) All billboards, signboards, advertising signs and devices not expressly related
to the business being conducted on the premises or otherwise specifically
permitted by this chapter.
(2) Auction markets.
(3) Outdoor sales of used vehicles not associated with a new vehicle dealership.
[Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
(4) Junkyards, automobile wrecking yards or disassembly yards or the sorting of
scrap metal, paper, rags or other scrap or recycled materials. [Amended
10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
(5) Yards for the sale of lumber and other such building materials. This provision
shall not apply to the sale of materials from a building on the site of which it
is being torn down.
(6) (Reserved)97
§ 94-10.2 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.3
94:336
§ 94-10.4. R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5 and R-5 Single-Family Residential Zone
Districts.
Regulations controlling the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5 and R-5 Residential Zone Districts
shall be as follows:
(7) Aviation fields, including heliports.
(8) Massage parlors that do not comply with Chapter 167 adopted October 16,
2006. [Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 98998]
(9) Gasoline, filling and service stations.
(10) Restaurants or other eating or refreshment places, including but not limited to
lunch wagons, diners, road stands or any food-dispensing establishments
which permit or provide facilities for the consumption of food out of doors on
their premises. Restaurants or other eating or refreshment places, unless
located in the B-2 Zone District. [Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
(11) Fuel storage, other than facilities for use on the premises.
(12) Flea markets as defined in Article II. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
(13) Store and shops primarily engaging in the retail sale or service of electronic
smoking devices, liquid nicotine or vapor products. [Added 10-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 989 and 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1041]
(14) Body art procedure establishments. [Added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1041]
(15) Pawnshops or pawn broker establishments. [Added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No.
1041]
(16) The sale or retail trade of firearms, explosives, or ammunitions, whether
conducted in retail establishments or through home businesses. [Added
10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1041]
(17) All classes (1 through 6) of cannabis establishment or cannabis distributors or
cannabis delivery services, including cannabis cultivators, manufacturers,
wholesalers, retailers, cannabis testing facilities, medical cannabis
dispensaries, clinical registrant or cannabis retailer, including any alternative
treatment centers deemed to hold a medical cannabis dispensary permit
pursuant to Section 7 of P.L. 2009, c. 307 (N.J.S.A. 24:61-7), are expressly
prohibited within the Borough of Shrewsbury. [Added 5-17-2021 by Ord. No.
2021-108899]
A. Permitted uses.
97. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(6), concerning adult bookstores, etc., was repealed 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989.
98. Editor's Note: This ordinance amended this subsection to add the reference to Ch. 167 and its 2006 adoption date. The
referenced provisions are located in Ch. 157, Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapy Businesses, adopted in 1976,
amended in entirety 10-16-2006 and subsequently amended in entirety 11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 973.
99. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Subsection B(17), Alternative treatment centers,
added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 1041.
§ 94-10.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.4
94:337
(1) A single detached house used as a residence by not more than one family.
(2) Farms and agricultural purposes. No storage of manure or other odor- or dustproducing
substances or use shall be permitted within 100 feet of any property
line.
(3) Borough parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings and uses as
are deemed appropriate and necessary by the Borough Council.
(4) Other public buildings of a cultural nature, provided that such buildings shall
be located on a lot minimum of 45,000 square feet in the R-1 Zone and 22,500
square feet in the R-2, R-3, R-4, R-4.5 and R-5 Zone. [Amended 10-1-2012
by Ord. No. 989]
(5) Fairs, bazaars, rummage sales, Christmas tree sales and similar functions or
fund-raising activities sponsored and conducted by any nonprofit religious,
charitable, philanthropic organization or any public service organization, such
as volunteer fire company, first-aid squad or parent-teacher association,
provided that such function or activity is located solely on property of the
entity sponsoring the function or activity or on property owned by, and with
the permission of, the Borough of Shrewsbury and provided further that such
function or activity is limited to a period not exceeding two weeks’ duration in
any calendar year. [Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
(6) Trailers of contractors actively engaged in construction work, provided that
said trailers are located on the project and are removed immediately upon the
completion of said construction.
(7) Community residences for the developmentally disabled, community shelters
for victims of domestic violence, community residences for the terminally ill,
community residences for persons with head injuries, and adult family care
homes for elderly persons and physically disabled adults, as defined and
limited by the Municipal Land Use Law. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Private garages, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.19.
(2) Family day care serving three or fewer children. [Amended 12-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 670]
(3) Other customary accessory uses and buildings, subject to § 94-5.8 of this
chapter, provided that such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not
include any activity commonly conducted as a business. Any such accessory
building or use shall be located on the same lot as the principal building.
(4) Customary farm buildings for the storage of products or equipment located on
the same parcel as the principal uses.
(5) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.34.
(6) Fences and hedges, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.16.
(7) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.26.
§ 94-10.4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.4
94:338
§ 94-10.5. R-1A Single-Family Residential (Cluster Option and Planned Senior
Citizen Development Option) Zone District. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No.
708; 8-3-1998 by Ord. No. 751; 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
Regulations controlling the R-1A Residential Zone District shall be as follows:
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article IX of this chapter.
(1) Places of worship.
(2) Cemeteries.
(3) Educational uses.
(4) Public utilities.100
D. Standards and regulations shall be in accordance with the schedule referred to in
§ 94-10.1 and a part of this chapter.
A. Permitted uses: same as § 94-10.4A for the R-1 Residential Zone District.
B. Permitted accessory uses: same as § 94-10.4B.
C. Conditional uses: same as § 94-10.4C.
D. Standards and regulations shall be in accordance with the schedule referred to in
§ 94-10.1 and further that a cluster option may be granted within an area designated
as R-1A on the Zoning Map in accordance with the additional provisions of
Subsection E below.
E. R-1A Single-Family Residential Zone (cluster option). Within the R-1A Single-
Family Residential Zone, the R-1 Zone regulations shall apply to conventional
development or subdivision. In addition, the cluster option may be approved by the
Land Use Board with the following standards:
(1) For purposes of calculating gross tract density, the developable tract area shall
not include any areas within the 100-year floodplain area as designated by the
Federal Insurance Rate Maps, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection floodplain maps on file with the Environmental Commission or
calculated flood-prone areas as approved by the Borough Engineer. A
conventional subdivision schematic, excluding the areas noted above, shall be
submitted to the Land Use Board for review to determine the maximum
number of dwelling units based upon the R-1 Residential Zone District
standards. The Land Use Board shall determine the maximum number of units
which the applicant may utilize for the cluster option.
(2) Cluster developments shall be based upon a design layout which will provide
that all proposed lots abutting existing lots of 22,500 square feet or more shall
be equal to or larger than such existing lots but need not be greater in area than
the lots required within the R-1 Zone District. All such lots shall conform to
the R-1 Zone District standards. The remaining developable tract area may be
100.Editor's Note: Former § 94-10.4C(5), Community residences for the developmentally disabled, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 831 and 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989.
§ 94-10.4 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.5
94:339
designed in accordance with the R-2 Zone District standards.
(3) Cluster developments shall be designed to preserve and protect sensitive
environmental features, including wetlands, flood-prone areas, marshes,
significant wooded areas, areas with shallow depth to water table and other
sensitive environmental features which may be identified from the
Environmental Commission Natural Resources Inventory Maps, the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Coastal Management Policies
or field surveys by the applicant and/or Environmental Commission in
accordance with §§ 94-5.13 and 94-5.27 of this chapter.
(4) Flood-prone and other sensitive environmental areas shall be protected from
future development through conservation easements or other forms of legal
restriction preventing construction and/or development other than that agreed
to by the Borough Land Use Board and Borough Council within designated
sensitive environmental areas.
(5) All cluster development lots shall provide for deed restrictions which will
prevent further subdivision for a period of not less than 30 years.
(6) The applicant shall provide an environmental impact statement in
conformance with requirements of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, CARFA Rules and Regulations, and the Borough
of Shrewsbury Environmental Commission.
(7) The applicant shall provide soil borings taken between December 31 and April
1 to determine soil types, seasonal depth to high-water table and subsurface
hydrological profiles in accordance with requirements and under the
supervision of the Borough Engineer in accordance with § 94-6.8B(23).
(8) The applicant shall provide a right-of-entry authorization to the property under
consideration for the Land Use Board, Environmental Commission, Borough
Engineer and their agents and consultants.
(9) All reasonable costs for review of cluster options, boring data and
environmental data by the Borough and its consultants shall be paid for by the
applicant to an escrow account to be established and maintained by the Land
Use Board for each application. Upon final approval, any remaining escrow
account funds shall be refunded to the applicant.
F. R-1A Single-Family Residential planned senior citizen development option. Within
the R-1A Single-Family Residential Zone, the planned senior citizen development
option may be approved by the Land Use Board with the following requirements:
(1) Coordinated development plan.
(a) The planned senior citizen development option shall provide for a
coordinated development plan for all contiguous parcels in the
development tract and shall include the area designated on the Zoning
Map as R-1B and contiguous parcels in the R-1A Zone under the same
ownership or control.
(b) The coordinated development plan shall provide for, but not be limited
§ 94-10.5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.5
94:340
to, coordinated vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation, utilities,
stormwater management, common open space and common open space
ownership by a homeowners' association unless the subdivision option
provided in § 94-10.6A(5)(h) pertaining to the property located in the
R-1B Zone is elected, recreation facilities and such other facilities as
are necessary to develop and maintain the development as a coordinated
development.
(c) Architectural design of buildings, the design of signage, streetlighting,
landscaping and pedestrian ways shall be coordinated to present a unified
appearance for the entire development.
(d) Upon approval of the coordinated development plan, the development
tract need no longer remain under the same ownership or control,
provided agreements, covenants and restrictions as are necessary or
required to establish the extent of the obligations of all owners within the
development tract for the maintenance of the open space areas within the
general development plan tract and the utilities, roadways, and other
common facilities within and used in connection with the general
development plan tract are entered into and duly recorded.
(e) The planned senior citizen development option shall include personal
care amenities which shall be available to residents in both the R-1A and
R-1B areas of the development.
(f) The minimum tract area shall consist of 65 contiguous acres within the
R-1A Zone and all the land in the R-1B Zone.
(2) Age of residents. Residents in said planned senior citizen development shall
conform with the age requirements as defined in "planned senior citizen
development" in this chapter.
(3) Uses permitted:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Attached single-family dwelling units within the same building,
hereinafter referred to as a "multiple dwelling," but no more than six such
units in any one building.
(c) Multifamily dwelling units in accordance with provisions of
§ 94-10.6A(4), Planned senior citizen residential developments, or
assisted living facilities or residences in accordance with the provisions
of § 94-10.6A(5), to be located within the area designated as R-1B on the
Zoning Map.
(d) Recreational and cultural facilities for the sole use of the residents of the
development and their guests, including the following: clubhouse,
shuffleboard courts and picnic grounds as specifically enumerated
hereinafter. Recreational and cultural facilities shall not be limited to the
foregoing and so that an applicant may propose additional facilities with
his submission. All such facilities shall be subordinated to the residential
§ 94-10.5 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.5
94:341
character of the area, and no advertising shall be permitted.
(e) The following uses may be permitted but are not required:
[1] A screened, unpaved, graveled area for the parking of accessory
vehicles not normally utilized for transportation, at a location and of
such size approved by the approving agency but not to exceed one
parking space for every five dwelling units. Such area shall not be
used in computing common open space.
[2] A screened area reserved for storage and care of maintenance
equipment of the development, not to exceed 5,000 square feet.
[3] A guard- or gatehouse at the main entrance, not to exceed 200 square
feet and not to exceed 16 feet in height.
[4] Garden plots, including raised beds (16 inches to 20 inches), for use
by residents.
[5] A greenhouse, including raised beds (16 inches to 20 inches), for use
by residents.
[6] Pet walkways.
(f) Model homes and/or sales office in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66
and any retail home decoration and furnishings sale facility operated by
the developer solely for the use of purchasers of dwelling units therein.
(g) Accessory uses. Accessory uses provided in § 94-10.4B, including
necessary accessory buildings and uses, utilities, facilities for street and
off-street parking facilities, and personal care amenities, but excepting
family day care servicing three or fewer children as would otherwise be
permitted under § 94-10.4B(2).
(h) Prohibited uses. All other uses shall be prohibited, including, without
limitation, all dwelling units not part of the site development plan
submitted by the applicant.
(4) Development standards. No building permits shall be issued or construction
commenced within the planned development except in accordance with a
general development plan herein described. Such general development plan
shall meet at least the following minimum requirements:
(a) Minimum area. The minimum area for a planned senior citizen
development shall be 65 contiguous acres under one ownership or control
within an R-1A Zone and the area zoned as R-1B on the Zoning Map.
(b) Density and housing unit distribution. There shall be no more than 2.5
dwelling units per gross acre for the entire tract included in the general
development plan. Notwithstanding the permitted densities, a planned
senior citizen development shall not have more than 1.670 units per acre
in the R-1A portion of the site and not more than 12.5 housing units per
acre in the R-1B portion of the site.
§ 94-10.5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.5
94:342
(c) Residential building and impervious surface coverage. Not more than
15% of the gross tract area shall be covered by residential buildings, and
not more than 35% of the site shall be covered by impervious surface.
(d) Common open space. Not less than 50% of the gross tract area shall be
devoted to common open space, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2, which
shall not be developed with buildings or impervious surfaces. All
common open space shall conform to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
(e) Residential development shall be designed as a unified development in
the R-1A and R-1B Zoning Districts west of Route 35 and south of
Sycamore Avenue.
(f) Setbacks.
[1] No building or structure shall be located closer than 25 feet from an
accessway, provided that all driveways fronting on said accessway
shall be 25 feet or more in length.
[2] No building or structure other than entrance gates or fences shall be
located within 75 feet of any exterior boundary line of the tract
abutting a residential district zone nor less than 75 feet along a
nonresidential zone district or railroad right-of-way. The setback
area may include any required buffer strip as provided herein.
[3] No building shall be located closer than 15 feet from a parking lot.
(g) Distance between single-family detached and single-family attached
residential buildings.
[1] There shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet between the sides of
single-family detached structures.
[2] For single-family attached structures oriented essentially at 90° to
each other, the minimum distance between the same shall be 30 feet.
[3] For single-family attached structures oriented essentially end-to-end
to each other, the minimum distance between the same shall be 50
feet.
(h) Off-street parking. Off-street parking shall conform with § 94-8.26.
(i) Lighting. Lighting shall be provided on the premises and installed at
street intersections and parking areas and at such other places as the Land
Use Board may require in accordance with the lighting standards in this
chapter.
(j) Accessways.
[1] Accessways shall be constructed in accordance with § 94-8.30,
Roadway construction, of this chapter, except as follows:
[a] Minor accessways shall have a paved roadway width of 30 feet.
§ 94-10.5 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.5
94:343
[b] Collector accessways shall have a paved roadway of 36 feet,
and the foregoing measurements shall exclude curb.
[c] Major accessway with public streets. A major accessway, not
to Sycamore Avenue, shall be provided and shall be designed
to provide for emergency access in the event of an accident,
construction or other temporary blockage of the roadway or a
portion of the roadway. The accessway shall be divided where
practicable, with each cartway not less than 22 feet in width,
with mountable-type curbing to help provide for emergency
access.
[d] Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with § 94-8.11, Curbs
and gutters, of this chapter.
[e] Emergency access, separate from the major accessway, shall be
provided.
[2] Provisions shall be made for the permanent maintenance of private
roadways located within a planned senior citizen development in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.3 pertaining to maintenance of
roadways, lighting, etc.
[3] Culs-de-sac of minor accessways and minor collector accessways
shall have a minimum curb radius in accordance with § 98-8.40.
[4] There shall be no parking on any of the major accessways.
[5] Residential courts shall provide a minimum curb diameter of 40 feet,
and further provided that each unit shall have a minimum parking
area of two spaces a minimum of 10 feet by 21 feet outside of the
forty-foot-diameter curb.
(k) Sidewalks shall conform to the requirements of § 94-8.33 and shall be
installed along the minor and collector accessways and the major
accessway on both sides within the development. Additional sidewalks
may be required by the Land Use Board to create a unified system of
pedestrian circulation within the development and interconnecting to
adjacent development, including shopping, park and municipal facilities.
(l) Buffer strip. There shall be provided a fifty-foot screening strip when the
development abuts a nonresidential zone or use, a state or county
highway or a railroad right-of-way and a twenty-five-foot buffer when
the development abuts a residential zone or use. Said buffer strip may be
included within any required setbacks.
(m) All on-site and off-site drainage shall be provided for in accordance with
the Borough requirements and applicable Borough regulations.
(n) Water and sewerage facilities. Sewage disposal and water distribution
systems, including fire hydrants, shall be approved by the Borough
Engineer, applicable utilities authority, the Department of Environmental
Protection and all other applicable bodies. No building permit shall be
§ 94-10.5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.5
94:344
issued unless and until plans for such facilities have been submitted to the
proper authority for approval and adequate provisions are made to ensure
that all necessary facilities shall be installed. All such facilities shall be
so constructed as to facilitate their connection to systems which may be
provided by the applicable utility.
(o) Driveways, walks and parking areas. There shall be provided a safe and
convenient system of driveways, walks and parking areas. Due
consideration shall be given in planning walks, ramps and driveways
consistent with applicable Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA)
design standards.
(p) Maximum building height for single-family detached or attached
dwelling buildings in a planned senior citizen development shall conform
to the requirements of the R-1A Zoning District. Maximum building
height for multifamily structures within the R-1B portion of the site shall
conform to the height requirements of the R-1B Zoning District.
(q) The Land Use Board may grant design waivers from the requirements of
this chapter and permit landscaped islands in the center of culs-de-sac,
provided that their maintenance and upkeep is not the responsibility of
the Borough.
(r) The Land Use Board may grant design waivers from the requirements of
this section to vary minimum distances between residential buildings by
not more than 10%, consistent with sound planning concepts, where the
plan provides for comparable privacy for affected residential uses.
(s) A planned senior citizen development shall provide at least one clubhouse
to serve the entire development, with a total habitable area equal to 10.5
square feet for each dwelling unit to be built in the development. In
computing the "interior habitable area," all space reserved for mechanical
equipment and storage shall be excluded. A multipurpose recreation room
facility shall also be provided within the multifamily development or
assisted living residence in the R-1B Zone. Such room and facilities shall
be open to all residents of the planned senior citizen development. The
initial clubhouse shall be completed and in operation before 50% plus one
dwelling unit has been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued
thereupon. Said clubhouse shall have an adjoining parking area so as to
comply with § 94-8.26, Off-street parking, with a minimum of one space
per 125 square feet of total habitable area of the clubhouse.
(t) Recreation areas shall comply with § 94-8.28 of this chapter.
(5) Outdoor recreation areas.
(a) Outdoor recreation facilities, including walkways, picnic areas and nature
trails, shall be provided and available to all planned development
residents. Walkways shall include resting benches spaced an average of
150 feet apart where the walkways are used primarily for walking
exercises. Other outdoor facilities may include a swimming or wading
pool, shuffleboard courts and other facilities which are consistent with a
§ 94-10.5 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.5
94:345
§ 94-10.6. R-1B Single-Family/Senior Citizen Residential Zone District.
Regulations controlling the R-1B Single-Family/Senior Citizen Residential Zone
District shall be as follows:
senior citizen residential population.
(b) Recreational facilities shall be attractively landscaped, with appropriate
walkways. An irrigation system shall be provided where grassed
recreation areas occur.
(c) Should topographic conditions or particular soil conditions permit, the
applicant may, as part of the recreation area, provide a lake for aesthetic
purposes, fire protection as well as water recharge and water retention
purposes.
(6) The Land Use Board may require the prospective developer of a planned
development to file a report of financial qualifications, prepared by a
recognized auditing firm, and such other documentation deemed necessary by
the Board, to determine the developer's capability of completing the proposed
development as part of its findings for a planned senior citizen development in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.
A. Permitted uses. [Amended 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 708; 8-3-1998 by Ord. No.
751]
(1) Single-family detached dwelling units in accordance with the R-1 Zone
District regulations.
(2) Borough parks, playgrounds and other such municipal buildings and uses as
are deemed appropriate and necessary by the Borough Council.
(3) Other public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature, provided that such
buildings shall be located on a minimum lot area of 45,000 square feet.
(4) Planned senior citizen residential developments as defined in this chapter
comprised of apartments, townhouse or other architectural design of
multifamily housing in accordance with the following:
(a) The maximum density shall be 12.5 units per gross acre within the R-1B
Zoning District portion of the overall planned senior citizen development.
All structures shall comply with minimum New Jersey Housing
Mortgage Finance Agency and U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development standards for senior citizen housing including minimum
dwelling unit size, number of units per structure, minimum distance
between buildings and other design standards.
(b) Dwelling unit sizes.
[1] Dwelling unit sizes for conventional age restricted housing units
shall provide minimum square footage of habitable living areas as
follows:
§ 94-10.5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.6
94:346
Type of Unit
Minimum Square
Footage
Efficiency 630
1 bedroom 720
2 bedroom 900
[2] No units shall have more than two bedrooms.
(c) All conventional multifamily housing development shall include
provisions for contracted services for meals and intermittent medical and
social services for a period of time to extend not more than three years
following the assumption of the facilities by the homeowners' association
at which time the homeowners' association may determine whether such
services shall be continued on a private or nonprofit basis.
(d) Recreation areas(s) shall be provided within the development site. 6 1/4%
of the gross tract area shall be provided for recreation areas and facilities
of which 1/2 of the area (3.125% of the site) shall be designed for active
recreation facilities, such as shuffleboard, a swimming pool, tennis
courts, boccie court, ball and/or playfield area. No active recreation
facilities shall be permitted in the front yard. Developments which are
part of a planned senior citizen development option in accordance with
§ 94-10.5F shall provide recreation facilities in accordance with the
provisions of that section.
(e) Buffers shall be provided abutting nonresidential zones at a minimum
depth of 50 feet in accordance with the provisions of § 94-8.6.
(f) Signs, subject to the provisions of §§ 94-8.43 and 94-10.5F(1)(c).
(g) Fences and hedges, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.16.
(5) Assisted living residences. Assisted living residences as defined in this chapter
shall be permitted for adults aged 55 and over. Said assisted living residences
shall include personal care amenities. All assisted living residences shall
include provisions for the services set forth in this section and for contracted
services for meals and intermittent medical and social services and such other
services as may be required by the State of New Jersey and any agency
regulating the ownership, maintenance and operation of an assisted living
residence. An assisted living residence shall be developed in accordance with
the following regulations:
(a) Density and housing unit distribution. There shall be no more than three
dwelling units per gross acre for the entire tract included in the general
development plan. Notwithstanding the permitted densities, a planned
senior citizen development with assisted living residences shall not have
more than 1.670 units per acre in the R-1A portion of the site and not
more than 13.5 housing units per gross acre in the R-1B portion of the
site.
§ 94-10.6 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.6
94:347
(b) All structures shall comply with minimum New Jersey Housing Finance
Agency, New Jersey Department of Health and United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development standards for the number of units per
structure, distance between buildings and other design standards.
(c) Dwelling unit sizes and requirements for ALR's.
[1] Dwelling unit sizes shall provide minimum square footage of
habitable living areas as follows:
Type of Unit
Minimum Square
Footage
Efficiency/suite 300
1 bedroom 400
2 bedroom 625
[2] No units shall have more than two bedrooms.
[3] Each dwelling unit shall contain a bathroom with a toilet, bathtub
and/or shower and hand washing sink.
[4] Each dwelling unit shall contain, at a minimum, a refrigerator, a
cabinet for food storage, a bar-type sink and space with electrical
outlets suitable for small cooking appliances, for example, a
microwave, a two-burner cooktop or a toaster oven.
(d) Parking shall be provided and constructed in accordance with the
provisions of § 94-8.26.
(e) Vehicular access.
[1] Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter or other
chapters of the Borough Code to the contrary, any assisted living
residence shall be required to construct and maintain a means of
vehicular access to the assisted living residence, whether designated
in plans or resolutions as a cartway, driveway, or by any other
means, in accordance with the construction standards for public
streets within the Borough.
[2] No assisted living residence shall be permitted which does not have
frontage on a public street unless vehicular access to a public street
is available through recorded easements and restrictions providing
access to public streets over access ways which have been improved
to meet Borough construction standards with security to ensure
maintenance for the effective life of those streets.
(f) Services required.
[1] An assisted living residence shall provide the following services to
residents. The ALR services shall be provided only to residents of
assisted living residences, persons visiting residents of assisted
living residences, the employees of assisted living residences and
§ 94-10.6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.6
94:348
residents of the planned senior citizen development in the R-1A
Zone, it being the intention that such services shall not be
commercial establishments open to the public at large.
[a] Assistance with personal care, nursing, pharmacy, dining,
activities, recreational and social work services to meet the
individual needs of each resident; and
[b] Resident transportation, either directly or by arrangement, to
and from health care services provided outside the residence, as
well as for transfer of records and resident information to and
from the service provider; and
[c] Security and accountability for residents and their personal
possessions; and
[d] Assistance in arranging for transportation to activities of social,
religious and community groups, in which residents choose to
participate.
[e] Emergency medical services.
[2] An assisted living residence shall maintain the following agreements
pertaining to services:
[a] A written referral and/or transfer agreement with: at least one
licensed acute care hospital in New Jersey; and at least one
licensed state, county or private psychiatric hospital in New
Jersey; and at least one New Jersey licensed long-term-care
facility.
[b] A written plan for arranging for emergency transportation of
residents for medical care and returning them to the assisted
living residence.
(g) Qualification of residents. The admission and residency requirements of
an assisted living residence shall restrict admission and occupancy to
residents who:
[1] Do not require twenty-four-hour-a- day, seven-day-per-week
nursing care; or
[2] Are not bedridden for more than 14 consecutive days; or
[3] Are not consistently and totally dependent in four or more of the
following activities: eating, bathing, dressing, grooming or toileting.
[4] Do not have a cognitive decline severe enough to prevent the making
of simple decisions regarding activities such as bathing, dressing and
eating, and cannot respond appropriately to cuing and simple
directions; or
[5] Do not require treatment of a Stage Three or Four pressure sore or
multiple Stage Two pressure sores; or
§ 94-10.6 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.6
94:349
§ 94-10.7. Business Zones [Amended 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 925101]
§ 94-10.7.1. B-1 Business Zone District. [Amended 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 925]
Regulations controlling the B-1 Business Zone District shall be as follows:
[6] Do not require more than assistance with transfer as defined in
N.J.A.C. 8:36-1.3; or
[7] Are not a danger to self or others; or
[8] Do not have a medically unstable condition and/or special health
problems, and a regimen of therapy cannot be appropriately
developed and implemented in the assisted living environment.
(h) Recreation areas shall be provided within the development site in
accordance with § 94-10.5F.
(i) Buffers shall be provided abutting nonresidential zones at a minimum
depth of 50 feet in accordance with the provisions of § 94-8.6.
(j) Signs, subject to the provisions of §§ 94-8.43 and 94-10.5F(1)(c).
(k) Fences and hedges, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.16.
(l) Upon approval of a general development plan which includes
development of the property located in the R-1B Zone for an assisted
living residence in accordance with this § 94-10.6(A)(5), the property
within the R-1B Zone shall be included in the overall general
development plan and either: 1) all open space areas and the utilities,
roadways, and other common facilities within and used in connection
therewith which are so designated or delineated on the general
development plan shall be owned and maintained by the organization
established in accordance with § 94-6.8A.1(6)(c); or 2) the property
located within the R-1B Zone may be subdivided from the remaining land
in the general development plan as a separate lot, independent of the
remaining portion or portions of the general development plan tract. In
the event the R-1B property shall be subdivided as herein provided, such
subdivision shall be conditioned upon and subject to such agreements,
covenants and restrictions of record as are necessary or required to
establish the extent of the obligations of the owner of property within the
R-1B Zone for the maintenance of the open space areas within the general
development plan tract and the utilities, roadways, and other common
facilities within and used in connection with the general development
plan tract. Notwithstanding the subdivision of the property located within
the R-1B Zone into a separate lot, access to the recreation and personal
care amenities located in the R-1B Zone shall be available to all residents
of the R-1A Zone, and all clubhouses, recreation facilities and other
common facilities located in the R-1A Zone shall be available to all
residents of the R-1B Zone.
101.Editor's Note: This ordinance amended this section to consist of only this heading. See also §§ 94-10.7.1 through 10.7.3
§ 94-10.6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.7.1
94:350
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Within any B-1 Zone, no building or land shall be used in whole or in part for
any industrial or manufacturing purpose or for any other than the following
specified purposes:
(a) Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail trade or service use, such as
but not limited to general merchandise stores; furniture, home furnishings
and equipment stores; household appliance, radio and television and
music stores; apparel and accessory stores; drugstores; jewelry stores;
barbershops; shoe repair shops; bakeries; laundromats; florist shops;
beauty shops; tailor shops; and similar service uses.
(b) Banks, fiduciary institutions and indoor theaters.
(c) Business and professional offices.
(d) Telephone exchanges, telegraph and express offices.
(e) Residential uses, either as a mixed use or as separate dwelling units.
[Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
(2) For the above uses, no wholesale merchandising or distributing shall be
permitted and no merchandise shall be carried or stored in or about the
building, structure, enclosure or land other than that intended to be sold at
retail within such building, structure, enclosure or land. No business or use
shall be carried on in connection with any merchandising establishments or
permitted in any building, structure or upon any land which is or is likely to be
injurious, obnoxious, offensive or dangerous, by reason of noise, smoke, odor,
gas, dust or other objectionable or hazardous features, or which for any reason
would hinder, interfere with or detrimentally affect the health, safety, comfort
or general welfare of the Borough.
(3) Only electric motive power shall be used for operating any machinery used
incidentally to a permitted use. No junk, defunct motor vehicles, scrap
materials or motor vehicles advertised for sale or held as stock-in-trade shall
be stored or allowed to remain out of doors.
B. (Reserved)102
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Private garages subject to the provisions of § 94-8.19.
(2) Other customary accessory uses and buildings, subject to § 94-5.8, provided
that such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity
commonly conducted as a business. Any such accessory use shall be located
on the same lot as principal building.
(3) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.34.
(4) Fences and hedges, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.16.
102.Editor's Note: Former § 94-10.7B, Prohibited uses, was repealed 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989.
§ 94-10.7.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.7.1
94:351
§ 94-10.7.2. (Reserved) [Added 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 925103]
§ 94-10.7.3. B-3 Business Service Zone. [Added 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 925]
Regulations controlling the B-3 Business Service Zone shall be as follows:
(5) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.26.
D. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article IX of this chapter.
(1) Places of worship.
(2) Educational uses.
(3) Public utilities.
E. Standards and regulations shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and with the schedule referred to in § 94-10.1 and contained herein.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the B-3 Business Service Zone is to permit the
development or redevelopment of lands within the district in a manner consistent
with smart growth principles by permitting land uses which are compatible with
mixed use development, and which are harmonious in character with surrounding
neighborhoods and the zone plan of the Borough. Development within the B-3 Zone
shall permit apartments as an accessory use to those uses permitted in this chapter.
Accessory apartments within this zone shall include affordable housing units for
low- and moderate-income families, in order to better promote the general welfare
and to create a realistic opportunity for the construction of low- and moderateincome
housing within the Borough of Shrewsbury in accordance with the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing Rules, N.J.A.C. 5:92 through N.J.A.C. 5:95.104
B. Permitted uses. Within the B-3 Zone, no structure or land shall be used in whole or
in part for any use or purpose other than the following:
(1) Stores and shops for the conduct of retail trade including stores and shops for
home furnishings, household appliances and goods, consumer electronics,
computer equipment and software, toys and games, cameras and photographic
equipment, food and beverages, music and musical equipment, pharmacies
and drugstores, cosmetics and beauty supplies, jewelry, optical goods, sporting
goods, health and personal care supplies, apparel and accessories, shoes,
luggage, florists, pets and supplies, art and collectible dealers, books, cards
and gifts.
(2) Establishments for the conduct of retail services including dry cleaners, tailor,
consumer electronics repair, personal and household goods repair, hair salon,
nail and skin care services, travel services, administrative and support services,
real estate sales and lending, packaging and shipping of household or personal
goods.
103.Editor's Note: This ordinance added this section as a reserved section.
104.Editor's Note: Said statutory sections are reserved provisions.
§ 94-10.7.1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.7.3
94:352
(3) Business and professional offices.
(4) Financial and insurance institutions including walk-in banks, credit unions,
consumer lending, mortgage and nonmortgage loan brokers, insurance sales,
income tax preparation, investment management and advice, and fiduciary
institutions.
(5) Child day-care centers which are licensed by the State of New Jersey to
operate.
(6) Essential Borough services.
C. Prohibited uses.
(1) Any use not listed as a permitted use or conditional use, and uses listed in
§ 94-10.3 are prohibited in the B-3 Zone.
(2) Laundromats shall be prohibited in the B-3 Zone.
(3) Medical uses categorized as, or licensed by the New Jersey Department of
Health and Senior Services as ambulatory care facilities, comprehensive
rehabilitation hospital, general acute care hospital, home health agency,
maternal and child health consortium, psychiatric hospital, residential drug
treatment facility, residential alcohol treatment facility, or special hospital.
(4) "Surgical care facility" as defined elsewhere in the chapter.105
(5) No wholesale merchandising or distributing shall be permitted, nor shall
merchandise be stored in or about the building or land other than that intended
to be sold at retail within said building or structure.
(6) All storage and retail sale of goods or services shall be conducted within the
building walls. The outdoor sales or storage of goods is expressly prohibited.
(7) No conduct of any business or use shall be carried out within a structure or
land which is likely to be injurious, obnoxious, offensive, or dangerous by
reason of noise, smoke, odor, gas, dust, or other objectionable or hazardous
features, or which for any other reason would hinder, interfere with or
detrimentally affect the health, safety, comfort or general welfare of the
Borough.
(8) All places of business engaged in direct sales to the public or merchandise
shall be closed to the public and the business therein, together with deliveries
to said premises, shall be prohibited before the hour of 6:00 a.m. or after the
hour of 10:00 p.m. on all days.
D. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Customary accessory structures subject to the provisions of § 94-5.8, provided
such uses and structures are incidental to the principal use and do not include
any activity commonly conducted as a business. Any such accessory use or
structure shall lie on the same lot as the principal building or use.
105.Editor's Note: See Art. II.
§ 94-10.7.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.7.3
94:353
(2) Signs subject to the provisions of § 94-8.34.
(3) Fences and hedges subject to the provisions of § 94-8.16.
(4) Off-street parking in accordance with the Residential Site Improvement
Standards, as well as the provisions of § 94-8.26. Shared parking may be
utilized for commercial and residential components of a mixed use
development, provided the applicant satisfactorily demonstrates that adequate
off-street parking shall be provided for both residential and nonresidential uses
during times of peak demand.
(5) Accessory apartments constructed to provide low- and moderate-income
housing, and ancillary off-street parking and utilities infrastructure. Where
accessory apartments are constructed a minimum of two units, and a maximum
of eight units per gross acre shall be constructed as part of any single principal
use.
E. Conditional uses subject to the provisions of Article IX of this chapter.
(1) Places of worship.
(2) Educational uses.
(3) Public utilities.
F. Bulk standards and regulations. All uses and structures erected pursuant to this
chapter shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and with the
schedule of bulk standards and regulations referred to in § 94-10.1 and contained
herein.
G. Low- and moderate-income housing obligations.
(1) The developer of any nonresidential use constructed in accordance with this
chapter shall be required to satisfy the affordable housing obligation in
accordance with the Growth Share Ordinance of the Borough. All or some of
the affordable housing obligation may be satisfied by making payments in lieu
of constructing the affordable housing units. These payments shall be made
pursuant to the applicable criteria of COAH.
(2) The developer, at its option, may satisfy the affordable housing obligation
through the construction of affordable housing units on site in the form of
accessory apartments. Accessory apartments shall be constructed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-6.8.106 In such mixed use developments, a
minimum of 20% of accessory apartments constructed shall be low- and
moderate-income units.
(3) As a compensatory benefit to constructing affordable housing, developments
which are designed to contain accessory apartments shall conform to the
following modifications to the Table of Zoning and Bulk Standards for the B-3
Zone:
106.Editor's Note: Said statutory section is a reserved provision.
§ 94-10.7.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.7.3
94:354
§ 94-10.8. B-2 Business Shopping/Office Center Zone District.
Regulations controlling the B-2 Business Shopping/Office Center Zone District shall be
as follows:
(a) Maximum impervious coverage: 75%.
(b) Maximum building coverage: 50%.
(c) Maximum building height: 45 feet or three stories.
(d) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.60.
(4) All affordable housing units shall comply with N.J.A.C. 5:97-9107 and the
Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC).
(5) All improvements constructed as part of the residential component of a mixed
use development shall be in accordance with the Residential Site Improvement
Standards found at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
A. Permitted uses. No building shall hereafter be erected and no existing building shall
be moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt nor shall any land be designed, used or
intended to be used for any purpose other than the following:
(1) Shopping centers incorporating those uses permitted in the B-1 Business Zone.
It is the intent of this chapter that development in the B-2 Zone District situated
between White Street and Monroe Avenue shall achieve the Master Plan
objective of becoming a commercial and business center.
(2) Restaurants and other establishments serving food are permitted in shopping
centers provided that at least one parking space for each 50 square feet of gross
floor area is provided. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
B. Prohibited uses. In addition to prohibited uses included in § 94-10.3, residential
uses and dwellings are hereby prohibited within the B-2 Zone District.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Private garages, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.19.
(2) Other customary accessory uses and buildings, subject to § 94-5.8, provided
that such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity
commonly conducted as a business. Any such accessory use shall be located
on the same lot as the principal building.
(3) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.34.
(4) Fences and hedges, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.16.
(5) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.26.
D. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article IX of this chapter.
107.Editor's Note: Said statutory section is a reserved provision.
§ 94-10.7.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.8
94:355
§ 94-10.9. HC/PO Highway Commercial/Professional Office Zone District.
Regulations controlling the HC/PO Highway Commercial/Professional Office Zone
District shall be as follows:
(1) Public utilities.
E. Standards and regulations shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and with the schedule referred to in § 94-10.1 and contained herein.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Any use permitted in the B-1 Zone District, except shopping centers.
(2) Automobile sales of new motor vehicles with used motor vehicles as accessory
sales only and only if located on the same lot as new motor vehicle sales, and
automobile servicing and repair, provided that any repairs, vehicles processing
and sale offices shall be contained within a structure. [Added 10-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 989]
(3) Any use permitted in the P-1 Zone District.
(4) Any use permitted in Subsection A(1) of the Light Industrial Zone District,108
subject to the same requirements therein. [Added 7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 737;
amended 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076]
B. Prohibited uses.
(1) Any prohibited uses contained in § 94-10.3.
(2) Residential uses and dwellings are hereby prohibited with the HC/PO Zone
District.
(3) Industrial, manufacturing or warehousing, including miniwarehousing and
including such prohibited uses listed in the LI Light Industrial Zone District in
§ 94-10.11B.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Private garages, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.19.
(2) Other customary accessory uses and buildings, subject to § 94-5.8, provided
that such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity
commonly conducted as a business. Any such accessory use shall be located
on the same lot as the principal building.
(3) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.34.
(4) Fences and hedges, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.16.
(5) Off-street loading, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.25.
(6) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.26.
108.Editor's Note: See § 94-10.11A(1).
§ 94-10.8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.10
94:356
§ 94-10.10. P-1 Professional Zone District.
Regulations controlling the P-1 Professional Zone District shall be as follows:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Offices and facilities of medical doctors, dentists, architects, engineers,
lawyers, insurance agents, accountants, land surveyors, planners or related
professional services licensed by the State of New Jersey.
(3) Within the P-1 Zone District on Sycamore Avenue, the following additional
uses are permitted: banks, lending or other fiduciary facilities, realtors and
municipal buildings and uses as are deemed appropriate by the Borough
Council.
(4) Other public buildings of a cultural nature. [Amended 10-1-2012 by Ord. No.
989]
(5) Fairs, bazaars, rummage sales, Christmas tree sales and similar functions or
fund-raising activities sponsored and conducted by any nonprofit religious,
charitable, philanthropic organization or any public service organization, such
as volunteer fire company, first-aid squad or parent-teacher association,
provided that such function or activity is located solely on property of the
entity sponsoring the function or activity or on property owned by, and with
the permission of, the Borough of Shrewsbury, and provided further that such
function of activity is limited to a period not exceeding two weeks’ duration in
any calendar year. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
(6) Trailers of contractors actively engaged in construction work, provided that
said trailers are located on the project and are removed immediately upon the
completion of said construction.
B. Architectural requirements.
(1) Within the Patterson Street P-1 Zone District, converted and new professional
offices shall be designed to be compatible in scale, construction and facade
treatment with the residential character of buildings within the Zone District in
accordance with § 94-5.20.
(2) Within the Sycamore Avenue P-1 Zone District, all new construction and
converted structures, including accessory structures, shall have an exterior
architectural style of a colonial or early American nature which shall be
compatible with and complementary to the existing historical structures and
character of the P-1 District and other historic structures on Sycamore Avenue
within the Borough.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Private garages, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.19.
(2) Family day care serving three or fewer children. [Amended 12-13-1993 by
Ord. No. 670]
§ 94-10.10 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.10
94:357
§ 94-10.11. LI Light Industrial Zone District.
Regulations controlling the LI Light Industrial Zone District shall be as follows:
(3) Other customary accessory uses and buildings, subject to § 94-5.8 of this
chapter, provided that such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not
include any activity commonly conducted as a business. Any such accessory
building or use shall be located on the same lot as the principal building.
(4) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.34.
(5) Fences and hedges, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.16.
(6) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.26, and further provided
that all parking must be located to the rear or side of buildings within that zone,
and no such parking area shall be located closer than 50 feet to any street or
closer than 10 feet to any side or rear property line.
D. Conditional uses. Subject to the provisions of Article IX of this chapter.
(1) Places of worship.
(2) Educational uses.
(3) Public utilities.
(4) Philanthropic or charitable uses.109
E. Standards and regulations shall be in accordance with the schedule referred to in
§ 94-10.1 and contained in this chapter.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Within any LI Zone and except as provided in §§ 94-4.1 through 94-4.7
hereof, no building or land shall be used in whole or in part for any other than
the following purposes:
(a) Any "light industry," which is hereby defined as any industry which
manufactures, processes, assembles or otherwise treats products, the
manufacture, assembly or treatment of which does not cause or result in
or will not tend to cause or result in toxic or objectionable or corrosive
fumes, vapors, odors, effluent, gas, smoke, dust, glare, flashes or
excessive noise or vibration, including buildings and structures for offices
and distribution purposes incidental to the light industry herein defined,
and which light industry purpose conforms to the following:
[1] Any and all manufacturing, processing, assembling or treatment
shall be carried on within and confined to an enclosed structure or
structures.
[2] Any and all buildings and structures used for light industry shall
109.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(5), regarding community residences, which immediately followed this subsection,
was repealed 10-5-2020 by Ord. No. 1076.
§ 94-10.10 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.11
94:358
comply with the Schedule of Zoning District Regulations, except
that for any and all buildings and structures located within the LI
Zone District east of the railroad (Block 31, Lot 1) shall be set back
at least 150 feet from the center line of any public street or public
road on which the premises abuts or fronts. The space provided for
a front yard setback, except sidewalks and such reasonable ways
for ingress and egress to and from the premises or any building or
structures thereon from and to any public street or road, shall be
grass-seeded and landscaped and remain at all times free of parking,
loading and unloading. No building or structure on any property in
any LI Zone shall be used, placed or erected nearer than 15 feet of
a side yard line and 30 feet of a rear yard line to any building or
structure or any other property.
(b) New automobile sales facilities, including appurtenant automobile
servicing.
(c) All uses permitted in the P-1 Zone.
(d) Banks and fiduciary institutions.
(e) Indoor theaters.
(f) Business and professional offices.
B. Prohibited uses. Within any LI Zone, no building or land shall be used in whole or
in part for purposes, including but not limited to the following purposes:
(1) Any uses prohibited in § 94-10.3.
(2) Any uses allowed or permitted in B-1 or B-2 Zones, with the exception of
those specifically permitted in Subsection A above.
(3) Any of the following principal uses or any principal uses similar to the
following:
Animal hospitals or kennels housing more than three animals and nearer than
100 feet to any residential zone
Asbestos manufacturing
Asphalt plants
Automobile wrecking
Boiler shops, steel car or locomotive shops, railway repair shops and metal
working shops and all shops or industries operating reciprocating hammers or
reciprocating chisels
Brick, pottery, tile and terra-cotta manufacturing
Celluloid, pyroxylin or plastic manufacturing or explosive or inflammable
cellulose or pyroxylin products manufacturing or storage
Cupola or metal-smelting furnace
Dye or dyestuff manufacturing
§ 94-10.11 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.11
94:359
Flour or grain mill
Forge or foundry works
Gas (illuminating or heating) manufacture or storage
Grain drying or poultry feed manufacturing from refuse, mash or grain
Hair or hair products manufacturing
Junkyards
Linoleum, oilcloth or oiled goods manufacturing
Meat packing
Metal or ore reduction or smelting
Motels
Paper and pulp manufacturing
Plaster manufacturing
Potash manufacturing or refining
Rock or stone crusher, mill or quarry
Rubber, caoutchoue or gutta-percha manufacturing or treatment from crude
or scrap material or the manufacturing of articles therefrom or from balata
Sewage disposal plant, except by the municipality
Shoeblacking or shoe polish or stove polish manufacturing
Slaughterhouse, including packing and storage for wholesale
Soda ash, caustic soda or washing compound containing chlorine or
bleaching powder manufacturing or refining
Steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill
Storage, drying, cleaning of iron, junk, rags, glass, cloth, paper or clipping,
including sorting, refining, baling, wool pulling and scouring
Tannery
Tar or asphalt roofing or waterproofing manufacturing
Tourist camp or trailer camp
Vinegar manufacturing
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Private garages subject to the provisions of § 94-8.19.
(2) Other customary accessory uses and buildings, subject to § 94-5.8, provided
that such uses are incidental to the principal use and do not include any activity
commonly conducted as a business. Any such accessory use shall be located
on the same lot as the principal building.
(3) Signs, subject to § 94-8.34.
(4) Fences and hedges, subject to § 94-8.16.
(5) Off-street loading, subject to § 94-8.25.
§ 94-10.11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.11
94:360
§ 94-10.12. LIR-60 and LIR-88 Limited Industrial and Research Zone Districts.
Regulations controlling the LIR-60 and LIR-88 Limited Industrial and Research Zone
Districts shall be as follows:
(6) Off-street parking, subject to § 94-8.26.
D. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article IX of this chapter.
(1) Public utilities.
(2) Sexually oriented business is a conditionally permitted use subject to the
provisions of Article IX. [Added 10-1-2012 by Ord. No. 989]
E. Standards and regulations shall be in accordance with the schedule referred to in
§ 94-10.1 and contained in this chapter.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Office buildings for a scientific research or engineering facility.
(2) Office buildings for executive, administrative, business or professional users
and purposes, provided that the same are of a nonmanufacturing nature. The
permitted uses are such as, but not limited to, insurance, banking, data
processing and computer operations.
B. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Private garage space for the storage of vehicles utilized in conjunction with a
permitted used within the principal building(s).
(2) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.26 and Subsection D(2)
below.
(3) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.34.
(4) Fences and hedges, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.16.
(5) Buffers, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.6.
C. Conditional uses, subject to the provisions of Article IX of this chapter.
(1) Public utilities.
(2) Places of worship.
D. Standards and regulations in accordance with the schedule referred to in § 94-10.1
and a part of this chapter and also as follows:
(1) No building shall be constructed within 150 feet of any property zoned for
residential use in a LIR-88 Zone District or 75 feet in a LIR-60 Zone District.
(2) Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with § 94-8.26 and
shall be located as follows:
(a) Within 800 feet of Broad Street in any yard not closer than 20 feet to any
§ 94-10.11 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.12
94:361
§ 94-10.13. Areas of special flood hazard.110 [Amended 8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 811;
12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
street line or rear property line.
(b) In the area beyond the eight-hundred-foot line, in any yard, but not in any
front or side yard, except for the installation of a parking area for visitors
and the handicapped, but not closer than 50 feet to any street line or
property line.
(c) Within an LIR-60 Zone District, within any side or rear yard but not in a
front yard nor closer than 15 feet to any property line.
A. Purpose.
(1) The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Shrewsbury are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affects the public health, safety and general welfare.
These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas
of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities and, when
inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood
damage, also contribute to the flood loss.
(2) It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by provisions designed to:
(a) Protect human life and health.
(b) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control policies.
(c) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
(d) Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
(e) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges, located in
areas of special flood hazard.
(f) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
(g) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
(h) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
110.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 122, Flood Hazard Areas.
§ 94-10.12 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.13
94:362
B. Applicability. Any and all lands or portions of lands which extend into, traverse or
lie within the areas of special flood hazard or floodplains as delineated and defined
below shall be subject to the rules and regulations as set forth herein as well as the
other development regulations applicable to the zone district in which said lands are
placed:
(1) The areas of special flood hazard identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
by the Federal Insurance Administration for the Borough of Shrewsbury,
Monmouth County, New Jersey, dated August 1, 1979, and as may be
amended.
(2) Maps prepared in 1980 and 1981 by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection delineating flood hazard areas which are on file with
the Borough Clerk.
(3) In areas which are not mapped, flood-prone areas may be delineated by
engineering calculation for a 100-year design storm in a manner acceptable to
the Borough Engineer.
(4) In cases where there are conflicts between maps and/or design storm
calculations, the more-stringent shall apply.
C. Prohibited uses. No person shall hereafter engage in or cause other persons to
engage in any of the following prohibited activities or land uses within any portion
of a flood hazard area, except as permitted as a lawful preexisting use pursuant to
Article IV of this chapter:
(1) The placing, depositing or dumping of any solid waste.
(2) The dumping, disposal or discharge of pesticides, domestic or industrial
wastes, radioactive materials, petroleum products or other hazardous
materials, except as authorized under other provisions of law, including
authorized Mosquito Control Commission programs.
(3) Any use which is not permitted in the district regulations of Article X of this
chapter for the zone district in which the flood hazard area is located.
D. Regulated uses. For purposes of this subsection, regulated uses are activities and
land uses within the flood hazard area which:
(1) Are not prohibited under Subsection C.
(2) Result in excavation, fill or grading.
(3) Require channel modification or relocation.
(4) Require, under the terms of this chapter, approval of a subdivision, site plan,
or conditional use or require a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c,
40:55D-70d and 40:55D-76a.
(5) Require the erection of a structure or building (temporary and permanent).
E. Floodplain encroachment permit required.
§ 94-10.13 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.13
94:363
(1) Subject to the provisions of § 94-10.13P of this chapter, no person shall
hereafter engage or cause other persons to engage in any development or
regulated use in a flood hazard area as defined herein unless and until such
person shall have applied for and received from the administrative officer
(Zoning Officer) a floodplain encroachment permit.
(2) Where a lot, tract or parcel is proposed for development and a portion of said
lot, tract or parcel lies within a flood hazard area, a zoning permit may be
issued without the prior approval and issuance of a floodplain encroachment
permit, provided that said development does not in any way during or as a
result of construction or development disturb the natural condition of or
encroach upon the flood hazard area and/or result in any man-made change to
the flood hazard area, including the placement therein of buildings or
structures or mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling;
and provided moreover that said development does not require site plan,
subdivision or conditional use approval nor require the issuance of any
variance. The administrative officer (Zoning Officer) may require such
information prior to the issuance of the zoning permit and impose such
conditions to assure that the development does not disturb or encroach upon
the flood hazard area.
(3) Minor uses or activities within a flood hazard area, such as, but not limited to,
gardens, flower beds, open fences, temporary play equipment, lawn furniture
or the removal of dead or diseased trees, which are accessory to and normally
associated with the enjoyment of a single-family dwelling and which, in the
opinion of the administrative officer (Zoning Officer), do not alter or increase
the flood hazard do not require a floodplain encroachment permit.
(4) Practices within a flood hazard area that are related to a farm, such as terracing,
construction of diversions, subsurface drainage, construction of grassed
waterways and dug ponds, shall be designed and constructed under the
supervision of the Freehold Soil Conservation District and shall be considered
a regulated use for which the issuance of a floodplain encroachment permit is
required.
F. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the administrative officer (Zoning Officer)
to issue or deny an application for a floodplain encroachment permit after
consultation with the Borough Engineer and the Construction Official in
accordance with the following. He shall:
(1) Review all such applications to determine that the permit requirements of this
section have been satisfied.
(2) Review all such applications to require that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required.
(3) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with
§ 94-10.13B, obtain, review and reasonably utilize other base flood elevation
data available from a federal, state or other source, upon approval and
acceptance by the Borough Engineer, in order to administer this section.
§ 94-10.13 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.13
94:364
(4) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including the basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.
(5) Review all zoning permits to determine if the proposed development is located
in the floodway; if located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment
provisions of § 94-5.27 are met.
(6) Determine that the development complies with the design standards of
§ 94-5.27.
(7) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual lowest floor elevation (in relation to mean
sea level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 94-10.13H.
(8) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
section.
(9) Alteration of watercourses:
(a) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Insurance Administration.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
(10) For any development application involving a regulated use and for which
approval of a subdivision, site plan, conditional use or a variance is required,
the administrative officer (Zoning Officer) shall refer said application to the
Land Use Board for review and approval, approval with conditions or denial
of the floodplain encroachment permit in accordance with § 94-10.13I.
G. Duties and responsibilities of the Land Use Board. In those cases where an
application for development requires a floodplain encroachment permit for a
regulated use as a precondition to the issuance of a zoning permit as set forth in
§ 94-10.13F, then the Land Use Board shall have the same power to act on the
application for a floodplain permit subject to the same restrictions and requirements
as the Land Use Board.
H. Application procedures.
(1) Where an application for development is classified as a regulated use within a
flood hazard area, the applicant shall submit for a floodplain encroachment
permit the following to the administrative officer (Zoning Officer):
(a) An application fee.
(b) Four copies of the floodplain encroachment application form and plans
§ 94-10.13 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.13
94:365
showing the following information:
[1] A plan, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures,
fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the
foregoing.
[2] The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including the basement) of all structures.
[3] The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any
nonresidential structure has been floodproofed.
[4] Plans showing how any nonresidential floodproofed structures will
meet the floodproofing criteria of § 94-5.27F.
[5] A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(2) Distribution.
(a) The administrative officer (Zoning Officer) shall distribute the
application form and plans as follows:
[1] One copy to the Construction Official.
[2] One copy to the Zoning Officer.
[3] Two copies to the Borough Engineer's office.
(3) All information shall be complete, responsive and accurate to the best of the
applicant's knowledge and ability and, if required, be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer, architect and/or land surveyor.
(4) Declaration of completeness of submission of additional information. Within
30 days of its submission, the administrative officer shall take action on an
application for a floodplain encroachment permit. Such action may approve,
deny or declare incomplete said application or notify the applicant that the
development requires approval by the Land Use Board. The applicant shall be
notified in writing of the action taken. If the application is incomplete, the
applicant shall be notified of the additional items or information required to
complete the application. Failure of the applicant to furnish such information
within 20 days of being so notified will result in denial of the application. The
administrative officer shall not issue a floodplain encroachment permit unless
a favorable report has been issued by the Borough Engineer's officer and any
required prior approval of the Land Use Board has been granted.
I. Development applications to be consolidated with floodplain encroachment permit
applications.
(1) Any person who intends to apply for a floodplain encroachment permit
hereunder, and who further intends to apply for conditional use approval, for
subdivision approval, for site plan approval or for any variance pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c, 40:55D-70d or 40:55D-76a shall consolidate all
§ 94-10.13 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.13
94:366
information required by the floodplain encroachment application to be platted
with all tentative and final subdivision plats, site plans or other such plans
submitted pursuant to this chapter. Additional copies of the floodplain
encroachment application form shall be submitted as required by the Board.
(2) Where platted information has been consolidated as herein required, the Land
Use Board shall consider simultaneously the application for a floodplain
encroachment permit and the application for subdivision, site plan, conditional
use or variance approval.
(3) Where platted information has been consolidated as herein required, such
consolidation shall not constitute a waiver of the requirements of any other
provision of this chapter or any other ordinance, except that the Land Use
Board may refrain from taking any action on such floodplain encroachment
permit application until final subdivision, site plan, conditional use or variance
approval is granted or denied.
(4) This subsection is in no way intended to excuse any applicant for subdivision
or site plan approval from any other applicable provisions of this chapter or
any other provisions of law but is solely intended to eliminate the necessity for
dual submission.
J. A floodplain encroachment permit may be issued if, after review and consideration
of the application, with due regard for the criteria of this chapter, the use or activity
as proposed by the applicant, or as conditioned by the approving authority:
(1) Has low flood damage potential.
(2) Neither obstructs flood flows nor increases flood heights or velocities unduly,
whether acting alone or in combination with other existing or expected uses.
(3) Does not increase significantly the rate of local runoff, erosion and
sedimentation.
(4) Does not degrade significantly the water-carrying capacity of any delineated
floodway or channel.
(5) Does not degrade significantly the quality of surface water or the quality and
quantity of groundwaters.
(6) Does not stress unduly the environment of the floodplain.
(7) Does not require channel modification or relocation.
(8) Does not involve the storage of hazardous materials.
(9) Does not require excessive fill.
(10) Complies with the design standards of § 94-5.27.
(11) Is elevated in accordance with § 94-5.27E in the case of residential structures,
or is elevated or floodproofed in accordance with § 94-5.27F in the case of
nonresidential structures.
§ 94-10.13 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.13
94:367
K. Conditional issuance. The approving authority may impose such conditions on
regulated uses as it deems necessary to promote and protect the public safety, health
and welfare, to protect public and private property, and to preserve, protect and
enhance the natural environment of the floodplain.
L. Certification prior to occupancy. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
for buildings or structures erected within a special flood hazard area, an engineer or
architect licensed in the State of New Jersey must certify that such buildings and
structures have been built to comply with § 94-5.27E, F and/or G, as applicable.
M. Revocation of floodplain encroachment permits. Floodplain encroachment permits
may be revoked by the municipal agency or administrative officer (Zoning Officer)
for any violation of these regulations or for violations of any permit conditions.
Continuation of the use or activity subsequent to revocation shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter.
N. Penalties. Any persons engaging in a use or activity prohibited in this section or
engaging in an activity without receiving a floodplain encroachment permit where
one is required shall be subject to the penalties of § 94-3.9A.
O. Design waivers. An applicant desiring a waiver of the design conditions and
standards required for the issuance of a floodplain encroachment permit may appeal
to the Land Use Board for a waiver in accordance with § 94-5.27J.
P. Maintenance, repair, expansion and reconstruction of uses within a flood hazard
area. Uses of land or structures in a flood hazard area which lawfully existed on or
before the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to remain, subject to the
following conditions:
(1) Routine maintenance and repair of preexisting structures are permitted and do
not require a floodplain encroachment permit.
(2) No preexisting structure or use defined as a regulated use in a floodplain shall
be expanded or enlarged unless a floodplain encroachment permit has been
received.
(3) If a preexisting structure is damaged by any means, including floods, to the
extent that the cost of reconstruction or repair exceeds 50% of the reproduction
cost, such structure shall not be reconstructed unless a floodplain
encroachment permit has been applied for and received.
(4) If a structure is substantially and lawfully under construction on or before the
effective date of the regulations, then such a structure may be completed
without a floodplain encroachment permit.
(5) No preexisting use shall be changed or modified so as to increase its flood
damage potential, unless a floodplain encroachment permit has been applied
for and received.
(6) Routine maintenance and repair of a structure for which a floodplain
encroachment permit has been granted is permitted and shall not require
additional floodplain encroachment permits. Maintenance and repair shall
comply with the terms of the original permit.
§ 94-10.13 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.13
94:368
§ 94-10.14. Planned development. [Added 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 708; amended
12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
(7) If a structure for which a floodplain encroachment permit has been granted is
destroyed to the extent that the cost of repair exceeds the reproduction cost,
such structure shall not be reconstructed unless a new floodplain encroachment
permit has been applied for and received.
Q. Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this
chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific
and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does
not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazard or uses permitted within
such area will be free from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not create
liability on the part of the Borough of Shrewsbury, any officer or employee thereof,
or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this section or chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to provide a range of flexibility in
planned developments within which special land use situations and conditions may
be accommodated.
B. Planned development option. As an alternative to conventional development, the
Land Use Board may authorize planned developments within zones designated for
a planned development option in accordance with plans and proposals which
conform to the requirements of this section. The standards herein establish the
limits of discretionary action which may be taken by the approving authority
administering these provisions. No deviation from these standards may be granted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
(1) Standards for type, density or intensity of use. Planned developments may be
approved by the Land Use Board in conformity with the standards governing
the type, density, or intensity of use set forth by this subsection.
(a) The minimum tract size shall be 65 acres.
(b) All lands remaining outside of public streets, building lots and any other
parcels approved for special purposes shall be set aside as open space.
The boundaries of any open space parcels shall be designed to coincide
with adjoining open space parcels, whether existing or proposed, so as to
extend and expand upon an overall open space network for the Borough.
(2) Variations of standards. The type and density or intensity shall be varied from
that otherwise permitted within a planned development in consideration of the
amount, location and proposed use of common open space; the location and
physical characteristics of the site; and the location, design and type of
dwelling units and other uses as set forth by this subsection.
(3) Deviations within planned developments. Within planned developments,
deviations in the standards for type, density or intensity of use may be
authorized by the Land Use Board by designating areas to be developed under
§ 94-10.13 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.14
94:369
different standards in accordance with the limitations set forth by this
subsection and those set forth for each designated planned development area.
(a) A land use map delineating and classifying areas for each variation shall
be established for all planned developments. Land use maps shall be
approved where the Land Use Board finds the following requirements to
be satisfied:
[1] The land use proposals are consistent with the policies articulated in
the adopted Master Plan as relates to land use, community facilities
and housing.
[2] The open space proposals protect any special environmental features
by preserving land in an open, undeveloped state, create suitable
areas for organized outdoor recreation and are consistent with the
policies articulated in the adopted Master Plan as relates to open
space and environmental features as identified and recommended in
the Shrewsbury Borough Environmental Resources Inventory
prepared by the Shrewsbury Borough Environmental Commission.
[3] The circulation proposals provide for a closed traffic circulation
system, provide a pedestrian path network linking all parts of the
development and are consistent with the policies articulated in the
circulation element of the adopted Master Plan.
[4] The utilities proposals are consistent with the policies articulated in
the adopted Master Plan as relate to stormwater management,
utilities, local services and fiscal impact on the county, municipality
and special districts, including the County Solid Waste Management
District.
[5] The overall proposals are consistent, inasmuch as is reasonably
practicable, with other existing, planned or potential developments
adjacent to the planned development.
(b) Classifications for land use areas shall correspond with the optional zone
classifications enumerated for each planned development designated
area. Substitute classifications may be approved by the Land Use Board
to accommodate substitute bulk standards and shall be consistent with
this section as follows:
[1] Substitute classifications shall provide for the type, density or
intensity of use.
[2] Substitute classifications shall provide uniform standards which are
of equal stringency for the type, density or intensity of use.
[3] Substitute classifications shall provide standards which are
consistent with the limitations established for the PD designated
area.
(4) Bulk standards. The standards for the design, bulk and location of buildings
for planned developments shall be evaluated by the Land Use Board and
§ 94-10.14 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.14
94:370
§ 94-10.15. PSC-3 Planned Senior Citizen Residential Zone District. [Added
6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 837; amended6-5-2006 by Ord. No. 873; 6-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 916; 12-19-2011 by Ord. No. 975; 11-17-2014 by Ord. No. 1009; 12-7-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-1077]
The PSC-3 Planned Senior Citizen Residential Zone District is hereby created on Block
70.2, Lot 6.
approved where they are found to be in conformity with the regulations set
forth by this subsection and those set forth for each planned development
designated area.
(a) The standards employed shall be those standards for the zones or the
planned development option standards which correspond to the land use
classifications established for each delineated land use area. The Land
Use Board may approve substitute bulk standards as follows:
[1] Substitute bulk standards shall provide for minimum lot area, width
and depth; minimum setbacks along streets and other lot lines and
wetland properties; maximum lot coverage; maximum floor area
ratio; minimum improvable tract area and general design standards
for multifamily residential development; exceptions for accessory
buildings; and requirements for parking, landscaping, lighting and
other improvements.
[2] Substitute bulk standards shall provide standards which are of equal
or greater stringency to the corresponding zones or planned
development options with respect to minimum lot area; maximum
building height measured in feet and stories; maximum floor area
ratio; and minimum improvable tract area for multifamily residential
development.
[3] The Land Use Board shall notify the governing body and Tax
Assessor, by adopted resolution, within five days of approval of
substitute bulk standards approved for any planned development.
(5) Zoning. Changes in zoning effectuated through the planned development
approval shall be recorded on the Zoning Map.
(a) Upon approval, the area comprising an approved planned development
shall be delineated along with the name and date of approval of the
proposed planned development on the Zoning Map.
(b) The zoning standards shall be recorded through deed restrictions upon
final approval, and the Zoning Map shall be periodically amended to
reflect the completion of sections of a planned development.
(6) Plans. Development shall be in conformity with site plans, subdivisions and
any general development plan as approved by the Land Use Board.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the PSC-3 Planned Senior Citizen Residential Zone
District is to provide for the development of a planned senior citizen residential
§ 94-10.14 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.15
94:371
development on contiguous parcels within a single development tract as a general
development plan. The development plan shall provide for, but not be limited to,
coordinated vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation, utilities, stormwater
management, common open space, recreation facilities and other facilities as may
be necessary to develop and to maintain the planned development through a
common ownership association.
B. Design. The planned senior citizen development shall be designed to preserve and
protect sensitive environmental features, including wetlands, flood-prone areas,
marshes, significant wooded areas, areas with shallow depth to water table, and
other sensitive environmental features which may be identified from the Natural
Inventory Maps prepared by the Environmental Commission, the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Maps, and studies or field surveys in
accordance with § 94-5.13, Preservation of environmentally sensitive features, and
§ 94-5.27, Floodplain management.
C. Planned senior citizen development. The developer of a planned senior citizen
development shall obtain a general development plan approval in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c (Planned Development) for contiguous parcels in the
development tract in accordance with the following:
(1) The architectural design of the buildings, exterior materials, signage,
streetlighting, landscaping, pedestrian ways and other improvements shall be
coordinated to present a harmonious appearance for the entire development
consistent with § 94-8.4C.
(2) Age of residents. Occupancy of the dwelling units shall be restricted through
bylaws, rules, regulations, and restrictions of record for housing of older
persons so that the housing within the development shall qualify as "55 and
over housing" within the meaning of the Federal Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C.
§ 3601 et seq. Occupancy shall be by at least one person 55 years of age or
older per unit, and further provided that no child who has not attained the age
of 18 years shall be domiciled therein.
(3) A planned senior citizen residential development in the PSC-3 District shall be
limited to single-family detached dwellings and to such recreational and
cultural facilities as may be approved by the Land Use Board for the sole use
of the residents of the development and their guests, unless such recreational
facilities are dedicated to public use and accepted by the municipality in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43a. Such recreational and cultural facilities
may include, but are not limited to, clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis courts,
shuffleboard courts, picnic areas and other outdoor recreation facilities. All
recreational and cultural facilities shall be subordinated to the residential
character of the area, and no advertising shall be permitted.
(4) Common ownership. Provisions shall be made for the ownership and
maintenance of all common areas, open space and recreation facilities by a
common ownership association, which shall be established as a condition of
approval. The association shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Membership in the common ownership association shall be mandatory
for all owners of property in the development.
§ 94-10.15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.15
94:372
(b) The common ownership association shall be empowered to ensure the
payment of dues through deed restrictions on the property of its members.
(c) A copy of the master deed, if applicable, declaration of covenants and
restrictions, restrictive covenants and bylaws, which will govern the
planned development, shall be submitted for review and approval by the
Board Attorney and Borough Counsel. The restrictive covenants shall
include provisions requiring occupancy of the dwelling units by persons
55 years and older in accordance with § 94-10.15C(2). The documents
shall include all restrictions and limitations imposed by the PSC-3
Ordinance, including restrictions on further development and open space
protections.
(5) Findings for general development plan. Prior to the approval of a general
development plan for a planned senior citizen development, the developer
shall prove and the Board shall find the following facts and conclusions
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45 et seq.:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to the Zoning
Ordinance standards pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D65.c;
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of common open
space are reliable and the amount, location and purpose of the common
open space are adequate;
(c) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed development
for public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the
amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment are adequate;
(d) That the proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established;
(e) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates construction
over a period of years, the terms and conditions intended to protect the
interests of the public and of the residents, occupants and owners of the
proposed development in the total completion of the development are
adequate; and
(f) The required contents of a general development plan set forth at N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45.1 shall be included in the findings.
(6) Qualifications of developer. The Land Use Board shall require the prospective
developer of a planned development to file a report of financial qualifications,
prepared by a recognized auditing firm, and such other documentation deemed
necessary by the Board, to determine the developer's capability of completing
the proposed development as part of its findings for a planned senior citizen
development in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.
(7) Developer's agreement. The Land Use Board shall require a written
development agreement between the Borough and the developer or its
assignees, addressing the improvements to be provided in accordance with the
§ 94-10.15 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.15
94:373
requirements of this chapter and the conditions of the final development
approval, both on site and off site.
(8) Drainage. All on-site and off-site drainage facilities shall be provided for in
accordance with the Borough requirements and applicable Borough
regulations.
(9) Water and sewerage facilities. A PSC development shall be permitted
provided that the site is connected to adequate public water and sewer.
Adequacy and design of sewerage disposal and water distribution systems,
including fire hydrants, shall be approved by the Borough Engineer, applicable
utility authorities, the Department of Environmental Protection and all other
applicable agencies prior to approval of the general development plan. No
construction permit shall be issued unless and until plans for such facilities
have been submitted to the proper authority for approval and adequate
provisions are made to ensure that all necessary facilities are installed.
(10) General requirements.
(a) Streets. All streets shall be private streets maintained by the common
ownership association.
(b) Request for Title 39 enforcement. Prior to granting of final approval by
the Board, the applicant/developer shall file a written request with the
Borough Clerk requesting the Borough of Shrewsbury to enforce the
provisions of Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes on all streets
and roads in the subdivision which are open to be used by the public. The
provisions of Title 39 shall be made applicable to said streets and roads
at the discretion of the Borough Council and with the approval of the
Commissioner of Transportation of New Jersey.
D. Zoning and design standards for planned senior citizen development - tract
requirements.
(1) The minimum contiguous tract area shall consist of 35 acres. The entire tract
shall be under the control of one ownership or contract purchaser for purposes
of obtaining all required development approvals and committing the tract to
the requirements of this chapter. Upon approval of the tract for development,
no further development will be permitted, and appropriate restrictions will be
incorporated in the approval to effectuate this limitation.
(2) Minimum perimeter setback for the development tract: 50 feet.
(3) Maximum total impervious surface coverage for the entire tract for purposes
of the PSC-3 District, including all buildings, pavement, decks, and other
structures, shall be 35%.
(4) A gatehouse at the entrance of the development is permitted. The entrance
gatehouse shall not exceed a maximum floor area of 100 square feet and
maximum building height of 15 feet.
(5) Common open space. At least 50% of the tract, inclusive of wetlands and
common areas, shall be set aside as permanent common open space. The Land
§ 94-10.15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.15
94:374
Use Board may require that the development plan incorporate any and all
Master Plan recommendations which provide for reservation of public areas or
public access requirements. The open space shall be subject to a conservation
easement, and appropriate monuments shall be provided to mark the
boundaries of the conservation easement. The permanent nature, location and
restrictions on the open space shall be disclosed in all association documents
and deeds to lot owners and shall be included in a declaration of covenants and
restrictions or other recordable documents, to be approved by the Land Use
Board prior to final site plan approval.
(6) Active recreation area. An area of the site shall be set aside and developed as
a common area for active recreation use. The active recreation area shall
provide at least 1,500 square feet per dwelling unit and will consist of a
clubhouse building and such other outdoor recreation facilities as may be
approved by the Land Use Board.
(7) A planned senior development shall provide at least one clubhouse to serve the
entire development, with a minimum total usable area of 3,300 square feet.
"Usable area" shall mean all interior conditioned space. Such room and
facilities shall be open to all residents and their guests, subject to reasonable
regulations under the association bylaws of the planned senior citizen
development. The initial clubhouse shall be completed and in operation before
50% plus one dwelling unit has been completed and a certificate of occupancy
issued thereupon.
(8) Said clubhouse shall have an adjoining parking area so as to comply with
§ 94-8.26, Off-street parking, with a minimum of one parking space per 100
square feet of total usable area of the clubhouse.
(9) The clubhouse facility shall include an adequate area, outside of the clubhouse,
for an enclosed, unroofed area to store solid waste and recycling containers
related to the clubhouse operation. The solid waste/recycling area shall be
appropriately screened and landscaped.
(10) Recreation areas. A planned senior citizen development shall provide
recreation facilities including a swimming pool, with changing areas and
restrooms approved by the Land Use Board, one regulation-size tennis court,
and other such facilities which are suitable for a senior citizen residential
population. The swimming pool shall be a minimum size of 1,500 square feet.
The size, width and dimensions of the swimming pool area shall meet the
approval of the Land Use Board. The swimming pool shall comply with the
Uniform Construction Code and the New Jersey State Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C.
8:26-3.1). Other recreation facilities may include, but are not limited to, a
wading pool, shuffleboard courts, bocce courts, putting greens, and other such
walkways, picnic areas and nature trails available to all planned development
residents. Recreational facilities shall be attractively landscaped, with
appropriate walkways. An irrigation system shall be provided where grassed
recreation areas occur.
(11) Accessory buildings for the pool and the pool equipment and other recreational
facilities and for maintenance purposes shall be provided and shall be
§ 94-10.15 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.15
94:375
sufficient to store recreational and maintenance equipment and supplies.
(12) Bulk standards for clubhouse and all other nonresidential structures.
(a) Minimum front yard setback, from the curbline of the parking lot, for the
clubhouse: 20 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard setback, from any property line: 35 feet.
(d) Maximum building height: 35 feet and two stories.
(e) The clubhouse and other common area buildings shall be residential in
design and architectural character and shall incorporate residential
rooflines and materials compatible with the residential character of the
development.
(13) Accessory structure setbacks.
(a) Permitted accessory structures. Other customary accessory uses and
buildings, subject to the provisions of § 94-5.8 of this chapter, are
permitted, provided that such uses are incidental to the principal use and
do not include any activity commonly conducted as a business.
(b) Rear yard setback: 15 feet.
(c) Side yard setback: eight feet.
(14) Design standards for common areas.
(a) Screening of equipment and machinery. Any area devoted to the storage
and care of maintenance vehicles and equipment shall be attractively
landscaped or screened from view from the street and any adjoining
residences.
[1] Screening shall consist of one of the following:
[a] Densely planted evergreen shrubs, which shall grow to not less
than five feet after one growing season.
[b] A solid and uniform fence at least five feet in height on four
sides of the equipment and machinery area.
[c] A masonry wall at least five feet in height on four sides of the
equipment and machinery area.
[2] Any opening in any required screening for ingress and egress
purposes shall be as inconspicuous as possible to prevent any
unsightly display of said equipment to public view.
(b) Landscaping. A landscaping plan shall be submitted for Board review in
accordance with the provisions of § 94-8.21. The landscape plan shall be
submitted to the Shade Tree Commission for review and comment.
§ 94-10.15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.15
94:376
(c) Buffers. A fifty-foot perimeter buffer to screen the development shall be
provided when the development abuts a nonresidential zone or use, in
accordance with the provisions of § 94-8.6. A twenty-five-foot buffer
shall be provided when the development abuts a residential zone or use.
Said buffer may include any freshwater and saline wetlands and wetlands
transition areas. Native vegetation shall be retained in required buffer
areas to the greatest extent possible. A berm of variable height or other
screening measures may be required where deemed necessary by the
Board to provide a visual screen. The berm shall be designed and
constructed in a curvilinear or naturalistic fashion and shall be planted
with a variety of landscaped materials to provide a natural, attractive,
low-maintenance visual barrier.
(d) Driveways, walks and parking areas. There shall be provided a safe and
convenient system of driveways, walks and parking areas. Due
consideration shall be given in planning walks, ramps (with slip-resistant
surface) and driveways consistent with applicable Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) design standards. Sidewalks shall conform to the
requirements of the Residential Site Improvement Standards. Additional
off-tract sidewalks may be required by the Land Use Board to create a
unified system of pedestrian circulation within the development and
interconnecting to adjacent development.
(e) Improvements. All on-site and off-site improvements shall be constructed
in accordance with the standards, criteria and requirements of Article VIII
(Design Standards and Improvements Specifications) of Chapter 94 and
the Residential Site Improvement Standards.
(15) The Zoning and Land Development Ordinance shall apply to the development.
However, if there is any conflict between the Zoning and Land Development
Ordinance and the standards outlined herein, the standards outlined herein
shall apply.
E. Zoning and design standards for single-family detached dwellings.
(1) The permitted net density of the development shall not exceed 1.65 dwelling
units per gross acre and 3.5 dwelling units per net acre. "Permitted net
density," for the purposes of this zone district, shall be defined as the
maximum permitted number of dwelling units per the acreage of the tract less
delineated freshwater wetlands area and areas classified as wetlands transition
areas pursuant to the New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act.111
(2) Minimum lot area: 6,600 square feet. Corner lots shall have a minimum lot
area of 7,500 square feet.
(3) Minimum lot width: 60 feet. Corner lots shall have a minimum lot width of 75
feet.
(4) Minimum lot depth: 110 feet.
111.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.
§ 94-10.15 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.15
94:377
(5) Minimum front yard setback from the property line to the dwelling: 20 feet; 20
feet to the face of the garage.
(6) Minimum side yard setback: one foot to 10 feet, combined 20 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(8) Maximum building height: 30 feet.
(9) Maximum number of stories: two stories.
(10) Maximum building coverage for purposes of the PSC-3 District shall include
the principal and all accessory buildings for each individual lot: 42.5%.
(11) Maximum total impervious surface coverage for purposes of the PSC-3
District shall include all buildings, pavement, decks, and other structures: 45%
for each individual lot, subject to the following:
(a) Each individual residential lot in the PSC-3 Zone shall be permitted to
have an unroofed outdoor patio, deck, or terrace, not extending vertically
above the finished floor elevation of the dwelling unit. Such unroofed
outdoor area shall be included in the overall impervious lot coverage
calculation for each individual lot, except as outlined in Subsection
E(11)(b) through (f) below.
(b) Unroofed outdoor patios, decks or terraces constructed of a permeable
paving system, designed with adequate storage below grade to fully
contain the volume of runoff generated by the ten-year design storm as
defined by NJDEP, and designed in a manner acceptable to the Borough
Engineer, may be excluded from the impervious lot coverage calculation
for each individual lot up to a maximum area of 300 square feet, or not
more than 25% of the rear yard area, whichever is less.
(c) The infiltration layer of any permeable paving system shall lie a
minimum of two feet above the seasonal high groundwater table, and the
suitability of underlying soils shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of
the Borough Engineer.
(d) The "rear yard area" as described in Subsection E(11)(b) above shall be
defined as the area encompassing the entire width of the lot, lying
between the rear-most building wall (excluding architectural projections
less than two feet in depth) or the extension thereof along a plane parallel
to the rear setback line.
(e) Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection E(11)(a) through (d) above,
no outdoor patio, deck or terrace, whether constructed of permeable or
impervious material(s), or an aggregation thereof, and whether roofed or
unroofed, shall exceed the maximum area prescribed in Subsection
E(11)(b) above, unless said patio, deck or terrace is fully compliant with
the maximum lot coverage of 45%, not excepting any areas constructed
of permeable materials.
(f) No portion of this subsection shall permit the maximum impervious
§ 94-10.15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.15
94:378
coverage of the entire development to exceed the prescribed maximum
standard nor alter or otherwise impair the provisions of NJDEP permits
originally issued or as may be modified by NJDEP.
(12) Garages. There shall be provided a two-car garage within each detached
single-family dwelling. Garages may be constructed as front-entry garages.
(13) Minimum gross habitable living area:
(a) One story: 800 square feet.
(b) Two stories: 1,000 square feet.
(14) Maximum dwelling unit footprint: 2,700 square feet of habitable living area.
(15) Building requirements:
(a) A break in the front building elevation of at least three feet shall be
provided in each detached single-family dwelling. An offset of three feet
for a garage, a bay window or other architectural feature shall be deemed
to comply with this requirement.
(b) Residential appearance. Single-family detached dwellings in a planned
senior citizen development shall comply with the residential appearance
requirements of § 94-8.29. Each development in excess of 50 units shall
contain at least three substantially different, yet architecturally
compatible, principal building designs and elevations.
(16) Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Off-street parking, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.26.
(b) Signs, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.34.
(c) Fences and hedges, subject to the provisions of § 94-8.16.
(d) Sheds, which shall not exceed a maximum floor area of 100 square feet
and maximum building height of 10 feet and which may be erected only
with the approval of the common ownership association.
(e) Hot tubs, subject to applicable coverage restrictions.
(17) Prohibited accessory uses: in- or aboveground swimming pools on individual
lots.
F. Assignment of interest.
(1) Before any applicant or developer effectively assigns any of the interests in
any preliminary or final approval, he/she must notify the administrative officer
(Land Use Board Clerk) and supply detailed information with regard to the
name, address, principals, type of organization, competency, experience and
past performance of the assignee, transferee or agent. Notice of such
assignment or transfer shall be given no later than 10 days after its effective
date. The assignee must be made acquainted with all conditions of approval,
and the applicant and/or developer shall so certify.
§ 94-10.15 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.15
94:379
§ 94-10.16. AH-MF-8 Affordable Housing Multifamily Overlay Zone. [Added
12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 924; amended 5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 1059; 12-7-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-1077]
(2) The administrative officer shall notify the Borough Clerk, the Chief Financial
Officer, the Borough Engineer, the Zoning Officer and the Construction
Official of the assignment of interest.
(3) A fee of $250 shall be deposited by the assignee to cover the cost of the review
and recording of certification filed by the assignee.
G. Affordable housing requirements.
(1) At least 20% of the residential units constructed on site shall be affordable
housing units as defined by COAH's regulations and applicable regulations
under the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency's Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls.
(2) The developer may utilize the approved building footprint to create attached
dwelling units for the affordable housing units and may alternatively reduce
the size of the approved units to accommodate affordable units.
(3) All or some of the affordable housing obligation may be satisfied by making a
payment in lieu of constructing the affordable housing units required by this
chapter. These payments shall be calculated pursuant to the applicable criteria
of COAH on the date of the issuance of the building permit.
(4) The obligation for in-lieu payments shall be calculated based on the number of
market units that will be constructed and the growth share generated by those
market units.
(5) As a compensatory benefit for the actual construction of affordable housing or
the payment in lieu of the construction of affordable housing, the developer
may, at its option, eliminate the proposed common area recreational facilities
on the site.
(6) Affordable housing units constructed on site shall conform in all manners with
COAH's regulations and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls at
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., including, but not limited to, requirements
regarding phasing, controls on affordability, low-/moderate-income split,
maximum rent and sales prices, affordability average, bedroom distribution,
and affirmative marketing.
(7) Pursuant to COAH regulations, and as an additional compensatory benefit, the
developer shall not be required to pay any development fee.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the AH-MF-8 Affordable Housing Multifamily Overlay
Zone is to provide compensatory economic benefits and incentives for the
development of multifamily housing with inclusionary low- and moderate-income
housing units on parcels of land that are designated for such use by ordinance.
Development within the AH-MF-8 Overlay Zone shall permit multifamily housing
as an optional use to the underlying zoning district regulations. Multifamily
§ 94-10.15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.16
94:380
residential development within this zone shall include affordable housing units for
low- and moderate-income families, in order to better promote the general welfare
and to create a realistic opportunity for the construction of low- and moderateincome
housing within the Borough of Shrewsbury in accordance with the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing Rules, N.J.A.C. 5:92 through N.J.A.C. 5:97.
B. Qualification of developer. The Land Use Board shall require the prospective
developer to file a report of financial qualifications, prepared by a recognized
auditing firm, and such documentation as may be deemed necessary by the Board
or its professionals to determine the developer's ability to complete the proposed
development as part of its finding for a development in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45.
C. Assignment of interests. Before any applicant or developer effectively assigns any
of the interests in any preliminary or final approval, he or she must notify the
administrative officer of the Land Use Board (Land Use Board Secretary), in
writing, of his or her intent and must furnish detailed information with regard to the
name, address, principals, type of organization, competency, experience, and past
performance of the assignee, transferee or agent.
(1) Any such assignment of interests shall be subject to the following
requirements:
(a) Any successor or assignee is subject to the filing requirements as outlined
in Subsection B, Qualification of developer, above.
(b) The assignee shall file a written certification that he or she has been made
aware of each of the conditions of development application approval.
(c) The administrative officer shall notify the Borough Clerk, the Borough
Chief Financial Officer, the Borough Engineer, the Borough Zoning
Officer, and the Borough Construction Official, in writing, of the
assignment of interest, upon approval of the assignee's qualifications by
the Land Use Board.
(d) Any request for assignment of interest must be accompanied by a
nonrefundable administrative fee in the amount of $500, to offset the cost
of the review and recording of the certification filed by the assignee.
(2) Written notice of such assignments or transfers shall be made by the applicant
no later than 10 calendar days after their effective date.
D. Permitted uses. In the AH-MF-8 Zone Overlay, no premises shall be used and no
structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purposes except the
following:
(1) Any principal use permitted in the prevailing or underlying zone, in
compliance with the standards of the zone.
(2) Multifamily structures consisting of a minimum of four and a maximum of 16
units per building, with a mandatory inclusionary component for low- and
moderate-income households of 20% for sale units and 20% for rental units in
§ 94-10.16 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.16
94:381
accordance with Article XI of this chapter.
(3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
(4) Public parks, playgrounds, conservation areas, and essential municipal
services and facilities.
E. Permitted accessory uses. The following shall be considered permitted accessory
uses in the AH-MF-8 Zone Overlay:
(1) Common parking areas designed in compliance with the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.).
(2) Common recreational facilities and structures.
(3) Common open space and conservation areas.
(4) Attached garages with a capacity of not more than two vehicles per unit.
(5) One sign at the main site entrance identifying the name of the development in
conformance with § 94-8.34, entitled "Signs." In the case of developments
fronting on more than one public roadway, a second sign indicating the name
of a residential development only may be located on the lower-order roadway
or at the point of secondary access to the development.
(6) Such other customary accessory uses and structures permitted by the LDO. All
structures accessory to dwelling units, such as patios, decks and balconies,
shall be attached to the dwelling unit to which they are accessory.
(7) One temporary sales office incidental to the initial project development,
consisting of not more than 1,000 square feet, allowed during the period of
initial sales of units by the developer. Any temporary sales office installed
shall be removed within 30 days of the completion and issuance of certificate
of occupancy of the first model home.
(8) One temporary construction trailer, adequately screened from public view,
incidental to the site construction activities, provided that same is removed
upon completion of site construction work.
(9) A community recreation center for the residents and guests of the
development, whose building design shall complement the design of principal
buildings; and may include such amenities as a swimming pool, playground,
tot-lot, gazebo, tennis courts and the like.
(10) One maintenance storage building with a maximum floor area of 200 square
feet and a maximum height of 12 feet, as measured to the highest point of the
roof, whose architectural design shall complement the design of the principal
buildings. The maintenance storage building shall adhere to all minimum
building setback requirements for principal buildings.
(11) Model homes may be constructed by the developer, with not more than one
model home per housing style being offered for sale. The models shall be in
§ 94-10.16 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.16
94:382
full compliance with UCC requirements and shall abide by the hours of
operation for businesses as outlined in the Borough Administrative Code.
F. Common ownership. Provisions shall be made for the ownership and maintenance
of all common areas, open space and recreation facilities by a common ownership
association, which shall be established as a condition of approval. The association
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Membership in the common ownership association shall be mandatory for all
owners of property in the development.
(2) The common ownership association shall be empowered to ensure the
payment of dues through deed restrictions on the properties of its members.
(3) A copy of the master deed, if applicable, declaration of covenants, easements
and restrictions, restrictive covenants and bylaws, which will govern the
development, shall be submitted for review and approval by the Borough and
Land Use Board Attorneys. The documents shall include all restrictions and
limitations imposed by the AH-MF-8 Ordinance, including restrictions on
further development and open space protections.
G. Association requirements, covenants, and easements.
(1) All proposed restrictive covenants, articles of incorporation or other
documents concerning the creation of a common ownership association for the
ownership and maintenance of common lands and facilities shall be submitted
to the Borough and approved by the Borough and Land Use Board Attorneys
prior to final approval or as determined by the Land Use Board as a condition
of subdivision or any proposed site plan.
(2) All dwelling units shall be constructed subject to such restrictions and
covenants as may be required to establish common rights and responsibilities.
(3) In the case of age-restricted developments, occupancy of the dwelling units
shall be restricted through bylaws, rules, regulations and restrictions of record
for housing of older persons so that the housing within the development shall
qualify as "55 and over housing" within the meaning of the Federal Fair
Housing Act, 45 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq. Occupancy shall be at least one person
55 years of age or older per unit, and further provided that no child who has
not attained the age of 18 years shall be domiciled therein.
H. Developer's agreement. The Land Use Board shall require a written developer's
agreement between the Borough and the developer or its assignees, addressing the
improvements to be provided in accordance with the requirements of this chapter,
the provision of community services, conditions of the final development approval,
both on site and off site, stormwater management and any other issues deemed
appropriate by the Borough. As a condition of final approval of any development, a
municipal services agreement shall be executed between the developer and the
Borough, addressing the contribution by the Borough for solid waste, leaves and
recyclables collection, snow removal and streetlighting in accordance with the
Municipal Services Act.
§ 94-10.16 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.16
94:383
I. Zoning standards. Development pursuant to the AH-MF-8 Zone Overlay shall be
subject to the following standards and regulations:
(1) Tract ownership, further development and change in zoning district. The
minimum contiguous tract area shall consist of one acre. The entire tract shall
be under the control of one ownership or contract purchaser for the purposes
obtaining all required development approvals and committing this tract to the
provisions of this overlay zone ordinance. Upon approval of the tract for
development, no further development shall be permitted unless approved by
the municipal agency, and appropriate restrictions shall be incorporated into
any approval issued to effectuate this limitation. Upon final approval, the
zoning district designation shall be changed to an AF-MF-8 Zoning District.
(2) Maximum permitted residential density. The maximum permitted residential
density shall be as indicated below. The gross density includes the total area
within the boundaries of the tract to be developed, including internal
roadways, conservation areas, stormwater management facilities, and
dedicated right-of-way areas. The maximum permitted density shall be
computed based on the overall tract area without the exclusion of portion(s) of
the same development used for nonresidential uses. In computing the number
of units permitted, any portion of a unit less than 0.50 shall not be considered,
and any portion of the unit greater than 0.50 shall be rounded up to the nearest
whole number.
(a) In the case of non-age-restricted developments, there shall not be more
than eight dwelling units constructed upon each gross acre of tract area
except as otherwise provided below. A minimum of 20% of the units
constructed shall be set aside as affordable housing units in accordance
with Article XI.
(b) Not more than 14 dwelling units shall be constructed upon each gross
acre of land on certain premises known as "Block 3, Lot 8."
(c) Not more than 14 dwelling units shall be constructed upon each gross
acre of land on certain premises known as "Block 29, Lots 7, 8, 9, 10,
11."
(3) Maximum impervious coverage. The maximum total impervious coverage,
including, but not limited to, buildings, pools, parking areas, driveways,
streets, walkways, patios and all other impervious surfaces as defined in
§ 94-8.39, Stormwater control, shall be as listed below:
(a) In those portions of the overall development used for residential
purposes, the maximum impervious coverage shall be 50%.
(b) In those portions of the development used for nonresidential purposes, the
maximum impervious coverage shall be 65%.
(c) In developments with nonresidential components, a phasing plan must be
submitted outlining those limits of the development utilized for such
purposes. All minimum setbacks, buffer areas, parking areas, refuse
storage areas and similar appurtenant features for each phase of a
§ 94-10.16 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.16
94:384
development must lie wholly within the phase limit shown on the phasing
plan.
(4) Maximum building coverage. The maximum permitted building coverage
shall be 35% of the total area of the tract, including residential and
nonresidential portions of a development.
(5) Maximum building height. The maximum mean building height of a principal
structure shall be 35 feet, with a maximum height of 45 feet measured to the
highest point of the roof. The mean building height of accessory structures
shall be 16 feet. "Mean height" shall be defined as the average elevation of all
outside corners of a structure from final grade to the mean elevation of the
roof.
(6) Maximum number of stories. Each building shall be limited to 2 1/2 stories
plus a basement above grade. Notwithstanding the definition of "basement" in
§ 94-2.3, attics and basements may be used for storage, utilities, garages or
similar uses.
(7) Minimum multifamily structure setbacks. Any residential structure, with the
exception of detached single-family homes or attached units, constructed as
part of a multifamily development shall meet the following minimum
setbacks:
(a) Seventy-five feet from an existing municipal street or proposed collector
street as designated on the Borough Master Plan.
(b) Twenty feet from any internal private street line, measured at the rightof-
way limit. In the absence of a right-of-way line, the minimum distance
between the building face and back edge of the sidewalk shall be no less
than 20 feet; or in cases where no sidewalk exists, the minimum distance
to the curbline of an internal street shall be 26 feet.
(c) Fifty feet from any tract boundary. Normal architectural projections such
as eaves, chimneys, porches, balconies, patios, and similar projections
may extend into this minimum required setback area a maximum of six
feet.
(d) Fifty feet between the rear walls of any two buildings, measured at right
angles to the rear wall.
(e) Twenty-five feet between the front or side walls of a building and the
front or side walls of any adjacent buildings, not including bay windows
or second-story balcony overhangs.
(f) Fifteen feet to any common off-street parking area or access driveway for
the parking area.
(g) One hundred feet to any existing principal residential structure or zone.
Customary architectural projections such as eaves, chimneys, porches,
balconies, patios, and similar projections may extend into the minimum
required setback area a maximum of six feet.
§ 94-10.16 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.16
94:385
(h) The front facade of any structure containing more than one dwelling unit
shall not continue on the same plane for a distance of more than the width
of four adjacent units. Offsets between front facade planes shall not be
less than four feet nor more than 20 feet.
(i) A minimum twenty-foot clear yard area shall be provided on all sides of
any multifamily residential structure that are not coincident with a street
line.
(j) Notwithstanding the above setback requirements, the residential
community shall be designed to provide a pleasing visual environment
with adequate provisions for open space and access to structures by
Borough emergency services.
J. Zoning, common open space and recreation facilities. In developments consisting
of more than eight residential units, the development shall be clustered to provide
open space areas and shall meet the minimum standards outlined herein:
(1) A minimum of 35% of the total tract area shall be retained as common open
space.
(2) The minimum required common open space areas may include steep slope
areas, freshwater wetlands, buffer areas, and open waters.
(3) Common open space and recreation facilities shall be owned and maintained
by an association to be established in accordance with the applicable
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
(4) Conservation or slope area easements shall be required pursuant to local, state,
or federal environment protection regulations, specifically including the
provisions of § 94-5.13, Preservation of environmentally sensitive features.
K. Buffer areas. In developments consisting of more than eight residential units, buffer
areas shall be established within the boundaries of the development tract pursuant
to the following standards:
(1) A landscaped buffer strip at least 50 feet in width shall be permanently
maintained along all tract boundaries.
(a) Required buffer strips may contain earthen berms with a maximum height
of three feet and a minimum top width of six feet.
(b) Required buffer areas shall be suitably landscaped in accordance with the
requirements of § 94-8.6, Buffer areas and screening.
(c) Landscaped buffers shall be designed to provide a year-round visual
screen and shall contain a mix of deciduous and evergreen plantings and
ground cover.
(d) Buffer areas may be supplemented with fences, with a maximum height
of six feet, to provide effective visual and noise buffers.
(e) Buffers from railroad rights-of-way shall be provided subject to the
design criteria of § 94-8.6, Buffer areas and screening.
§ 94-10.16 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.16
94:386
(2) Buffer areas may be "averaged," at the discretion of the municipal agency, and
reduced in width to a minimum of 25 feet to allow the construction of site
access roads, where no feasible alternative exists. In such cases, the design of
buffer plantings and fences shall be suitable to maintain an effective yearround
screen. Buffer area reductions shall be permitted for the purposes of
roadway construction only and shall be compensated at a 1:1 ratio elsewhere
on the tract, with a maximum compensation width of 25 feet.
(3) Prior to final approval, buffer areas shall be recorded in the form of buffer
easements and shall contain restrictions prohibiting the removal of plantings
and future construction.
L. Streets, parking, sidewalks, water supply, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, drainage
and stormwater management standards.
(1) Primary access shall be from the street with the higher classification.
(2) A secondary access shall be provided and shall be designed in accordance with
the RSIS.
(3) Public improvements shall be designed and installed as required by the RSIS.
(4) Streets, common driveways, parking areas, and access drives within
developments shall be owned and maintained by a private association to be
established by the developer in accordance with the applicable provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43, entitled "Standards for the establishment of open space
organization." The Borough shall bear no responsibility to maintain, or
contribute to the maintenance of, streets, parking areas, or common driveways,
except as mandated by the Municipal Services Act.
(5) The maintenance of drainage facilities in privately owned and maintained
streets shall be the sole responsibility of the developer and association. The
developer shall be required to deposit with the Borough a sum of money
computed by the Borough Engineer to be held in escrow for a period of 99
years to fund the following:
(a) The review of an annual report prepared by a licensed professional
engineer retained by the developer or association verifying the adequate
operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities.
(b) Biannual inspections by the Borough to confirm maintenance.
(6) Prior to the release of performance guarantees, the developer shall be required
to deposit a growth fund in accordance with the methodology outlined in
Exhibit K112 for the future maintenance of the on-site stormwater management
facilities by the association. The growth fund shall be computed based upon a
ninety-nine-year period beginning at the time of final acceptance and shall
including the costs for the following:
(a) Routine lawn mowing and landscaping maintenance.
112.Editor's Note: Exhibit K is no longer included in the Code. See now § 94-8.39, as amended by Ord. No. 861.
§ 94-10.16 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.16
94:387
(b) Semiannual cleaning, desilting, and desnagging of above- or belowground
facilities.
(c) Biannual inspections of all on-site stormwater management facilities,
including above- and below-ground facilities, storm sewers, and all
appurtenances.
(d) Replacement of all aboveground structures, including outlet structure,
headwalls, flared-end sections, and conduit outlet protection at year 50.
(e) Replacement of landscaping every 25 years.
(7) Prior to final approval, the developer shall file, in writing, a request with the
Borough Clerk for the enforcement of N.J.S.A. 39:1 et seq. (Title 39), Motor
Vehicles and Traffic Regulation, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, Revised
Statutes.
(8) In all cases where the maintenance or repair of any wall, fence or other
improvement by its owner or his agent would require entry upon an adjacent
property, an appropriate easement or right-of-way shall be obtained by the
developer. All such easements shall be detailed and specific as to required
notice and any limitations upon the right of entry and shall provide a specific
means of arbitration in the event of disputes.
(9) Stormwater management facilities shall be maintained solely by the developer
or the association in accordance with the provisions of § 94-8.39, Stormwater
control, and N.J.A.C. 7:8-5 (Stormwater Management).
(10) Stormwater management facilities, including detention basins, retention/
infiltration basins, water quality basins, and appurtenant structures, shall be
designed to be harmonious with the topography of the development and shall
maintain a minimum horizontal setback of 40 feet as measured from the top of
bank to any residential or nonresidential structure.
(11) Streets shall be designed to provide a smooth and efficient traffic circulation
pattern and shall be in accordance with RSIS design standards. All dead endstreets
shall include adequate provisions for turnaround movements of
emergency and refuse collection vehicles.
M. Lighting. Development shall comply with § 94-8.22, Lighting. All public and
private streets shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure traffic and pedestrian
safety under all weather conditions.
(1) All exterior lighting shall be arranged protect residential uses, both within the
project as well as adjoining uses, from glare.
(2) Pedestrian walkways, excluding nature trails, shall be adequately illuminated
to provide a minimum of 0.2 footcandle in all locations and a maximum of one
footcandle.
N. Utilities. Public utilities for all residential developments within the AH-MF-8
Overlay Zone shall be designed and installed in accordance with the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21) and the following:
§ 94-10.16 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.16
94:388
§ 94-10.17. through § 94-10.19. (Reserved)
(1) Residential development within the AH-MF-8 Overlay Zone shall be served
by public water and public sanitary sewer that shall be installed by and at the
expense of the developer.
(2) All utilities shall be installed underground. The costs for the installation of all
utilities, including streetlighting, shall be borne by the developer.
(3) The developer shall establish and convey appropriate utility easements to the
appropriate utility service provider.
(4) The developer shall pay the cost of connection and transmission facilities
necessary to connect to municipal sewer and water systems.
(5) All underground utilities shall be installed before the placement of final
surface course pavement.
O. Solid waste and refuse and recycling collection.
(1) Areas suitable for storage of recyclable materials shall be provided in
accordance with § 94-8.51B, Recyclable materials storage.
(2) Refuse and recycling materials storage and collection areas shall be suitable
for containerized collection and shall be provided in sufficient number and at
locations convenient to all dwelling units. Such areas shall be screened from
view on three sides by solid fence, walls or other suitable materials.
(3) Refuse and recycling collection shall be provided and maintained by the entity
responsible for internal streets and other common facilities.
P. Low- and moderate-income housing obligation.
(1) Any residential development in the AH-MF-8 Overlay Zone District shall be
an inclusionary development, and the developer shall provide a minimum of
one affordable dwelling unit for every five market-rate housing units (i.e., 20%
set-aside) for units offered for sale. The affordable housing set-aside shall be a
minimum of 20% for rental units. In computing the low- and moderate-income
housing obligation, any portion of a unit less than or equal to 0.50 shall not be
considered, and any portion of the unit greater than 0.50 shall be rounded up
to the nearest whole number.
(2) The developer shall comply with all regulations to assure the creditworthiness
of each affordable unit, including compliance with all relevant regulations
adopted by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing and codified at
N.J.A.C. 5:96 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:97 et seq. and the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls adopted by the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage
Finance Agency and codified at N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.; provided that, in
lieu of 10% of affordable units provided at 35% of median income, 13% of
affordable units shall be provided at 30% of median income.
(3) The developer in any affordable housing inclusionary development shall bear
all costs associated with the administering of affordable units.
§ 94-10.16 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.20
94:389
§ 94-10.20. AH-MU Affordable Housing Mixed Use Overlay Zone. [Added
5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 1060; amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
A. Purpose. The purpose of the AH-MU Affordable Housing Mixed Use Overlay Zone
is to permit the development of planned mixed-use commercial development with
overhead inclusionary low- and moderate-income housing units on parcels of land
that are designated for such use by ordinance. Development within the AH-MU
Overlay Zone shall permit inclusionary housing as a secondary permitted use to the
permitted uses in the underlying zoning district regulations. Alternatively, any
property situated in the AH-MU Zone may be developed under the AH-MF-8 Zone
requirements for a solely residential development, without the absolute requirement
for mixed use. Mixed-use residential development within this zone shall include
affordable housing units for low- and moderate-income families, in order to better
promote the general welfare and to create a realistic opportunity for the construction
of low- and moderate-income housing within the Borough of Shrewsbury in
accordance with the New Jersey Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.,
and the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing Rules, N.J.A.C. 5:92 through
N.J.A.C. 5:95.
B. Qualification of developer. The Land Use Board shall require the prospective
developer of a planned development to file a report of financial qualifications,
prepared by a recognized auditing firm, and such documentation as may be deemed
necessary by the Board or its professionals to determine the developer's ability to
complete the proposed development as part of its finding for a planned development
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.
C. Assignment of interests. Before any applicant or developer effectively assigns any
of the interests in any preliminary or final approval, he or she must notify the
administrative officer of the Land Use Board (Land Use Board Clerk) in writing of
his or her intent and must furnish detailed information with regard to the name,
address, principals, type of organization, competency, experience, and past
performance of the assignee, transferee, or agent. Any such assignment of interests
shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) Any successor or assignee is subject to the filing requirements as outlined in
Subsection B. Qualification of developer, above.
(2) The assignee shall file a written certification that he or she has been made
aware of each of the conditions of development application approval.
(3) The administrative officer shall notify the Borough Clerk, the Borough Chief
Financial Officer, the Borough Engineer, the Borough Zoning Officer, and the
Borough Construction Official, in writing, of the assignment of interest, upon
approval of the assignee's qualifications by the Land Use Board.
(4) Any request for assignment of interest must be accompanied by a
nonrefundable administrative fee in the amount of $500, to offset the cost of
the review and recording of the certification filed by the assignee.
(5) Written notice of such assignments or transfers shall be made by the applicant
no later than 10 calendar days after their effective date.
§ 94-10.20 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.20
94:390
D. Permitted uses. In the AH-MU Zone Overlay, no premises shall be used and no
structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purposes except the
following:
(1) Any principal use permitted in the prevailing or underlying zone, in
compliance with the standards of the zone.
(2) Accessory apartments consisting of a minimum of two, with a mandatory
inclusionary component for low- and moderate-income households of 20% in
accordance with Article XI of this chapter.
(3) Community residences for the developmentally disabled in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 and the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
(4) Public parks, playgrounds, conservation areas, and essential municipal
services and facilities.
E. Permitted accessory uses. The following shall be considered permitted accessory
uses in the AH-MU Zone Overlay:
(1) Common parking areas designed in compliance with the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21).
(2) Common recreational facilities and structures.
(3) Common open space and conservation areas.
(4) Fences and landscaping complying with the provisions of § 94-8.16, Fences
and hedges, in perimeter or screening areas or private outdoor areas between
dwelling units.
(5) Such other customary accessory uses and structures as may be permitted by
the approving authority. All structures accessory to dwelling units, such as
decks and balconies, shall be attached to the dwelling unit to which they are
accessory.
(6) Stormwater management facilities in compliance with the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21), as well as the
standards contained in § 94-8.38, Storm drainage facilities, and § 94-8.39,
Stormwater control.
(7) Buffer plantings and site landscaping required by § 94-8.21, Landscaping and
shade tree regulations.
(8) Site lighting fixtures designed and installed in conformance with § 94-8.22,
Lighting.
(9) One temporary construction trailer, adequately screened from public view,
incidental to the site construction activities, provided that same is removed
upon completion of site construction work.
(10) A community recreation center for the residents and guests of a planned
development, whose building design shall complement the design of principal
§ 94-10.20 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.20
94:391
buildings; and may include such amenities as a picnic area, playground or totlot.
F. Tract ownership, further development and change in zoning district.
(1) The entire tract shall be under the control of one ownership or contract
purchaser for the purposes of obtaining all required development approvals
and committing this tract to the provisions of this Overlay Zone Ordinance.
Upon approval of the tract for development, no further development shall be
permitted, appropriate restrictions for which shall be incorporated into any
approval issued to effectuate this limitation.
G. Design standards. Development in the AH-MU Overlay Zone which is not in
compliance with the underlying zone standards shall be subject to the following
standards and regulations:
(1) Maximum permitted residential density. The maximum permitted residential
density shall be as indicated below:
(a) The gross density includes the total area within the boundaries of the area
to be developed, including internal roadways, conservation areas,
stormwater management facilities, and dedicated right-of-way areas. In
computing the number of units permitted, any portion of a unit less than
0.50 shall not be considered, and any portion of the unit greater than 0.50
shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
(b) There shall not be more than eight dwelling units constructed over
commercial development upon each gross acre of tract area, except as
otherwise provided below. A minimum of 25% of the units constructed
shall be set aside as affordable housing units in accordance with Article
XI.
(c) The maximum gross density of dwelling units constructed over
commercial development shall be increased as follows, up to a maximum
of 14 dwelling units per acre:
[1] The maximum gross density of dwelling units constructed over
commercial development may increase by one dwelling unit per acre
to a maximum of 14 dwelling units per acre for each additional five
feet of principal or accessory building setback provided on all front,
side and rear yards. The additional density shall be computed based
on the single yard with the smallest increase in setback dimension
over the minimum required in the zone. No yards may have less than
the minimum setback prescribed by ordinance, and no existing
nonconformities may be continued to receive a density increase
under this provision.
[2] The maximum gross density of dwelling units constructed over
commercial development may increase by one dwelling unit per acre
to a maximum of 14 dwelling units per acre for each 1/4 acre by
which the lot area exceeds the minimum required in the zone,
provided the front, side and rear yard setbacks are increased by 20%
§ 94-10.20 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.20
94:392
for each additional 1/4 acre.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage. The maximum total impervious coverage for
mixed-use developments under this chapter, including, but not limited to,
buildings, pools, parking areas, driveways, streets, walkways, patios, and all
other impervious surfaces as defined in § 94-8.39, Stormwater control, shall
be 75% of the total area of the tract. The maximum impervious coverage
permitted shall decrease by 2% for each one dwelling unit per acre above eight
dwelling units per acre constructed in accordance with Subsection G(1)(c)
above.
(3) Maximum building coverage. The maximum permitted lot coverage by
buildings shall be 30% of the total area of the tract.
(4) Maximum building height. The maximum mean building height of a principal
structure shall be 35 feet, with a maximum height of 45 feet measured to the
highest point of the roof. The mean building height of accessory structures
shall be 16 feet. "Mean height" shall be defined as the average elevation of all
outside corners of a structure from final grade to the highest point of the roof.
Each building shall be limited to two stories plus an attic above grade and a
basement which must be partly below grade. Attics and basements shall be
used only for storage, utilities, garages or similar uses.
(5) Minimum structure setbacks. Any structure constructed as part of a planned
affordable housing over commercial development shall meet the following
minimum setbacks:
(a) Fifteen feet from Newman Springs Road street line and 20 feet from a
municipal street line.
(b) Twenty feet from any internal private street (right-of-way) line.
(c) Twenty feet from an internal parking area or driveway curb or edge of
pavement.
(d) Fifty feet between the rear walls of any two buildings, measured at right
angles to the rear wall.
(e) Thirty-five feet between building front or side walls and adjacent building
front or side walls, not including bay windows or second-story balcony
overhangs.
(f) Seventy-five feet to any existing residential use or zone.
(6) Building design standards. Any residential structures constructed in the AHMU
Overlay Zone shall conform to the following minimum standards:
(a) No dwelling unit shall contain less than 300 cubic feet of storage space,
which may be within garages, basements or cellars, and which shall be in
addition to closet space provided with the unit. If within garages, a
rectangle of not less than 10 feet by 20 feet per parking space shall remain
clear for parking vehicles.
§ 94-10.20 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.20
94:393
(b) No dwelling unit shall be less than 18 feet in width, and the average width
shall be not less than 20 feet.
(c) Each dwelling unit shall contain, at a minimum, a separate bedroom, a
separate bathroom, and a kitchen which shall be located separate and
apart from other rooms, with the exception of a dining area.
(d) Building facades shall be varied in appearance in accordance with
§ 94-8.4, Architectural and building site design standards.
(e) Homeowners' association documents shall contain provisions prohibiting
the conversion of garages to any other use, including habitable living
space.
(f) Prior to final approval of any planned development, a municipal services
agreement shall be executed between the developer and the Borough,
addressing the contribution by the Borough for trash collection, snow
removal, and streetlighting in accordance with the Municipal Services
Act.
(g) Off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit in
accordance with the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards
(N.J.A.C. 5:21), at least one of which spaces shall be in an attached
garage. In addition, guest parking shall be provided at the ratio of 0.5
parking space per dwelling unit in accordance with the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21). Required
parking spaces may be provided in any combination: within attached
garages, on driveways leading to attached garages, parallel parking on
internal drives, or within collective parking lots or areas. At least one
parking space for each dwelling unit shall be within 100 feet of that
dwelling unit, measured alone the route reasonably expected to be used
to walk from the dwelling unit. Where driveways are utilized to meet
parking requirements, integrity and function of pedestrian walkways shall
be maintained.
(h) The requirements of § 94-8.19D, Garages, shall not apply to the design of
over-commercial buildings; however, applications shall incorporate sideentry
garages to the extent feasible.
(i) All development within the AH-MU Affordable Housing Over
Commercial Zones shall provide sidewalks and street trees along
Newman Springs Road in accordance with § 94-8.21, Landscaping and
shade tree regulations.
(7) Common open space and recreation facilities. Common open space and
recreation facilities shall be owned and maintained by a homeowners'
association to be established in accordance with the applicable provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
H. Buffer areas. In affordable housing mixed-use developments, a landscaped buffer
strip at least 20 feet in width shall be permanently maintained along rear property
lines adjacent to residential development.
§ 94-10.20 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.20
94:394
(1) Required buffer strips may contain earthen berms with a maximum height of
three feet and a minimum top width of six feet.
(2) Required buffer areas shall be suitably landscaped in accordance with the
requirements of § 94-8.6, Buffer areas and screening.
(3) Landscaped buffers shall be designed to provide a year-round visual screen
and shall contain a mix of deciduous and evergreen plantings and ground
cover.
(4) Buffer areas may be supplemented with fences, with a maximum height of six
feet, to provide effective visual or noise buffers.
I. Homeowners' association, covenants, and easements.
(1) All proposed restrictive covenants, articles of incorporation or other
documents concerning the creation of a homeowners' association for the
ownership and maintenance of common lands and facilities shall be submitted
to the Borough and approved by the Borough Attorney prior to final approval,
or as determined by the Land Use Board, of any proposed subdivision or any
proposed site plan.
(2) All dwelling units shall be constructed subject to such restrictions and
covenants as may be required to establish common rights and responsibilities.
J. Streets, parking, sidewalks, water supply, fire hydrants, sanitary sewers, drainage,
and stormwater management standards.
(1) Public improvements shall be designed and installed as required by the New
Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21).
(2) Streets, common driveways, parking areas, and access drives within planned
developments shall be owned and maintained by a private association to be
established by the developer in accordance with the applicable provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43, Standards for the establishment of open space
organization. The Borough shall bear no responsibility to maintain, or
contribute to the maintenance of, streets, parking areas, or common driveways.
(3) The maintenance of drainage facilities in privately owned and maintained
streets shall be the sole responsibility of the developer and homeowners'
association.
(4) Prior to final approval, the developer shall file, in writing, a request with the
Borough Clerk for the enforcement of N.J.S.A. 39:1 et seq. (Title 39), Motor
Vehicles and Traffic Regulation, within the development.
(5) In all cases where the maintenance or repair of any wall, fence or other
improvement by its owner or his agent would require entry upon an adjacent
property, an appropriate easement or right-of-way shall be created in favor of
the subject owner. All such easements shall be detailed and specific as to
required notice and any limitations upon the right of entry and shall provide a
specific means of arbitration in the event of disputes.
§ 94-10.20 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-10.20
94:395
(6) Stormwater management facilities shall be maintained solely by the developer
or homeowners' association in accordance with the provisions of § 94-8.39,
Stormwater control, and N.J.A.C. 7:8-5 (Stormwater Management).
K. Streetlights. Residential developments which necessitate the creation of internal
streets shall be designed with streetlighting meeting the following standards:
(1) All public and private streets shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure traffic
and pedestrian safety under all weather conditions in accordance with
§ 94-8.22, Lighting.
(2) All exterior lighting shall be arranged so as to reflect away from all adjoining
premises.
(3) Pedestrian walkways, excluding nature trails, shall be adequately illuminated
to provide a minimum of 0.2 footcandle in all locations.
L. Utilities. Public utilities for all planned residential developments within the AHMU
Overlay Zone shall be designed and installed in accordance with the New
Jersey Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21), and the following:
(1) Planned residential development within the AH-MU Overlay Zone shall be
served by public water and public sanitary sewer, which shall be installed by
and at the expense of the developer.
(2) All utilities shall be installed underground. The costs for the installation of all
utilities, including streetlighting, shall be borne by the developer.
(3) The developer shall establish and convey appropriate utility easements to the
appropriate utility service provider.
(4) The developer shall pay the cost of connection and transmission facilities
necessary to connect to municipal sewer and water systems.
M. Solid waste and refuse and recycling collection.
(1) Areas suitable for storage of recyclable materials shall be provided in
accordance with § 94-8.51, Recyclable materials storage.
(2) Refuse and recycling materials storage and collection areas shall be suitable
for containerized collection and shall be provided in sufficient number and at
locations convenient to all dwelling units. Such areas shall be screened from
view on three sides by solid fence, walls or other suitable materials.
(3) Refuse and recycling collection shall be provided and maintained by the entity
responsible for internal streets and other common facilities.
N. Low- and moderate-income housing obligation. Any residential development in the
AH-MU Overlay Zone shall be an inclusionary development, and the developer
shall provide a minimum of one affordable dwelling unit for every five market-rate
housing units (i.e., 20% set-aside) for sale units and 20% set-aside for rental units.
In computing the low- and moderate-income housing obligation, any portion of a
unit less than or equal to 0.50 shall not be considered, and any portion of the unit
greater than 0.50 shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
§ 94-10.20 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-10.20
94:396
ARTICLE XI
Affordable Housing Development Fees
[Added 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 858; amended 8-15-2005 by Ord. No. 859; 5-1-2006
by Ord. No. 868; 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 918; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 926;
12-17-2018 by Ord. No. 1056]
§ 94-11.1. Findings and purpose.
§ 94-11.2. Basic requirements.
§ 94-11.3. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this article, shall have the following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary
development, a municipal construction project or a 100% affordable housing
development.
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option or
A. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Borough, 121 N.J. 550 (1990), the
New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory development fees are
authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the
State Constitution, subject to the adoption of Rules by the Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH).
B. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the Statewide
Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), COAH
was authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations necessary for the
establishment, implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal
affordable housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities
that were under the jurisdiction of COAH, and that are now before a court of
competent jurisdiction and have a Court-approved Spending Plan, may retain fees
collected from nonresidential development.
C. This article establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and expenditure
of development fees that are consistent with COAH's regulations developed in
response to P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32-38 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7).
Fees collected pursuant to this article shall be used for the sole purpose of providing
low- and moderate-income housing in accordance with a court-approved spending
plan.
A. This article shall not be effective until approved by the court.
B. The Borough of Shrewsbury shall not spend development fees until the court has
approved a plan for spending such fees ("spending plan").
§ 94-11.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-11.3
94:397
contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such
land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of property
as permitted by applicable COAH regulations.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided by the
current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in which the property
is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c.123
(N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through N.J.S.A. 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the impact of
development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety and well-being of
residents by producing durable, low-maintenance, resource-efficient housing while
making optimum use of existing infrastructure and community services.
§ 94-11.4. Residential development fees.
A. Imposition of fees.
(1) Within the Borough of Shrewsbury, all residential developers, except for
developers of the types of developments specifically exempted below and
developers of developments that include affordable housing, shall pay a fee of
1.5% of the equalized assessed value for all new residential development
provided no increased density is permitted. Development fees shall also be
imposed and collected when an additional dwelling unit is added to an existing
residential structure; in such cases, the fee shall be calculated based on the
increase in the equalized assessed value of the property due to the additional
dwelling unit.
(2) When an increase in residential density is permitted pursuant to a "d" variance
granted under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), developers shall be required to pay a
"bonus" development fee of 6% of the equalized assessed value for each
additional unit that may be realized, except that this provision shall not be
applicable to a development that will include affordable housing. If the zoning
on a site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application, the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right during the twoyear
period preceding the filing of the variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
developments.
(1) Affordable housing developments, developments where the developer is
providing for the construction of affordable units elsewhere in the
municipality, and/or developments where the developer has made a payment
in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units, if permitted by ordinance or
by agreement with the Borough of Shrewsbury, shall be exempt from the
payment of development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan approval prior
to the adoption of Shrewsbury's first adopted Development Fee Ordinance
shall be exempt from the payment of development fees, unless the developer
§ 94-11.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-11.4
94:398
§ 94-11.5. Nonresidential development fees.
seeks a substantial change in the original approval. Where site plan approval
is not applicable, the issuance of a zoning and/or building permit shall be
synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for the purpose
of determining the right to an exemption. In all cases, the applicable fee
percentage shall be determined based upon the Development Fee Ordinance in
effect on the date that the building permit is issued.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure
undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished and replaced, or is
expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise exempt from the development fee
requirement. The development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(4) Nonprofit organizations which have received tax-exempt status pursuant to
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, providing current evidence of
that status is submitted to the Municipal Clerk, together with a certification
that services of the organization are provided at reduced rates to those who
establish an inability to pay existing charges, shall be exempted from paying a
development fee.
(5) Federal, state, county and local governments shall be exempted from paying a
development fee.
(6) Homes demolished and replaced as a result of a natural disaster (such as a fire
or flood) shall be exempt from the payment of a development fee.
A. Imposition of fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for developers of
the types of developments specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee equal
to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land and improvements, for all
new nonresidential construction on an unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for developers of
the types of developments specifically exempted below, shall also pay a fee
equal to 2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential purposes.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure is
demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5% shall be calculated on
the difference between the equalized assessed value of the preexisting land and
improvements and the equalized assessed value of the newly improved
structure, i.e. land and improvements, and such calculation shall be made at
the time a final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation required
under this section results in a negative number, the nonresidential development
fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for nonresidential
development.
§ 94-11.4 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-11.5
94:399
§ 94-11.6. Collection procedures.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market rate
development shall be subject to a 2.5% development fee, unless otherwise
exempted below.
(2) The 2.5% development fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within the existing footprint,
reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the exemptions required
pursuant to the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.1 through 8.7), as specified in Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption." Any exemption
claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to the Statewide Nonresidential
Development Fee Act shall be subject to the fee at such time as the basis for
the exemption no longer applies, and shall make the payment of the
nonresidential development fee, in that event, within three years after that
event or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy for the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a nonresidential
development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt from property taxation, the
owner of the property shall remit the fees required pursuant to this section
within 45 days of the termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances may be
enforceable by the Borough of Shrewsbury as a lien against the real property
of the owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval for a
development, the applicable approving authority or entity shall direct its staff to
notify the Borough Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit.
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be provided with a
copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
Certification/Exemption" to be completed as per the instructions provided. The
developer of a nonresidential development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the
instructions provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions provided in the
Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions and prepare estimated and
final assessments as per the instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building permit shall
notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first building permit for a
development which is subject to a development fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of such notification, the Borough Tax Assessor, based on
§ 94-11.5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-11.6
94:400
§ 94-11.7. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized assessed value of the
development.
E. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy shall notify the Borough Tax Assessor of any and all requests for the
scheduling of a final inspection on a property that is subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final inspection, the
Borough Tax Assessor shall confirm or modify the previously estimated equalized
assessed value of the improvements associated with the development; calculate the
development fee; and thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should the Borough of Shrewsbury fail to determine or notify the developer of the
amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the request for final
inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and pay that estimated
amount consistent with the dispute process set forth in Subsection b of Section 37
of P.L. 2008, c.46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. 50% of the initially calculated development fee shall be collected at the time of
issuance of the building permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the time
of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be responsible for
paying the difference between the fee calculated at the time of issuance of the
building permit and that determined at the time of issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed by filing a
challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Such a challenge must be made
within 45 days from the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be placed in an
interest bearing escrow account by the Borough of Shrewsbury. Appeals from
a determination of the Board may be made to the tax court in accordance with
the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et
seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees imposed by filing
a challenge with the Director of the Division of Taxation. Pending a review
and determination by the Director, which shall be made within 45 days of
receipt of the challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing
escrow account by the Borough of Shrewsbury. Appeals from a determination
of the Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions
of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90
days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed
shall be credited to the prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing Affordable Housing Trust Fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer of the Borough of Shrewsbury for
the purpose of depositing development fees collected from residential and
§ 94-11.6 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-11.7
94:401
§ 94-11.8. Use of funds.
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished
controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units or of a fraction of
an affordable unit, where permitted by ordinance or by agreement with the
Borough of Shrewsbury.
(2) Funds contributed by developers to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in a
townhouse or other multistory attached dwelling unit development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with Shrewsbury's affordable housing
program.
C. (1) In the event of a failure by the Borough of Shrewsbury to comply with trust
fund monitoring and reporting requirements or to submit accurate monitoring
reports; or a failure to comply with the conditions of the judgment of
compliance or a revocation of the judgment of compliance; or a failure to
implement the approved spending plan and to expend funds within the
applicable required time period as set forth in In re Tp. of Monroe, 442 N.J.
Super. 565 (Law Div. 2015) (aff'd 442 N.J. Super. 563); or the expenditure of
funds on activities not approved by the court; or for other good cause
demonstrating the unapproved use(s) of funds, the court may authorize the
State of New Jersey, Department of Community Affairs, Division of Local
Government Services (LGS), to direct the manner in which the funds in the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall be expended, provided that all such
funds shall, to the extent practicable, be utilized for affordable housing
programs within the Borough of Shrewsbury, or, if not practicable, then within
the county or the housing region.
(2) Any party may bring a motion before the Superior Court presenting evidence
of such condition(s), and the Court may, after considering the evidence and
providing the municipality a reasonable opportunity to respond and/or to
remedy the noncompliant condition(s), and upon a finding of continuing and
deliberate noncompliance, determine to authorize LGS to direct the
expenditure of funds in the Trust Fund. The Court may also impose such other
remedies as may be reasonable and appropriate to the circumstances.
D. Interest accrued in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall only be used to fund
eligible affordable housing activities approved by the Court.
§ 94-11.7 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-11.8
94:402
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved by the
court. Funds deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust Fund may be used for any
activity approved by the court to address the Borough of Shrewsbury's fair share
obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such activities
include, but are not limited to preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose
of maintaining or implementing affordability controls; housing rehabilitation; new
construction of affordable housing units and related costs; accessory apartments; a
market to affordable program; Regional Housing Partnership programs; conversion
of existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units; green building
strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted national or
state standards; purchase of land for affordable housing; improvement of land to be
used for affordable housing; extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure
to affordable housing sites; financial assistance designed to increase affordability;
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan; and/or any other activity permitted by the court and specified in the
approved spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough of Shrewsbury for past
housing activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned on such fees shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income households
in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the
affordability assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of the
median income for Housing Region 4, in which Shrewsbury is located.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down-payment assistance,
security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental assistance, assistance
with homeowners' association or condominium fees and special assessments,
and assistance with emergency repairs. The specific programs to be used for
affordability assistance shall be identified and described within the spending
plan.
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of median income
may include buying down the cost of low- or moderate-income units in the
municipal Fair Share Plan to make them affordable to households earning 30%
or less of median income. The specific programs to be used for very low
income affordability assistance shall be identified and described within the
spending plan.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable housing units on site, if permitted
by ordinance or by agreement with the Borough of Shrewsbury, and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt from the
affordability assistance requirement.
D. The Borough of Shrewsbury may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including its
programs for affordability assistance.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may be
expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries and benefits for
§ 94-11.8 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-11.8
94:403
§ 94-11.9. Monitoring.
The Borough of Shrewsbury shall provide annual reporting of Affordable Housing Trust
Fund activity to the State of New Jersey, Department of Community Affairs, Council
on Affordable Housing or Local Government Services or other entity designated by
the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center and
posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for this purpose by the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on Affordable Housing or Local
Government Services. The reporting shall include an accounting of all Affordable
Housing Trust Fund activity, including the sources and amounts of funds collected and
the amounts and purposes for which any funds have been expended. Such reporting shall
include an accounting of development fees collected from residential and nonresidential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site (if permitted by
ordinance or by agreement with the Borough) funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income from Borough owned
affordable housing units, repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any
other funds collected in connection with Shrewsbury's affordable housing programs,
as well as an accounting of the expenditures of revenues and implementation of the
spending plan approved by the court.
§ 94-11.10. Ongoing collection of fees.
municipal employees or consultants' fees necessary to develop or implement a
new construction program, prepare a Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or
administer an affirmative marketing program or a rehabilitation program.
(1) In the case of a rehabilitation program, the administrative costs of the
rehabilitation program shall be included as part of the 20% of collected
development fees that may be expended on administration.
(2) Administrative funds may be used for income qualification of households,
monitoring the turnover of sale and rental units, and compliance with COAH's
monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing
affordable housing sites or related to securing or appealing a judgment from
the Court are not eligible uses of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
A. The ability for the Borough of Shrewsbury to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with the expiration of the repose period covered by
its judgment of compliance unless the Borough of Shrewsbury has first filed an
adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with the court or with a designated
state administrative agency, has petitioned for a judgment of compliance from the
court or for substantive certification or its equivalent from a state administrative
agency authorized to approve and administer municipal affordable housing
compliance and has received approval of its Development Fee Ordinance from the
entity that will be reviewing and approving the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan.
B. If the Borough of Shrewsbury fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of its judgment of compliance, it may be
subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its Affordable Housing
Trust Fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey
§ 94-11.8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-11.10
94:404
Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c.
222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320).
C. The Borough of Shrewsbury shall not impose a residential development fee on a
development that receives preliminary or final site plan approval after the
expiration of its judgment of compliance, nor shall the Borough of Shrewsbury
retroactively impose a development fee on such a development. The Borough of
Shrewsbury also shall not expend any of its collected development fees after the
expiration of its judgment of compliance.
§ 94-11.10 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-11.10
94:405

ARTICLE XII
Affordable Housing Requirements
[Added 5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 1058]
§ 94-12.1. Purpose. [Amended 12-7-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-1077]
§ 94-12.2. Monitoring and reporting requirements.
The Borough of Shrewsbury shall comply with the following monitoring and reporting
requirements regarding the status of the implementation of its Superior Court approved
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan:
A. This section is intended to assure that very-low-, low-, and moderate-income units
("affordable units") are created with controls on affordability and that very-low-,
low-, and moderate-income households shall occupy these units. This section shall
apply except where inconsistent with applicable law.
B. The Borough of Shrewsbury Land Use Board has adopted a Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. (hereinafter "Fair Share Plan"). The Fair Share Plan was endorsed by the
Borough Council. The Fair Share Plan describes how the Borough of Shrewsbury
shall address its fair share of very-low-, low-, and moderate-income housing as
documented in the Fair Share Plan itself, the Settlement Agreement entered into
between the Borough and Fair Share Housing Center ("FSHC") on June 20, 2017
(hereinafter "FSHC Settlement Agreement"), and the Superior Court Order
approving same, which was entered by the Court on September 26, 2017, after a
properly noticed fairness hearing.
C. The Borough of Shrewsbury shall track the status of the implementation of the Fair
Share Plan.
A. Beginning one year after the entry of the Borough's Round 3 Judgment of
Compliance and Repose, and on every anniversary of that date through 2025, the
Borough shall provide an annual report of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund
activity to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on
Affordable Housing, or Local Government Services, or other entity designated by
the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center (FSHC)
and posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for this purpose by the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs (NJDCA), Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH), or Local Government Services (NJLGS). The report shall
include an accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the
source and amount of funds collected and the amount and purpose for which any
funds have been expended.
B. Beginning one year after approval of the settlement agreement entered into between
the Borough and FSHC after a fairness hearing, and on every anniversary of that
date through 2025, the Borough agrees to provide an annual report of the status of
all affordable housing activity within the municipality through posting on the
municipal website with a copy of such posting provided to Fair Share Housing
Center, using forms previously developed for this purpose by COAH, or any other
forms endorsed by the Superior Court Appointed Special Master and FSHC.
§ 94-12.1 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-12.2
94:407
§ 94-12.3. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this article shall have the meanings given in this
section:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit with a
kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private entrance, which is created
within an existing home, or through the conversion of an existing accessory structure
on the same site, or by an addition to an existing home or accessory building, or by the
construction of a new accessory structure on the same site.
ACT—The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.),
as has been subsequently amended.
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design standards of the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Borough responsible
for the administration of affordable units in accordance with this article, applicable
COAH regulations and the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls (UHAC) (N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq.)
C. The Fair Housing Act includes two provisions regarding action to be taken by the
Borough during its ten-year repose period. The Borough will comply with those
provisions as follows:
(1) For the midpoint realistic opportunity review due on July 1, 2020, as required
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the Borough will post on its municipal
website, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center, a status report as
to its implementation of its plan and an analysis of whether any unbuilt sites
or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to present a realistic opportunity and
whether the mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit
comments to the Borough, with a copy to Fair Share Housing Center,
regarding whether any sites no longer present a realistic opportunity and
should be replaced and whether the mechanisms to meet unmet need should be
revised or supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a
hearing before the Superior Court regarding these issues.
(2) For the review of very-low-income housing requirements required by N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of the third anniversary of the entry of the
Borough's Judgement of Compliance and Repose, and every third year
thereafter, the Borough will post on its municipal website, with a copy
provided to Fair Share Housing Center, a status report as to its satisfaction of
its very-low-income requirements, including the family very-low-income
requirements referenced herein. Such posting shall invite any interested party
to submit comments to the Borough and Fair Share Housing Center on the
issue of whether the Borough has complied with its very-low-income housing
obligation under the terms of this settlement.
(3) In addition to the foregoing postings, the Borough may also elect to file copies
of its reports with COAH or its successor agency at the state level.
§ 94-12.2 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-12.3
94:408
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed to attract
buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income at which
restricted units in an affordable housing development are affordable to low- and
moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE—A sales price or rent within the means of a low- or moderate-income
household as defined by COAH in its applicable regulations or an equivalent controlling
New Jersey state agency; in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the unit conforms to the
standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development all or a portion of which
consists of restricted units.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Borough's Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary
development, a municipal construction project or a 100% affordable development.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in the Borough's Fair
Share Plan prepared or implemented to address the Borough's fair share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to the Act,
credited pursuant to applicable COAH regulations, the FSHC Settlement Agreement, or
an order of the Superior Court.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs of, and
exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the population such that: 1)
all the residents of the development where the unit is situated are 62 years or older; or 2)
at least 80% of the units are occupied by one person that is 55 years or older; or 3) the
development has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development as "housing for older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2)
of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency established by
P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households live
in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central heat and common
areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are not limited to: transitional
facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D, and E boarding homes as regulated by
the State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential health care
facilities as regulated by the New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the
developmentally disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New
Jersey Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE—A facility licensed by the New Jersey Department
of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style housing and congregate dining
and to assure that assisted living services are available when needed for four or more
adult persons unrelated to the proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum,
one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
§ 94-12.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-12.3
94:409
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD—A household that has been certified by an administrative
agent as a very-low-income household, low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT—A housing unit with health and safety code violations
that require the repair or replacement of a major system. A major system includes
weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary
plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint abatement and/or load bearing structural
systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, entity, company or corporation
that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any land proposed to be included
in a proposed development including the holder of an option to contract or purchase, or
other person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement
of any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or of any mining,
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure,
or land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both affordable
units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not necessarily limited to: new
construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to residential and the creation
of new affordable units through the reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual household
income equal to 50% or less of the median household income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT—A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing, electrical, fire
protection, or occupant service components of a building, which include but are not
limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells), heating, electricity,
sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint abatement or load bearing
structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderate-income
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN-INCOME—The median income by household size for the applicable county,
as adopted annually by the Department.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the median household income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a moderateincome
household.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing body
with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the affordable housing
program for Shrewsbury.
§ 94-12.3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-12.3
94:410
NON-EXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the transfer of
ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership between former spouses
ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including
sales to third parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result of
inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary
and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently income-eligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units such that no
preference is given to one applicant over another except for purposes of matching
household income and size with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit (e.g.,
by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing region
affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of the regional median
as defined by the Department's adopted Regional Income Limits published annually by
COAH, a successor entity or established by the Court.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of any
building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the rent
paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities computed in
accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section 8 program. In assisted
living residences, rent does not include charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or ownership unit, that
is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, but does not include a market-rate unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
THE DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community Affairs of the State of New
Jersey, that was established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1
et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the median household income.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a very-lowincome
household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl space),
siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows, replacement storm
doors, replacement windows and replacement doors, and is considered a major system
for rehabilitation.
§ 94-12.4. Applicability.
A. The provisions of this section shall apply to all affordable housing developments
and affordable housing units that currently exist and that are proposed to be created
within the Borough of Shrewsbury pursuant to the Borough's most recently adopted
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.
§ 94-12.3 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-12.4
94:411
§ 94-12.5. Rehabilitation programs.
§ 94-12.6. Alternative living arrangements.
B. This section shall apply to all developments that contain low-and moderate-income
housing units, including any currently unanticipated future developments that will
provide low- and moderate-income housing units.
A. The Borough of Shrewsbury and FSHC have agreed that the Borough's Round 3
(1999-2025) indigenous need Rehabilitation Obligation is 51 units. The Borough
will address its Round 3 Rehabilitation Obligation via participation in the
Monmouth County Rehabilitation Program and/or hiring a separate qualified entity
to rehabilitate units in the Borough. The rehabilitation programs will update and
renovate deficient housing units occupied by low- and moderate-income
households such that, after rehabilitation, these units will comply with the New
Jersey State Housing Code pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:28.
(1) All rehabilitated rental and owner-occupied units shall remain affordable to
low and moderate-income households for a period of 10 years (the control
period). For owner-occupied units, the control period will be enforced with a
lien and for renter occupied units the control period will be enforced with a
deed restriction.
(2) The Borough of Shrewsbury shall dedicate an average of at least $10,000 for
each unit to be rehabilitated through this program, reflecting the minimum
hard cost of rehabilitation for each unit.
(3) Units in the rehabilitation programs shall be exempt from N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 and
UHAC requirements, but shall be administered in accordance with the
following:
(a) If a unit is vacant, upon initial rental subsequent to rehabilitation, or if a
renter-occupied unit is re-rented prior to the end of controls on
affordability, the deed restriction shall require the unit to be rented to a
low- or moderate-income household at an affordable rent and
affirmatively marketed pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 and UHAC.
(b) If a unit is renter-occupied, upon completion of the rehabilitation, the
maximum rate of rent shall be the lesser of the current rent or the
maximum permitted rent pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 and UHAC.
(c) Rents in rehabilitated units may increase annually based on the standards
in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 or the standards issued by a New Jersey administrative
agency with proper authority to issue such standards.
(d) Applicant and/or tenant households shall be certified as income-eligible
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-9 and UHAC, except that households
in owner occupied units shall be exempt from the regional asset limit.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in compliance with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following exceptions:
§ 94-12.4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-12.6
94:412
§ 94-12.7. Phasing schedule for inclusionary developments.
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-Rate
Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Low- and
Moderate-Income Units Completed
25% 0%
25% + 1% 10%
50% 50%
75% 75%
90% 100%
§ 94-12.8. New construction.
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15), provided, however, that the
units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the provider in
accordance with an alternative plan approved by the Superior Court;
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a twenty-year
operating contract with the Department of Human Services, Division of
Developmental Disabilities, alternative living arrangements shall have at least
thirty-year controls on affordability in accordance with UHAC, unless an
alternative commitment is approved by the Superior Court.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as the
administrative agent for the purposes of administering the affirmative marketing
and affordability requirements for the alternative living arrangement.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing units:
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low and moderateincome
units, except that where there is an odd number of affordable housing
units, the extra unit shall be a low-income unit. At least 13% of all restricted
rental units shall be very-low-income units (affordable to a household earning
30% or less of regional median income by household size). The very-lowincome
units shall be counted as part of the required number of low-income
units within the development. At least 50% of the very-low-income units must
be available to families.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units within each
bedroom distribution shall be very-low or low-income units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be structured in
conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one bedroom units shall be no
greater than 20% of the total low- and moderate-income units;
§ 94-12.6 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-12.8
94:413
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be two bedroom
units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be three
bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and three-bedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured such that
the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of age-restricted low- and
moderate-income units within the inclusionary development. This standard
may be met by having all one-bedroom units or by having a two-bedroom unit
for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements:
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units
in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Sub Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in other
multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is attached to at least
one other dwelling unit shall have the following features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door or the
casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor; and
(e) If all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B B(2)(a) through (d),
above, cannot be satisfied, then an interior accessible route of travel must
be provided between stories within an individual unit, but if all of the
terms of Subsection B B(2)(a) through (d), above, have been satisfied,
then an interior accessible route of travel shall not be required between
stories within an individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-311a et seq.), and the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or
evidence that Shrewsbury has collected funds from the developer
sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable entrances in the development
accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable entrance, upon
the request of a disabled person who is purchasing or will reside in
the dwelling unit, an accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit funds into the
Borough of Shrewsbury's Affordable Housing Trust Fund sufficient
to install accessible entrances in 10% of the affordable units that
§ 94-12.8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-12.8
94:414
have been constructed with adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f) above shall be used
by the Borough of Shrewsbury for the sole purpose of making the
adaptable entrance of an affordable unit accessible when requested
to do so by a person with a disability who occupies or intends to
occupy the unit and requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design plan and
cost estimate to the Construction Official of the Borough of
Shrewsbury for the conversion of adaptable to accessible entrances.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the design plan
to convert the unit entrances from adaptable to accessible meet the
requirements of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that
the cost estimate of such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be
made to the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of the
Borough Chief Financial Officer who shall ensure that the funds are
deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and appropriately
earmarked.
(g) Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be required where
an entity can demonstrate that it is "site impracticable" to meet the
requirements. Determinations of site impracticability shall be in
compliance with the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design:
(1) In inclusionary developments, very-low-, low- and moderate-income units
shall be integrated with the market units to the extent possible.
(2) In inclusionary developments, very-low-, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities as the
market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices:
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units, the
administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in UHAC, utilizing
the most recently published regional weighted average of the uncapped
Section 8 income limits published by HUD.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each affordable
development shall be affordable to households earning no more than 60% of
median income, and the average rent for restricted rental units shall be
affordable to households earning no more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units shall
establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both low-income and
moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of all low and moderateincome
rental units shall be affordable to very-low-income households, which
very-low-income units shall be part of the low-income requirement.
§ 94-12.8 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-12.8
94:415
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each affordable
development shall be affordable to households earning no more than 70% of
median income, and each affordable development must achieve an
affordability average of 55% for restricted ownership units; in achieving this
affordability average, moderate-income ownership units must be available for
at least three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales prices for
each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units other than assisted
living facilities and age-restricted developments, the following standards shall
be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 1.5 person household;
(c) A two bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person household;
(d) A three bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 4.5 person household; and
(e) A four bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with the
affordability average requirements for restricted units in assisted living
facilities and age-restricted developments, the following standards shall be
used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one and 1.5 person
household; and
(c) A two bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person household or to
two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be calculated
so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including principal and interest
(based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal
Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed
28% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented;
provided, however, that the price shall be subject to the affordability average
requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as not to exceed
30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household,
including an allowance for tenant paid utilities, as determined under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.4, as may be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the
rent shall be subject to the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.3, as may be amended and supplemented.
§ 94-12.8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-12.8
94:416
§ 94-12.9. Utilities.
(9) Income limits for all units that are part of the Borough's Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan, and for which income limits are not already established
through a federal program exempted from the Uniform Housing Affordability
Controls pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, shall be updated by the Borough
annually within 30 days of the publication of determinations of median income
by HUD as follows:
(a) The income limit for a moderate-income unit for a household of four shall
be 80% of the HUD determination of the median income for COAH
Region 4 for a family of four. The income limit for a low-income unit for
a household of four shall be 50% of the HUD determination of the median
income for COAH Region 4 for a family of four. The income limit for a
very low-income unit for a household of four shall be 30% of the HUD
determination of the median income for COAH Region 4 for a family of
four. These income limits shall be adjusted by household size based on
multipliers used by HUD to adjust median income by household size. In
no event shall the income limits be less than the previous year.
(b) The income limits are based on carrying out the process in Subsection
D(9) based on HUD determination of median income for the current
fiscal year, and shall be utilized by the Borough until new income limits
are available.
(10) In establishing sale prices and rents of affordable housing units, the
administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in UHAC, utilizing
the regional income limits established by the Council:
(a) The price of owner-occupied very-low, low and moderate-income units
may increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region determined pursuant to
Paragraph g. In no event shall the maximum resale price established by
the administrative agent be lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(b) The rents of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the permitted percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the Southern New Jersey Area, upon
its publication for the prior calendar year. This increase shall not exceed
9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to low-income
housing tax credit regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations
governing low- income housing tax credits.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market units within
an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth in the lease
and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved by the NJDCA for its
Section 8 program.
§ 94-12.8 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-12.10
94:417
§ 94-12.10. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the administrative agent
shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an undue delay in the occupancy of a
unit, strive to:
§ 94-12.11. Control periods for restricted ownership units and enforcement
mechanisms.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and each restricted ownership
unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this section for a period of at least
30 years, until Shrewsbury Borough takes action to release the unit from such
requirements; prior to such action, a restricted ownership unit must remain subject
to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall commence on
the date the initial certified household takes title to the unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a restricted ownership
unit and upon each successive sale during the period of restricted ownership, the
Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a particular
developer, shall determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine
the non-restricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal or the
unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall execute and
deliver to the Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent appointed
by a particular developer, a recapture note obligating the purchaser (as well as the
purchaser's heirs, successors and assigns) to repay, upon the first non-exempt sale
after the unit's release from the restrictions set forth in this section, an amount equal
to the difference between the unit's non-restricted fair market value and its restricted
price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture lien evidenced by a
duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this section shall remain in effect despite the
entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with respect to restricted
ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing certificate of
occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction Official stating that the
unit meets all Code standards upon the first transfer of title following the removal
of the restrictions provided under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and
supplemented.
§ 94-12.10 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-12.12
94:418
§ 94-12.12. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units, homeowner
association fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 94-12.13. Buyer income eligibility.
§ 94-12.14. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be approved by the
Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a particular
developer.
B. The Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a
particular developer, shall approve all resale prices, in writing and in advance of the
resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no distinction
between the condominium or homeowner association fees and special assessments
paid by low and moderate-income purchasers and those paid by market purchasers,
unless the master deed for the inclusionary project was executed prior to the
enactment of UHAC.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the Borough's administrative
agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a particular developer, to increase
the maximum sales price for the unit on the basis of anticipated capital
improvements. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or the addition of a bathroom.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, such that low-income
ownership units shall be reserved for households with a gross household income
less than or equal to 50% of median income and moderate-income ownership units
shall be reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80% of
median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a restricted
ownership unit when the household is a low-income household or a moderateincome
household, as applicable to the unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost
for the particular unit (including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private
mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted ownership unit, the
owner shall apply to the Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent
appointed by a particular developer, for a determination in writing that the proposed
indebtedness complies with the provisions of this section, and the Borough's
administrative agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a particular
developer, shall issue such determination prior to the owner incurring such
indebtedness.
§ 94-12.12 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-12.14
94:419
§ 94-12.15. Capital improvements to ownership units.
§ 94-12.16. Control periods for restricted rental units.
B. With the exception of first-purchase money mortgages, neither an owner nor a
lender shall at any time cause or permit the total indebtedness secured by a
restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of the maximum allowable resale price of
the unit, as such price is determined by the Borough's administrative agent, or an
administrative agent appointed by a particular developer, in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the Borough's administrative
agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a particular developer, to increase
the maximum sales price for the unit on the basis of capital improvements made
since the purchase of the unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that
render the unit suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom.
In no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit exceed the
limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that are
permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was initially
restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer, dishwasher, wall-to-wall
carpeting) shall be included in the maximum allowable resale price. Other items
may be sold to the purchaser at a reasonable price that has been approved by the
Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a particular
developer, at the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the unit and not
included in the base price may be made a condition of the unit resale provided the
price, which shall be subject to ten-year, straight-line depreciation, has been
approved by the Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent
appointed by a particular developer. Unless otherwise approved by the Borough's
administrative agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a particular
developer, the purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser must personally
certify at the time of closing that no unapproved transfer of funds for the purpose of
selling and receiving property has taken place at the time of or as a condition of
resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each restricted rental unit
shall remain subject to the requirements of this section for a period of at least 30
years, until Shrewsbury Borough takes action to release the unit from such
requirements. Prior to such action, a restricted rental unit must remain subject to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall contain deed
restriction language. The deed restriction shall have priority over all mortgages on
the property, and the deed restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with
the records office of the County of Monmouth. A copy of the filed document shall
be provided to the Borough's administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a
§ 94-12.14 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-12.16
94:420
§ 94-12.17. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
§ 94-12.18. Tenant income eligibility.
certificate of occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls described
in this section despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the property
containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and tenants shall be
responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as stated on the
lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted rental unit shall be provided to
the Borough's administrative agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a
particular developer.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent (except, in the
case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the customary charges for food
and services) without the express written approval of the Borough's administrative
agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a particular developer.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not exceed 5% of
the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall be payable to the
developer and/or landlord or to the Borough's administrative agent appointed by a
particular developer. If the fees are paid to the Borough's administrative agent or an
administrative agent appointed by a particular developer they are to be applied to
the costs of administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
section.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be applicable to either
the market units or the affordable units in any development in which at least 15%
of the total number of dwelling units are restricted rental units in compliance with
this article.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.13, as may
be amended and supplemented, and shall be determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 30% of the regional median household
income by household size.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 50% of the regional median household
income by household size.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than 80% of the regional median household income by
§ 94-12.16 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-12.18
94:421
§ 94-12.19. Municipal housing liaison.
household size.
B. The Borough's administrative agent, or a qualified administrative agent appointed
by a particular developer, shall certify a household as eligible for a restricted rental
unit when the household is a very low-income household, low-income household
or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed
for the unit does not exceed 35% (40%) for age-restricted units) of the household's
eligible monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if
one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40%) for households eligible
for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for rent, and the
proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40%) for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly income for rent in the past
and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the household
proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party assistance from an
outside source such as a family member in a form acceptable to the
administrative agent and the owner of the unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the existence of the
circumstances in Subsection B(1) through (5) above with the Borough's
administrative agent, or an administrative agent appointed by a particular
developer, who shall counsel the household on budgeting.
A. The position of Municipal Housing Liaison (MHL) for the Borough of Shrewsbury
is established by this section. The Borough shall make the actual appointment of
the MHL by means of a resolution.
(1) The MHL must be either a full-time or part-time employee of Shrewsbury.
(2) The person appointed as the MHL must be reported to the Superior Court and
thereafter posted on the Borough's website.
(3) The MHL must meet all the requirements for qualifications, including initial
and periodic training, if such training is made available by COAH or the DCA.
(4) The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Borough of
Shrewsbury, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out to the administrative agent, or the administrative agent
appointed by a specific developer:
§ 94-12.18 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-12.19
94:422
§ 94-12.20. Administrative agent.
An administrative agent may be either an independent entity serving under contract to
and reporting to the Borough, or reporting to a specific individual developer. The fees of
the administrative agent shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units for which the
services of the administrative agent are required. The Borough administrative agent shall
monitor and work with any individual administrative agents appointed by individual
developers. The administrative agent(s) shall perform the duties and responsibilities of
an administrative agent as set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in Sections
5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which includes:
(a) Serving as the municipality's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the State, affordable housing providers, administrative agents and
interested households;
(b) The implementation of the Affirmative Marketing Plan and affordability
controls;
(c) When applicable, supervising any contracting administrative agent;
(d) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough's Fair Share
Plan;
(e) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as required;
(f) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable; and
(g) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability controls,
compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing as offered or approved
by the Affordable Housing Professionals of New Jersey (AHPNJ), if such
continuing education opportunities are made available by COAH or the
DCA.
B. Subject to the approval of the Superior Court, the Borough of Shrewsbury shall
designate one or more administrative agent(s) to administer and to affirmatively
market the affordable units constructed in the Borough in accordance with UHAC
and this section.
A. Affirmative marketing:
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable housing
units in accordance with the Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Borough of
Shrewsbury and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services to low and
moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household certification:
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews with
interested households;
§ 94-12.19 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-12.20
94:423
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of gross
income and assets upon which to base a determination of income eligibility for
a low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the determination of
eligibility or non-eligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a certificate
substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the ownership or rental
certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant households living
in the housing region and eligible applicant households with members working
in the housing region where the units are located;
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the Affirmative
Marketing Plan of the Borough of Shrewsbury when referring households for
certification to affordable units; and
(7) Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable housing units
in the Borough of Shrewsbury: Fair Share Housing Center, the New Jersey
State Conference of the NAACP, the Latino Action Network, STEPS,
OCEAN, Inc., the Greater Red Bank, Asbury Park/Neptune, Bayshore,
Greater Freehold, Greater Long Branch, and Trenton Branches of the NAACP,
and the Supportive Housing Association.
C. Affordability controls:
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions and
mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of each restricted
unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its control period,
including the recorded deed with restrictions, recorded mortgage and note, as
appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation of the
mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the Monmouth County
Register of Deeds or the Monmouth County Clerk's office after the termination
of the affordability controls for each restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or certifications
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
D. Resales and re-rentals:
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information
between owners and the Borough's administrative agent, or any administrative
agent appointed by a specific developer, regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or re-rental; and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating information
§ 94-12.20 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-12.20
94:424
to very-low, low and moderate-income households regarding the availability
of restricted units for resale or re-rental.
E. Processing requests from unit owners:
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance during the term of
their ownership that the amount of indebtedness to be incurred will not violate
the terms of this section;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from owners of
restricted units who wish to make capital improvements to the units that would
affect the selling price, such authorizations to be limited to those
improvements resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the
depreciated cost of central air conditioning systems;
(3) Notifying the Borough of an owner's intent to sell a restricted unit; and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units for hardship
waivers.
F. Enforcement:
(1) Securing annually from the Borough a list of all affordable housing units for
which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners, and notifying all such owners
that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at the earliest
point of contact in the processing of the project or development, written
acknowledgement of the requirement that no restricted unit can be offered, or
in any other way committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the Borough's administrative agent, or any
administrative agent appointed by a specific developer;
(3) Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two family homes), a
notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with the telephone number
of the Borough's administrative agent, or any administrative agent appointed
by a specific developer, where complaints of excess rent or other charges can
be made:
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units, reminding
them of the notices and requirements outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the Borough's
Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each affordable
housing program administered by the Borough's administrative agent, or any
administrative agent appointed by a specific developer, to be approved by the
Borough Council and the Superior Court, setting forth procedures for
administering the affordability controls.
G. Additional responsibilities.
§ 94-12.20 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-12.20
94:425
§ 94-12.21. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(1) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions necessary
and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities hereunder.
(2) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for submission to
the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet the Court-approved monitoring
and reporting requirements in accordance with the deadlines set forth in this
section. The Borough's administrative agent will be responsible for collecting
monitoring information from any administrative agents appointed by specific
developers.
(3) The Borough's administrative agent, or any administrative agent appointed by
a specific developer, shall attend continuing education sessions on
affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing at
least annually and more often as needed.
A. The Borough of Shrewsbury shall adopt by resolution an Affirmative Marketing
Plan that is compliant with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and
supplemented.
B. The Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy designed to attract
buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority groups, regardless of race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, marital or familial status, gender, affectional or
sexual orientation, disability, age or number of children to housing units which are
being marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to target those potentially eligible persons
who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that region. It is a continuing
program that directs marketing activities toward Housing Region 4 and is required
to be followed throughout the period of restriction.
C. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference for all
households that live and/or work in Housing Region 4, comprised of Mercer,
Monmouth and Ocean Counties.
D. The Borough has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the Affirmative Marketing
Plan and for the proper administration of the Affirmative Marketing Program,
including initial sales and rentals and re-sales and re-rentals. The Borough's
administrative agent designated by the Borough of Shrewsbury, or any
administrative agent appointed by a specific developer, shall implement the
Affirmative Marketing Plan to assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable
units.
E. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Borough's administrative
agent, or any administrative agent appointed by a specific developer, shall provide
a list of counseling services to very-low, low, and moderate-income applicants on
subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
F. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall describe the media to be used in advertising
and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing the Affirmative
Marketing Plan, the Borough's administrative agent, or any administrative agent
§ 94-12.20 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-12.21
94:426
§ 94-12.22. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
appointed by a specific developer, shall consider the use of language translations
where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall begin at least
120 days prior to the expected date of occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several locations,
including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building and/or the County
Library for each county within the housing region; and the municipal building in
which the units are located; and the developer's rental office. Applications shall be
mailed to prospective applicants upon request.
I. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable units shall be
the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing an affordable
unit by an Owner, Developer or Tenant, the Borough shall have all remedies
provided at law or equity, including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction,
a requirement for household recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a
mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on the
premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or tenant of a
low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner, developer or tenant of the
penalties for such violations, the Borough may take the following action(s) against
the owner, developer or tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a period
of 60 days after service of the written notice:
(1) The Borough may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11 alleging a
violation or violations of the regulations governing the affordable housing
unit. If the owner, developer or tenant is adjudged by the Superior Court to
have violated any provision of the regulations governing affordable housing
units the owner, developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the
following penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $2,000 per day or imprisonment for a period not
to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a separate and specific
violation of these provisions and not a continuation of the initial offense;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a very-low, low or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable housing
units, payment into the Borough of Shrewsbury Affordable Housing
Trust Fund of the gross amount of rent illegally collected;
(c) In the case of an owner who has rented a very-low, low or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable housing
units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as
determined by the Court.
§ 94-12.21 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-12.22
94:427
(2) The Borough may file a court action in the Superior Court seeking a judgment
that would result in the termination of the owner's equity or other interest in
the unit, in the nature of a mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be
enforceable as if the same were a judgment of default of the first-purchase
money mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low or moderateincome
unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the Borough, by
means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at which time the low and
moderate-income unit of the violating owner shall be sold at a sale price
which is not less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off
any first-purchase money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the Borough, including attorney's
fees. The violating owner shall have his right to possession terminated as
well as his title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the firstpurchase
money mortgage lien and any prior liens upon the low- and
moderate-income unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse
the Borough for any and all costs and expenses incurred in connection
with either the court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are
insufficient to reimburse the Borough in full as aforesaid, the violating
owner shall be personally responsible for the full extent of such
deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred by the Borough in
connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event that a surplus
remains after satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be
placed in escrow by the Borough for the owner and shall be held in such
escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such earlier time as
the owner shall make a claim with the Borough for such. Failure of the
owner to claim such balance within the two-year period shall
automatically result in a forfeiture of such balance to the Borough. Any
interest accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the Borough, whether such balance
shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the Borough.
(c) Foreclosure by the Borough due to violation of the regulations governing
affordable housing units shall not extinguish the restrictions of the
regulations governing affordable housing units as the same apply to the
very-low, low and moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions of
the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The owner
determined to be in violation of the provisions of this plan and from
whom title and possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale shall
not be entitled to any right of redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient amounts are
bid to satisfy the first-purchase money mortgage and any prior liens, the
Borough may acquire title to the very-low-, low- and moderate-income
unit by satisfying the first-purchase money mortgage and any prior liens
and crediting the violating owner with an amount equal to the difference
§ 94-12.22 SHREWSBURY CODE § 94-12.22
94:428
§ 94-12.23. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant to this section
shall be filed in writing with the Superior Court.
between the first-purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs
of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum
resale price for which the very-low, low and moderate-income unit could
have been sold under the terms of the regulations governing affordable
housing units. This excess shall be treated in the same manner as the
excess which would have been realized from an actual sale as previously
described.
(e) Failure of the very-low, low and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the Borough shall obligate the owner
to accept an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser which may be
referred to the owner by the Borough, with such offer to purchase being
equal to the maximum resale price of the very-low, low and moderateincome
unit as permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for
complying with the terms and restrictions of governing affordable
housing units until such time as title is conveyed from the owner.
§ 94-12.22 ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT § 94-12.23
94:429

Chapter 106
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
§ 106-1. Discharge of weapons prohibited.
The discharge of any firearms, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot, air gun, spring
gun, gas gun or any other device which impels a projectile through the use of force is
prohibited in the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 106-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
§ 106-3. Authority to grant permission for use of bows and arrows.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury does hereby grant to the Chief of
Police of the Borough of Shrewsbury authority to grant specific permission to a person,
for limited periods of time, in certain areas of the Borough of Shrewsbury, to discharge
a long bow, recurve bow, compound bow or crossbow for the management of the deer
population. The authority to grant permission under this section shall lie in the discretion
of the Chief of Police of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 106-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,250, a term of imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any
combination thereof.
A. Any duly appointed law officer in the course of his or her official duty.
B. The use of firearms when necessary for the preservation of human life.
C. The use of firearms on a licensed pistol, rifle or firearm range and under the
supervision of the Police Department.
D. The discharge of a long bow, recurve bow, compound bow or crossbow in
compliance with the Police Department's discharge permit program.
§ 94-12.23 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS § 106-4
106:1

Chapter 110
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25. Fire prevention — See Ch. 118.
§ 110-1. Opening of fire hydrants prohibited; exceptions.113
No person, firm or corporation shall open, use or turn on, or assist in the use, opening
or turning on of, any fire hydrant except for the use of a recognized fire company or
authorized personnel of the New Jersey American Water Company.
§ 110-2. Use by Fire Department restricted. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
The Chief of the Fire Department and his assistant officers may use public fire hydrants
to extinguish fires and also, with due care and to a reasonable extent, to use water for
drills, tests and purposes of civil defense. All such uses shall be under the supervision
and direction of the Chief or his assistant officers. In no event shall an inexperienced or
an incompetent person be permitted to manipulate or control in any way any fire hydrant.
§ 110-3. Damaging of fire hydrants prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall damage, injure or deface, or assist in the damaging,
injuring or defacing of, any fire hydrant.
§ 110-4. Annual inspection and report. [Added 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
The company or agency which is supplying or may in the future from time to time supply
water to any or all portions of the Borough of Shrewsbury shall at least once annually
inspect all fire hydrants supplied from its water lines and report the condition of each
such fire hydrant to the Utility and Fire Committees of the Borough Council.
§ 110-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or
who assists in the commission of any violation shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding
90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination
thereof. A separate violation shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
113.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 106-4 FIRE HYDRANTS § 110-5
110:1

Chapter 114
FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 118.
§ 114-1. Payment of claims; certificate of search required.
No insurer issuing fire insurance policies in the State of New Jersey shall pay any
claims for fire damages in excess of $2,500 on any real property located within the
Borough unless or until the insured person submits an official certificate of search for
municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 certifying that all taxes, assessments or
other municipal liens or charges, levied and assessed and due and payable against said
property, have been paid or the Borough Council of the Borough submits a certified copy
of a resolution adopted pursuant to § 114-3 of this chapter. Any request pursuant to this
section for an official certificate of search for municipal liens shall specify that the search
concerns fire-damaged property.
§ 114-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to and be effective against any fire insurance policy issued
or renewed after the adoption hereof and after the filing of this chapter with the State
Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-9.
§ 114-3. Installment payments; resolution of agreement by Council.
The Borough Council of the Borough may enter into an agreement with the owner
of any fire-damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or other
municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for the redemption of the
tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-65 et seq., if the Borough
Council is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or improve the
fire-damaged property. An insurance company receiving a certified copy of a resolution
of such agreement from the Borough Council is authorized to make full payment on the
claim to the insured person.
§ 114-4. Payment to Borough by insurance company; appeal.
Unless a resolution is received in accordance with N.J.S.A. 17:36-11 by an insurance
company writing fire insurance policies in any municipality having adopted an ordinance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-9, such insurance company is hereby authorized and required,
prior to the payment of any claims for fire damages in excess of $2,500, to pay to the
municipality the amount of the liens appearing on the official certificate and such other
recorded liens or related charges as may be certified to the insurance company; provided,
however, that if an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other than
an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the
§ 110-5 FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS § 114-4
114:1
insurance company shall issue a draft payable to the court of record, to be held by the
court in an interest-bearing escrow account in a banking institution or savings and loan
association in the state, in an amount totaling 75% of the full amount of the lien or charge
being contested but not to exceed the proceeds payable under its insurance policy, and
the insurance company shall issue a draft payable to the municipality for the remaining
25% of the lien or charge being contested, with the full amount paid by the insurance
company to the court and the municipality not to exceed the proceeds payable under
its insurance policy pending termination of all proceedings, at which time such moneys
and all interest accruing thereon at a rate paid on interest-bearing accounts in banking
institutions or savings and loan associations in the state, shall be disbursed in accordance
with the final order or judgment of the court.
§ 114-5. Municipal claim to be paramount.
A municipal claim made in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq.
shall be paramount to any other claims on the proceeds of the fire insurance policy,
except the claim of the holder of a purchase money mortgage held as a first mortgage
or an institutional lender which is a holder of a mortgage on the fire-damaged property,
where the fire insurance policy at the time of the loss listed the mortgagee as the holder
of an insurable interest, in which event the claim of the mortgagee to the proceeds shall
be paramount to the municipal lien under N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq. only to the extent of
the amount due and payable to the mortgagee under the mortgage contract. As used in
this section, "institutional lender" shall mean any bank, savings bank, state or federally
chartered savings and loan association or insurance company.
§ 114-6. Exceptions.
Nothing in N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq. shall be construed:
A. To obligate an insurance company for any amount in excess of the proceeds payable
under its fire insurance policy;
B. Except as provided in the case of appeals, N.J.S.A. 17:36-10, to obligate the
insurance company for any liens not appearing on the official certificate or any
certified changes submitted by the bonded official; or
C. To affect the authority of a municipality to enforce a municipal lien under any other
law of this state.
§ 114-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 114-6
114:2
Chapter 118
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 25.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 110.
§ 114-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 114-6
118:1

ARTICLE I
Uniform Fire Code
[Adopted 8-12-1985 by Ord. No. 534 (Ch. 36 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 118-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, P.L. 1983, c. 383 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-202), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the
Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 118-2. Enforcing agency designated.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention, which is hereby
created in the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 118-3. Duties of enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the codes and
regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and premises within the Borough
of Shrewsbury, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform
Fire Code.
§ 118-4. Life hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 118-2 of this article shall carry out the
periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of
the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 118-5. Organization of enforcing agency. [Amended 12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 768]
The local enforcing agency established by § 118-2 of this article shall be part of the
Administrative Department of the Borough and shall be under the direct supervision and
control of the Fire Marshal who, in turn, shall report to the Mayor and Council of the
Borough.
§ 118-6. Fire Marshal; inspectors.
A. The local enforcing agency shall be under the supervision of a Fire Marshal who
shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Borough Council.
In making this appointment, the appointing authority shall make the appointment
from among a list of three recommendations provided by the Ex-Chief's
Association of the Shrewsbury Hose Company No. 1.
B. The Fire Marshal shall serve for a term of two years. Any vacancy shall be filled
for the unexpired term.
C. Such inspectors and other employees as may be necessary in the local enforcing
agency shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council of the Borough upon the
recommendation of the Fire Marshal.
§ 118-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 118-6
118:3
§ 118-7. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206
and 52:27D-208), any person aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency
(or agencies) shall have the right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of
Monmouth County.
§ 118-8. Additional inspections and fees. [Amended 8-11-1986 by Ord. No. 548;
10-7-2003 by Ord. No. 819]
In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act and the regulations
of the Department of Community Affairs, the following additional inspections and fees
shall be required:
D. The Fire Marshal, inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be
subject to removal by the Mayor and Council of the Borough for inefficiency or
misconduct. Each individual to be so removed shall be afforded an opportunity to
be heard by the appointing authority or a designated hearing officer. [Amended
12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 768]
A. Mercantile businesses shall be inspected yearly with a fee schedule of:
(1) Forty-five dollars for the first 1,000 square feet.
(2) Ten dollars for each additional 1,000 square feet.
B. Factories shall be inspected yearly with a fee schedule of:
(1) Fifty dollars for the first 1,000 square feet.
(2) Sixty dollars for 1,001 to 3,500 square feet.
(3) Seventy dollars for 3,501 to 6,000 square feet.
(4) Eighty dollars for 6,001 to 10,000 square feet.
(5) One hundred dollars for in excess of 10,000 square feet.
C. Warehouses shall be inspected yearly with a fee schedule of:
(1) Fifty dollars for the first 2,000 square feet.
(2) Seventy-five dollars for 2,001 to 5,000 square feet.
(3) One hundred dollars for in excess of 5,000 square feet.
D. Repair shops and service businesses shall be inspected yearly with the same fee
schedule as that pertaining to mercantile businesses.
E. Business offices (lawyers, doctors and other professional offices, barbershops and
insurance offices) shall be inspected yearly with a fee schedule of:
(1) Forty-five dollars for one professional.
(2) Ten dollars for each additional professional.
§ 118-6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 118-8
118:4
§ 118-9. Smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm fees and permit fees.
[Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 653; 12-6-1999 by Ord. No. 768; 10-7-2003 by
Ord. No. 819]
F. All other types of structures and facilities not otherwise described or included in
this § 118-8 shall be inspected yearly with the same fee schedule as that pertaining
to mercantile businesses.
A. The smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarms certificate fees shall be as
follows: [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 1042]
(1) More than 10 business days with a scheduled appointment: $45.
(2) Four to nine business days with a scheduled appointment: $90.
(3) Less than four business days with a scheduled appointment: $161.
B. If a scheduled appointment is not met by the owner/appointee and/or there is a
failure to have properly installed or have operating smoke detectors in accordance
with the Uniform Fire Code, a fee of $15 will be added for each reinspection.
§ 118-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 118-9
118:5

ARTICLE II
Rapid Entry Boxes
[Adopted 7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 797 (Ch. 39 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 118-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING and/or STRUCTURE — Any building and/or structure which has an
automatic fire suppression system or fire alarm system, except one-family residential
dwellings.
§ 118-11. Installation required.
The owner, tenant, and/or occupant of said buildings and/or structures as defined in this
article are required to have installed on the same a rapid entry box and key system to
allow access to the same and access to boiler rooms, sprinkler control valves, electrical
rooms, elevators and elevator control rooms, and other locked areas of the premises as
may be required by the Shrewsbury Bureau of Fire Prevention, the said Bureau to make
said determination on the basis of immediate need for access in the event of a fire alarm
or what appears to be a possible fire emergency.
§ 118-12. Specifications for rapid entry box.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall prescribe specifications as to the required rapid
entry box and key system and location.
§ 118-13. Rapid entry box contents.
The rapid entry box may be required to contain any or all of the following, as shall be
determined by the Fire Marshal:
§ 118-14. Time of compliance. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
All newly constructed buildings for which a certificate of occupancy has not been issued,
or buildings currently under construction, shall comply immediately.
A. Keys to locked points of egress, whether on interior or exterior of such buildings;
B. Keys to the locked mechanical rooms;
C. Keys to the locked elevator rooms;
D. Keys to the locked elevator controls;
E. Keys to any fence or secured area;
F. Keys to other areas;
G. A floor plan of the rooms within the building.
§ 118-10 FIRE PREVENTION § 118-15
118:7
§ 118-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof. Any fines collected shall be forwarded to the Borough
of Shrewsbury Uniform Fire Safety Trust.
§ 118-15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 118-15
118:8
Chapter 122
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 94.
Housing standards — See Ch. 145.
§ 118-15 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS § 118-15
122:1

ARTICLE I
Flood Insurance Coverage
[Adopted 5-13-1975 by Ord. No. 369 (Ch. 40, Art. I, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 122-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the regulations contained herein is:
§ 122-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. To regulate the construction of or substantial improvements to buildings and other
facilities in locations and in such a manner that they would likely be damaged by
floods or be washed away or cause damage to downstream properties.
B. To prevent encroachment of floodways which would cause damage to other
properties on the watercourse by increasing the height and velocity of floods.
C. To prevent pollution of watercourse during floods by preventing the placing and
storing of explosive, toxic or otherwise dangerous materials within the special flood
hazard area.
A. For the purpose of this article, certain terms and words are defined in the present
tense to include the future, the singular to include the plural and the plural to include
the singular.
B. As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DEVELOPMENT—Any structure, prospective addition, substantial improvement
or modification which would unduly affect the flow of waters.
ESCROW — The sum of money deposited by the applicant with the Borough of
Shrewsbury to be delivered to the on the fulfillment of conditions pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.114
ESCROW ACCOUNT — Any fees deposited by an applicant pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and the accounting entries used to keep track of
expenditures.115
PROFESSIONAL REVIEW COSTS — Costs for attorney, engineer, or other
professional or expert retained on behalf of the Borough of Shrewsbury for the
purpose of review, analysis, inspection, or preparation of documents, charged to
and paid by the applicant.116
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The maximum area of the floodplain that,
on the average, is likely to be flooded once every 100 years.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the actual cash value
of the structure either before the improvement is started or, if the structure has
been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. "Substantial
114.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
115.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
116.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 122-1 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS § 122-2
122:3
§ 122-3. Establishment of special flood hazard areas.
The special flood hazard areas of the Borough of Shrewsbury are those designated as
such upon a map consisting of one sheet with the following legend and identification:
FIA Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, Borough of Shrewsbury, Monmouth County, New
Jersey, No. HO1, Community No. 340326, dated June 7, 1974, and promulgated by
the Federal Insurance Administration, United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development. A copy of this map is officially on file in the offices of the Borough Clerk
and is hereby incorporated by reference into this article and made a part hereof and is
officially adopted by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 122-4. Regulations; permitted uses. [Amended 4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 554]
Premises in the special flood hazard area may be used for the purposes specified for that
particular zone in which they are located in accordance with all applicable local codes
and ordinances, subject to the following additional restrictions:
improvement" is started when the first alteration of any structural part of the
building commences.
A. Special use permit required. No new development shall be permitted within the
special flood hazard area except upon issuance of a special use permit granted by
the Construction Code Official with the approval of the Borough Engineer.
B. Building elevations. No building or any portion thereof shall be erected unless the
first-floor elevation and all exterior openings are set at an elevation at least one foot
above the one-hundred-year-flood level.117
C. Structural anchoring. Permitted structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement which may result in damage or restrictions of the flow
of floodwaters.
D. Construction methods and materials. Permitted structures shall be constructed of
materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage and shall be
placed on the building site so as to minimize obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
E. Electrical control panels. Electrical control panels in permitted structures shall be
mounted above the one-hundred-year-flood level.
F. Water supply systems and sanitary sewerage systems. New or replacement water
supply systems and sanitary sewerage systems, including on-site systems, shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the system into floodwaters.
G. Storage of materials. No materials that can float or that are toxic to humans, animals
or vegetation shall be stored outside.
H. Raising of flood level prohibited. No use will be permitted which will raise the onehundred-
year-flood level more than 0.20 of one foot.118
117.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
118.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 122-2 SHREWSBURY CODE § 122-4
122:4
§ 122-5. Application procedure [Amended 4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 554; 7-11-1994
by Ord. No. 693]
§ 122-6. Fee and deposit. [Amended 4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 554; 7-11-1994 by Ord.
No. 693119]
The Zoning Officer shall receive from the applicant, along with the application for a
permit hereunder, a fee of $50 for the review of the application and the determination
thereof. Should the Zoning Officer deem it necessary for the Borough Engineer to review
said application, an escrow deposit of $500 shall be made by the applicant to cover
professional review costs.
§ 122-7. On-site inspection. [Amended 4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 554; 7-11-1994 by
Ord. No. 693]
If the special use permit shall be issued, the Zoning Officer, with the assistance of the
Borough Engineer, shall make an on-site inspection at least once during construction to
determine whether the construction conforms to the approved plans, materials and other
specifications provided by the applicant.
§ 122-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 554; 7-11-1994
I. Minimization of flood damage. All new subdivision and development proposals,
including their utilities and drainage, shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
A. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to erect, construct, enlarge, add to, alter,
repair, improve, move, remove, substantially repair or demolish any building,
structure or major addition to any building or install any prefabricated or mobile
home, subdivision, utility system, water supply system or sewer system shall make
written application to the Zoning Officer of the Borough of Shrewsbury and shall
furnish to said Officer all data, work plans, engineering specifications or other
information reasonably required to enable him to evaluate the proposal, and the
Zoning Officer, with the assistance of the Borough Engineer, shall, within 15 days
thereafter, make a determination whether or not a special permit shall be issued. If
he shall approve the proposal, he shall issue a written special use permit to the
applicant for the proposed facility, describing in general terms on the permit the
facility to be constructed and its general location. If he shall disapprove the
proposal, the Zoning Officer shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the rejection
and shall generally state the reasons for rejection. No construction permit shall be
issued by the Construction Code Official unless and until a zoning permit has first
been issued by the Zoning Officer.
B. No permit shall be issued unless the applicant has satisfactorily demonstrated that
the proposal is consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, assures full
compliance with all regulations set forth herein and does not conflict with or
endanger the effectiveness of the floodplain management programs of neighboring
communities.
119.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 122-4 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS § 122-8
122:5
by Ord. No. 693]
§ 122-9. Appeals. [Amended 4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 554; 7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
693]
Where a request for such special use permit is denied by the Zoning Officer, the
applicant may apply for such permit or special exception directly to the Mayor and
Council within 60 days after such denial. The Mayor and Council shall grant or deny
such request within 60 days after the date of such application to the Mayor and Council.
§ 122-10. Governing regulations.
When the Federal Insurance Administrator has designated an area within the floodplain
as having special flood hazards, the chapter of the Code of this Borough concerning
land use control designed to reduce flood loss shall take precedence over any conflicting
ordinances or codes of this Borough.
§ 122-11. Liability.
The grant of a special use permit or approval of a subdivision plan within the special
flood hazard area shall not constitute a representation, guaranty or warranty of any
kind by the Borough of Shrewsbury or by any official or employee thereof of the
practicability or safety of the proposed use and shall create no liability upon the
Borough, its officers or employees.
A. A failure to apply for a special use permit, failure to construct in accordance with
data furnished to the Zoning Officer with the application or any violation hereof
shall constitute a violation of this article.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 122-8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 122-11
122:6
ARTICLE II
Flood Damage Prevention
[Adopted 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 434 (Ch. 40, Art. II, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 122-12. Statutory authorization. [Amended 9-21-2009 by Ord. No. 937]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq., delegated
the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote
public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council
of the Borough of Shrewsbury, Monmouth County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 122-13. Findings of fact.
§ 122-14. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare
and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific area by
provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Shrewsbury are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of
which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of
special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities and, when
inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately
floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to
the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special
flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development
of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas.
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood
hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 122-12 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS § 122-15
122:7
§ 122-15. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article includes methods and provisions for:
§ 122-16. Definitions. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 546; 4-13-1987 by Ord.
No. 554; 9-21-2009 by Ord. No. 937]
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property
due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increase in erosion or
in flood heights or velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses,
be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural
protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters.
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase
flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally
divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be
interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give
this article its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Zoning Officer's interpretation of any
provision of this article or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH or VO Zone on
a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percentannual-
or-greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where
a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding
or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any given
year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
§ 122-15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 122-16
122:8
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment
or materials located within the area of special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and piers) or
shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and adequately anchored so as not to
impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of
the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the Federal
Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood
Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state
or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any
source.
(2)
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on
the National Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
(2)
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
§ 122-16 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS § 122-16
122:9
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, useable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not
built so to render the structure in violation of other applicable nonelevation design
requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348), includes
substantial improvements and means the date the building permit was issued,
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with
historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(b)
(4)
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;
and
(3)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
(4)
§ 122-16 SHREWSBURY CODE § 122-16
122:10
§ 122-17. Applicability. [Amended 9-21-2009 by Ord. No. 937]
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the
Borough of Shrewsbury, Monmouth County, New Jersey.
§ 122-18. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. [Amended 5-12-1986
by Ord. No. 546; 9-21-2009 by Ord. No. 937]
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of
piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings or piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds 50% of the market
value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this article that permits
construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this article.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement officer and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure.
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Shrewsbury, Community No.
340326, are identified and defined on the following documents prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency: [Amended 6-4-2018 by Ord. No. 1050]
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Monmouth
§ 122-16 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS § 122-18
122:11
§ 122-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-21-2009 by Ord. No. 937]
§ 122-20. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements,
covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and any other ordinance,
easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 122-21. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
§ 122-22. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger
floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of Shrewsbury,
County, New Jersey, (All Jurisdictions)," dated June 20, 2018
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Monmouth County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions), as shown on Index and Panel Numbers 34025C0179F,
34025C0183G, 34025C0187F, and 34025C0191F, whose effective date is
June 20, 2018
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this article.
The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 419 Sycamore Avenue,
Shrewsbury, New Jersey 07702-7420.
A. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or
altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable
regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any
of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in
connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating this article or failing to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $
1,250 or a term of imprisonment or community service of not more than 90 days, or
any combination thereof, for each violation. In addition, any person convicted of
violation shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case.
C. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Shrewsbury from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
A. Considered as minimum requirements.
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
§ 122-18 SHREWSBURY CODE § 122-22
122:12
any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 122-23. Development permit. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No. 546; 4-13-1987
by Ord. No. 554; 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 693]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins with
any area of special flood hazard established in § 122-18. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Zoning Officer and may include, but
shall not be limited to, plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically,
the following information is required:
§ 122-24. Administrator designated. [Amended 4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 554:
7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 693]
The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement this article by
granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 122-25. Duties and responsibilities of administrator. [Amended 5-12-1986 by
Ord. No. 546; 4-13-1987 by Ord No. 554; 7-11-1994 by Ord. No. 693]
The duties of the Zoning Officer shall include, but not be limited to:
A. The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including the
basement, of all structures.
B. The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing
criteria in § 122-27B(2).
D. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as
a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review. The Zoning Officer shall:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of
this article have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have
been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies for
which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is
located in the floodway; if located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 122-27C(1) are met.
B. Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevations data has not been provided
§ 122-22 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS § 122-25
122:13
§ 122-26. Variances. [Amended 4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 554; 7-11-1994 by Ord. No.
693]
in accordance with § 122-18, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard,
the Zoning Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order
to administer § 122-27B(1) and (2).
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. The Zoning Officer shall:
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures and whether or not the structure contains a basement. [Amended
9-21-2009 by Ord. No. 937]
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level.
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in § 122-23C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(4) When base flood elevation and floodway data has not been provided in
accordance with the article, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from any source, in order to
administer the requirements of this article.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The Zoning Officer shall: [Amended 9-21-2009 by
Ord. No. 937]
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section and the
Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of
said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Zoning Officer shall make interpretations,
where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 122-26.
A. Appeal board.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment, as established by the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Shrewsbury, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this article.
§ 122-25 SHREWSBURY CODE § 122-26
122:14
(2) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Zoning Officer in the enforcement or administration of this
article.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of New Jersey.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in
other sections of this article and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of
others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are
not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and
floodplain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site.
(k) The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and
bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 122-26A(4) and the purposes of this
article, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
article.
(6) The Zoning Officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including
technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Insurance
Administration upon request.
§ 122-26 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS § 122-26
122:15
§ 122-27. Provisions for flood hazard reduction. [Amended 5-12-1986 by Ord. No.
546; 4-13-1987 by Ord. No. 554]
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, provided that § 122-26A(4)(a) through (k) has been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures
upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the
variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure. [Amended 9-21-2009 by Ord. No. 937]
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase
in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety or extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public,
as identified in § 122-26A(4), or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that
the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below
the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest-floor
elevation.
A. General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are
required:
(1) Anchoring.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(b) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be
§ 122-26 SHREWSBURY CODE § 122-27
122:16
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) Utilities.
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(d) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment
and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
(4) Subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and
other proposed development which contains at least 50 lots or five acres
(whichever is less).
(5) Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial improvements
having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by
a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria: [Amended 9-21-2009 by Ord. No. 937]
§ 122-27 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS § 122-27
122:17
(a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or
devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
B. Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation
data have been provided as set forth in § 122-18, Basis for establishing areas of
special flood hazard or in § 122-25B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required: [Amended 9-21-2009 by Ord. No. 937]
(1) Residential construction.
(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together with
the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to or above base
flood elevation.
(b) Within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM, all new construction
and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet (at least two
feet if no depth number is specified) and adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures are required.
(2) Nonresidential construction.
(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood
elevation; and
(b) Within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM, all new construction
and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified)
and adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures are required or:
[1] Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
[2] Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
[3] Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
§ 122-27 SHREWSBURY CODE § 122-27
122:18
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions
of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to the official
as set forth in § 122-25C(2).
(3) Manufactured homes.
(a) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 122-27A(1)(b).
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within an
area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the top of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation.
C. Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 122-18 are
areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and
erosion potential, the following provisions apply: [Amended 9-21-2009 by Ord.
No. 937]
(1) Prohibited encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If § 122-27C(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with § 122-27.
(3) In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data has been
provided and no floodway has been designated, the cumulative effect of any
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than 0.2 of a foot at any point.
§ 122-27 FLOOD HAZARD AREAS § 122-27
122:19

Chapter 126
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 63. Hours of business — See Ch. 139.
§ 126-1. Adoption of standards.
A code regulating retail food establishments, providing for the inspection of such
establishments and fixing penalties for violations is hereby established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6 and N.J.S.A. 26:3-92 and 26:3-93. A copy of the said
code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof
herein set forth.
§ 126-2. Title of standards. [Amended 6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 838]
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and commonly known
as "Chapter XII, Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage
Vending Machines, New Jersey State Sanitary Code."
§ 126-3. Copies on file. [Amended 6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 838]
Three copies of the said "Chapter XII, Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and
Food and Beverage Vending Machines, New Jersey State Sanitary Code" have been
placed on file in the office of the Clerk of the Borough of Shrewsbury upon the
introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there until final action is taken on this
chapter for the use and examination of the public.
§ 126-4. Permit required; fees; revocation of permits.
A. No person shall operate a retail food establishment unless a permit or approval of
an existing permit to operate same shall have been issued by this Board of Health.
Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in such establishment.
B. Fees for licensing of retail food establishments are hereby fixed in accordance with
the current fee schedule adopted by the Monmouth County Regional Health
Commission, "Ordinance No. 1 Regulating Retail Food Establishments for
Licensing and Fixing Fees."120 [Amended 6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 838]
C. Permits issued or approved under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
annually on December 31 of each year, and application for renewal thereof shall be
submitted, together with the required fee, to the Board of Health, prior to January
31 of each ensuing year. [Amended 6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 838]
120.Editor's Note: Said ordinance of the Monmouth County Regional Health Commission is on file in the Borough Clerk's
office.
§ 122-27 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 126-4
126:1
§ 126-5. Right of entry.
The said Board of Health and its agents or employees shall have the right of entry, at any
reasonable hour, into and upon any public or private building or premises for the purpose
of enforcing the provisions of such code and of this chapter or determining whether such
provisions or the rules and regulations of the Board of Health are being complied with
and obeyed. No person shall oppose such entry or hinder or interfere with the Board of
Health or its agents or employees in the performance of their duties.
§ 126-6. Payment of fees to Borough.122
The license fees covered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be paid to the
Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 126-7. License not transferable.
The license of any retail food establishment covered under this chapter is not transferable
upon the sale of such retail food establishment, and the new owner of any such retail
food establishment must apply for a new license and pay the appropriate fee provided
for in this chapter.
§ 126-8. Violations and penalties.
D. A person conducting an itinerant retail food-handing establishment shall secure a
permit in accordance with the Monmouth County Regional Health Commission
Ordinance No. 1. [Amended 6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 838]
E. A permit or approval of permit may be suspended or revoked for a violation by the
holder of any provision of this chapter or code, after an opportunity for a hearing
by the Board of Health or its authorized representative.
F. A permit or approval of a permit issued by another Board of Health is not
transferable.
G. Fees for licensing of food and beverage machines are hereby fixed in accordance
with the current fee schedule adopted by the Monmouth County Regional Health
Commission, "Ordinance No. 4 Regulating Food and Beverage Vending Machines
for Licensing and Fixing Fees."121 [Added 6-7-2004 by Ord. No. 838]
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or code established herein
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. Each day a particular
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. In the event that any violation of this chapter or code shall also be a violation of a
New Jersey state law, for which a greater penalty is provided for than that contained
in the aforesaid code and this chapter, the Municipal Judge, before whom the
121.Editor's Note: Said ordinance of the Monmouth County Regional Health Commission is on file in the Borough Clerk's
office.
122.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 126-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 126-8
126:2
complaint is brought, based upon such violation, shall, in his discretion, have the
right to impose, in the place and in lieu of any penalty provided for herein, that
which is so provided for in the New Jersey state law which has been so violated.
§ 126-8 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS § 126-8
126:3

Chapter 130
HALLOWEEN CURFEWS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
§ 130-1. October 30 ("Mischief Night").
On October 30 in each year, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18
years to engage or participate in any trick-or-treat activities, parades or other Halloween
celebrations, upon any public street, park or other publicly owned property or upon
private property not his or her own or not the property of his/her parent or guardian,
after 6:00 p.m. in the Borough of Shrewsbury, unless accompanied by his/her parent or
guardian. This restriction shall not apply to any person under the age of 18 years who is
participating in a parade or celebration sanctioned by and/or under the supervision of the
Recreation Committee of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 130-2. October 31 (Halloween).
§ 130-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or a period of community service not exceeding
90 days, or any combination thereof; provided, however, that if such person is a juvenile
under the age of 18 years, he or she shall be subject to such penalty as the Juvenile
Conference Committee or juvenile court, as the case may be, may see fit to impose
consistent with the power conferred by law upon the juvenile conference committee and
the juvenile court.
A. On October 31 in each year, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18
years to engage or participate in any trick-or-treat activities, parades or other
Halloween celebrations, upon any public street, park or other publicly owned
property, or upon private property not his/her own or not the property of his/her
parent or guardian, after 8:00 p.m. in the Borough of Shrewsbury, unless
accompanied by his/her parent or guardian. This restriction shall not apply to any
person under the age of 18 years who is participating in a parade or celebration
sanctioned by and/or under the supervision of the Recreation Committee of the
Borough of Shrewsbury.
B. In addition, on October 31 in each year, it shall be unlawful for any person under
the age of 18 years to appear or to be upon any public street, park or other publicly
owned property or upon private property not his/her own or not the property of his/
her parent or guardian, after 8:00 p.m. in the Borough of Shrewsbury, unless
accompanied by his/her parent or guardian.
§ 126-8 HALLOWEEN CURFEWS § 130-3
130:1

Chapter 132
HAWKING, PEDDLING AND CANVASSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hours of business — See Ch. 139.
Licenses — See Ch. 152.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
§ 132-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — Any person who goes from place to place, house to
house, or person to person, selling, offering to sell or purchase, or taking orders for
goods, wares, merchandise, real estate or any article for future delivery or for services to
be performed in the future or for the making, manufacturing or repairing of any article
or thing whatsoever for future delivery or for the solicitation of money. Canvassing
shall also include any person going from house to house for the purpose of obtaining
the views of any person upon any economic or social question or a project for the
purpose of distributing literature, pamphlets, circulars, samples and the like for purposes
of information and advertising for noncommercial purposes. Canvasser or solicitor shall
not include wholesale salespersons calling on retail merchants.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL —Means and includes any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed
or otherwise reproduced original copies of any matter of literature which:
HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR — Means and includes any person engaging or engaged
in the business for hire or gain of distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills,
other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving
compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbills.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any
newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service in accordance with federal
A. Advertises for sale any merchandise product, commodity or thing;
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or
other activity for the purpose of, either directly or indirectly, promoting the interest
thereof by sales;
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or
event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private
gain or profit; or
C.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominately
and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or circulated for advertising
purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser
or distributor.
D.
§ 130-3 HAWKING, PEDDLING AND CANVASSING § 132-1
132:1
statute or regulation and a newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as
provided by law; and, in addition thereto, includes any periodical or magazine regularly
published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Means and includes any printed or written
matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter or literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a sign, or a commercial
handbill, or a newspaper.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — An organization or entity possessing a tax-exempt
status which shall be evidenced by furnishing to the Borough a tax-exempt number
provided by the State of New Jersey and/or the government of the United States.
PEDDLER, HAWKER or VENDOR — Any person who goes from house to house,
place to place, or person to person, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares,
merchandise or services and offering or exposing the same for sale or delivering articles
for purchasers. The words "peddler," "hawker" and "vendor" shall not include a
wholesale salesperson calling on retail merchants.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, voluntary association,
incorporated association, and any principal or agent thereof, who has not been convicted
of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude and has not been convicted of
any prior violation of this chapter.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT and ITINERANT VENDOR
— Any person, whether as owner, agent, servant, employee or consignee, who engages
in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within
the Borough of Shrewsbury and who, in furtherance of such purposes, hires, leases, uses
or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, shops or any street, alley or other
public place within the Borough for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and
merchandise, either privately or at public auction.
§ 132-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to prevent unfair competition, dishonest business practices
and fraudulent solicitation, traffic hazards and undue annoyance to householders and
tenants by the regulation of transient merchants, hawkers, peddlers, junk dealers,
solicitors, canvassers and handbill distributors as defined in § 132-1.
§ 132-3. License required.
Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any transient merchant, hawker,
peddler, canvasser and solicitor or handbill distributor to sell, dispose of or offer for sale
or disposal any goods, wares, merchandise or publications or to solicit money, services
or other things of value within the Borough of Shrewsbury without first applying for and
obtaining a license as required by Chapter 152, Licenses, and complying with all other
requirements for applicants for licenses and licensees set forth in said Chapter 152.
§ 132-4. Exempted classes of persons.
The following persons shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter, except for
the provisions of § 132-12 (Time restrictions) and § 132-10 (Regulations for licensees;
§ 132-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 132-4
132:2
code of conduct):
A. Any person who conducts a judicial sale under the authority of state or federal laws.
B. Any exempt member of a volunteer fire department, volunteer fire engine, hook and
ladder, hose or supply company, first aid squad or salvage corps of any municipality
or fire district in this state, who holds an exemption certificate issued to him as an
exempt member of any such department, company or corps, who is a resident of the
State of New Jersey and who has procured a license in the manner and under the
conditions prescribed in N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq., as amended, supplemented and in
force.
C. Any person honorably discharged from the military forces of the United States, who
is a resident of the State of New Jersey and who has procured a license in the
manner and under the conditions prescribed in N.J.S.A. 45:24-9, as amended,
supplemented and in force.
D. Any persons who are the owners or authorized operators of any business or activity
described in Subsections A through C above, who hold any unexpired license or
permit issued by the Borough under any other ordinance in such business or
activity, provided that such employer or authorized operator submits to the Borough
Clerk, for approval, the name and address of such employed person, and provided
that, following such approval by the Chief of Police, to be submitted by him to the
Borough Clerk, the employer or authorized operator applies to and obtains from the
Borough Clerk a permit showing the name and address of the employer or
authorized operator, the name and address of the person so employed, the character
of the business or activity and such other matters as may, from time to time, be
required by the Police Committee of the Borough.
E. Children 18 years of age or younger that are members of the Boy Scouts, Girl
Scouts, any local grammar/high school educational fundraisers, local recreation/
travel sports teams, whether they are soliciting, peddling or canvassing door to door
or at a storefront. These individuals/organizations must first get the approval of the
business owners prior to any storefront solicitation or peddling of merchandise.
F. Bell ringers collecting for the Salvation Army at storefronts during the holiday
season. Approval by the store owners prior to any solicitation is required.
G. Store owners or their employees handing out coupons or store fliers within 10 feet
of the main entrance to their store.
H. Persons engaged in the sale or delivery of newspapers qualified as legal newspapers
within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 35:1-1 et seq., as amended, supplemented and in
force.
I. Officers or employees of the Borough, state or federal government when on official
business.
J. Any public utility or its employees, which said utility is subject to regulation by the
State Board of Public Utility Commissioners; provided, however, that such
employee shall display the identification badge or card issued by his employer.
K. Any person, not otherwise subject hereto, engaged in the delivery of goods, wares
§ 132-4 HAWKING, PEDDLING AND CANVASSING § 132-4
132:3
§ 132-5. Charitable solicitations and canvassing by nonprofit organizations.
Persons soliciting or canvassing for a lawful recognized nonprofit religious or charitable
organization shall be exempt from the licensing fees set forth in Chapter 152. Persons
deemed to be lawful, nonprofit religious or charitable organizations must provide the
following materials to the Borough Clerk's office and the Borough Police Department
prior to the issuance of a canvassing or soliciting license:
§ 132-6. Information required for applications.
In addition to the requirements of § 152-7 of Chapter 152, Licenses, persons applying
for licenses as transient merchants, itinerant merchants, itinerant vendors, peddlers,
solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors shall furnish this further information on
their respective applications or attach the same thereto:
or merchandise or other articles or things in the regular course of business to the
premises of persons who had ordered the same or were entitled to receive the same
by reason of a prior agreement.
L. Any person, soliciting votes or support of any bona fide political candidate seeking
public office, including primary election; any activity or conduct connected with or
relating to voter registration; or any conduct or activity relating to the expressing of
opinion on, or soliciting support for, any public candidacy or public issue or
question. As a courtesy to the Borough, these persons should alert the Borough's
administrative offices and Borough Police Department when they plan to canvass.
A. A completed application to obtain a canvassing/soliciting license must include the
following:
(1) Name of the organization and the purpose of the canvassing/solicitation.
(2) Proof of tax-exempt status from the State of New Jersey or the government of
the United States.
(3) Bylaws or mission statement of the organization, if applicable, confirming the
solicitation is prompted by a desire to finance the charitable or religious cause
described in the application and is not for private profit.
(4) Name of all solicitors/canvassers, including the specific dates and times on
where in the Borough the solicitation will occur. A copy of said list shall be
provided to the Borough Police Department.
B. The canvassing/soliciting license will be issued to each of the solicitors/canvassers
noted in § 132-5A(4). This license must be carried at all times during solicitation
within the Borough and must be presented when requested by Borough officials
and/or Borough residents.
C. Lawful, recognized religious or charitable organizations are exempt from all
provisions within this chapter with the exception of §§ 132-5, 132-8B and 132-10.
A. Name, address and phone number of business applying for a soliciting, canvassing,
peddling or handbill distribution license.
§ 132-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 132-6
132:4
B. A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or merchandise
to be sold or offered for sale, where manufactured and located and the proposed
method of delivery.
C. A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to
be done in order to attract customers.
D. The place or places within or outside the Borough of Shrewsbury where the
applicant, within two years next preceding the date of said application, did carry on
business, peddle, solicit, canvass or distribute.
E. Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the person or
persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business or the
method or plan of doing such business as the Borough Clerk may deem proper to
fulfill the purposes of this chapter in the protection of the public good.
F. Name, personal address and phone number of owners of the business noted in
§ 132-6A authorizing the solicitation, canvassing, peddling or handbill distributing
of those listed in § 132-6H.
G. A listing of all misdemeanors, felonies or violations of any municipal ordinances
for which the applicant has been convicted, the nature of the offense and the
punishment assessed therefor. If the applicant is not an individual, these provisions
shall apply to its officers and managers.
H. The name, personal address and contact number for each person authorized by
§ 132-6F to canvass, solicit, peddle or distribute handbills on their behalf.
I. Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant proposes
to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative.
J. Criminal history background check.
(1) A criminal history background check will be required for each solicitor,
canvasser, peddler or handbill distributor. The Borough Police Department
requires that the background check be completed by Morphotrak, the only firm
recognized by the New Jersey State Police. The fingerprint forms will be
supplied by the Borough's Police Department when the applicant completes
the license application.
(2) For any canvassing, soliciting, peddler or handbill distribution licenses being
renewed, the police may decide to allow a name check, instead of a fingerprint
background check, if the initial New Jersey State Police and FBI fingerprint
check, performed by Morphotrak, yielded the approval of the Chief of Police.
(3) No person will be permitted to commence peddling, soliciting, canvassing or
distributing handbills prior to the successful completion of the criminal history
background check process. Any person who refuses to consent to this
procedure shall not be issued a license.
(4) The costs associated with the criminal history background check are the
responsibility of the applicant, not the Borough.
§ 132-6 HAWKING, PEDDLING AND CANVASSING § 132-6
132:5
§ 132-7. Denial of license.
(5) The Borough Police Department will be responsible for maintaining and
reviewing the results of the criminal history record information received from
the New Jersey State Police Bureau of Identification and the Federal Bureau
of Investigation. The Chief of Police will advise the Borough Clerk's office
whether to endorse or deny the license application.
K. Two photographs of the applicant, taken within 30 days immediately prior to the
date of filing of the application, which pictures shall be two inches by three inches,
showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing
manner.
L. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the license
registration number or other means of identification.
M. A complete schedule of the date, time and place or places in the Borough where the
applicant proposes to solicit, canvass, peddle or distribute handbills. The license
will only be good for one month at a time, with a maximum of three months within
a twelve-month period.
A. Upon receipt of the completed license application, including the results of the
completed background check, the original will be reviewed by the Chief of Police
or police designee to assure the moral character of the solicitor, canvasser, peddler
or handbill distributor which is necessary for the protection of public welfare.
B. If, as a result of such review, the licensee's character and/or owner's business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of Police shall endorse on
such application his disapproval and his reasons for same and return the application
to the Borough Clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is
disapproved. Any determination by the Chief of Police that an application is
unsatisfactory shall be based only upon one or more of the following findings with
respect to the licensee/applicant:
(1) The criminal background check reveals a record of conviction of any crime or
disorderly offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and disorderly
persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq. (criminal
homicides); N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq. (assault; reckless endangering;
threats); N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq. (kidnapping and related offenses);
N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq. (sexual offenses); or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.
(robbery); or
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq.; or
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New Jersey
Statutes; or
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled substance
analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes,
§ 132-6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 132-7
132:6
§ 132-8. Issuance of license.
except for N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10a (4) (minimal amounts of marijuana or
hashish).
(e) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly person's offenses
described herein.
(2) Prior violation of a canvassing, peddling, soliciting or similar ordinance.
(3) Previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(4) Records of breaches of soliciting contracts.
(5) Misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for the
license.
(6) Concrete evidence of bad moral character.
C. If the Chief of Police disapproves of an application for a license the applicant may
appeal to the Borough Council to grant the license. Such appeal may be heard by
the Borough Council at any special or regular meeting, and shall be made on five
days' notice to the Chief of Police. Either the Chief of Police, or a member of the
Police Department shall attend such hearing, and shall state the reasons for
disapproval. There shall be no administrative appeal from the decision of the
Borough Council on this appeal.
A. After review of the completed license application that the character and business
responsibility of the owner and licensee are found to be satisfactory, the Chief of
Police shall endorse his approval of the application. Upon approval the Clerk's
office shall, upon payment of the license fee set forth in Chapter 152, Licenses,
execute and deliver the license.
B. The license issued hereunder shall contain the signature of the Chief of Police and
the Borough Clerk and shall show:
(1) The name and address of the licensee.
(2) The name and address of the business or organization the licensee is
representing.
(3) The type of license issued (canvassing, solicitation, handbill distribution).
(4) The purpose or reason for the license request; kinds of goods or services being
sold, discussed or distributed thereunder.
(5) The date of issue.
(6) The expiration date of the license.
(7) The license number and description of the vehicle, if applicable.
(8) The areas of the Borough the licensee is allowed to canvass, peddle or
distribute handbills.
§ 132-7 HAWKING, PEDDLING AND CANVASSING § 132-8
132:7
§ 132-9. Recording and reporting licenses.
§ 132-10. Regulations for licensees; code of conduct.
(9) The days and times licensee is permitted to canvass, solicit, peddle or
distribute handbills.
A. All licenses shall be issued on forms drawn in accordance with this section and shall
be consecutively numbered.
B. A ledger will be kept in the Borough Clerk's office that maintains a list of all
applications, showing what kind of license was issued, whether new or renewal,
name of licensee, name of business, date of approval, date the license is issued, date
of expiration and the areas in which the licensee is allowed to canvass, peddle or
distribute handbills.
C. The Clerk shall keep the original license application and supporting paperwork.
D. The Clerk's office will provide the Police Department with a copy of each approved
license. The Clerk's office shall keep a record of all complaints received, if any,
concerning each license.
A. Every holder of a license issued by the Borough under authority of this section shall
be required to carry such license while engaged in the licensed activity within the
limits of the Borough. The licensee shall produce such license at the request of any
official of the Borough or of any resident of the Borough with whom the holder
wishes to conduct the licensed activity.
B. Upon the expiration, cancellation, suspension or revocation of any license issued
under the provisions of this chapter, the licensee shall surrender the same to the
Borough Clerk within 24 hours after notice of such cancellation. The Borough
Clerk shall notify the Chairman of the Police Committee and the Chief of Police of
the failure of any person to surrender, as herein required, any expired license or any
license which may have been canceled or revoked.
C. The holder of any license shall not canvass or solicit orders for any articles from
pedestrian or vehicular traffic on or adjacent to any public street, avenue or highway
within the limits of the Borough of Shrewsbury in such manner as will interfere
with the normal and usual use of such public street, avenue or highway.
D. The holder of any license shall not enter in or upon any house, building or other
structure or any land or property without the prior consent of the owner or occupant
thereof, where there is placed or posted on the premises in a conspicuous position
at or near the usual means of ingress thereto a sign or other form of notice stating
or indicating that the owner or occupant thereof forbids or does not desire persons
engaged in any business or activity for which a license or permit is required to enter
upon the premises.
E. The holder of any license, on delivery of any article, ware, product or merchandise
paid for in full, or on the payment in full of any sum of money, shall give a written,
dated receipt therefor in full.
§ 132-8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 132-10
132:8
F. The holder of any license shall, if payment is not fully made in the first instance or
if payment is to be made in installments, give written, dated receipts for all
payments. Such receipt shall show the price of the article, ware, product or
merchandise ordered or sold, or the total amount solicited; the down payment, if
any; the time and amounts of installment payments and the time of the final
payment, including the time for the final delivery, if any, of any article, ware,
product or merchandise purchased or ordered. Copies of any receipts herein
required shall be kept by the holder of any such license and produced on demand
by the Chief of Police.
G. The licensee shall not transact any business which shall concern any goods, wares,
real estate, merchandise or services other than that specified in the application for
license or which shall consist of fraud, cheating or material misrepresentation.
H. The licensee must remove themselves from the premises immediately after being
asked to leave by anyone.
I. No person shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, or any loudspeaker, radio or
sound-amplifying system upon any streets, alleys, parks or other public places of
the Borough or upon any private premises where sound of sufficient volume is
emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets,
avenues, alleys, parks or other public places for the purposes to sell.
J. Distribution of commercial handbills on cars, moving or standing, on private
property or in public streets or parking areas is prohibited. It shall not be unlawful
for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver therefor a
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
K. No person shall have exclusive right to any location in or upon the public streets or
rights-of-way thereof, nor shall any vested rights arise from the use of any location,
and no person shall be permitted to operate in any location or area where his
presence presents a public hazard, danger or inconvenience, contributes to vehicular
or pedestrian congestion or constitutes a public nuisance.
L. The licensee shall not leave on or about the resident's property any circular, samples
or other manner or materials unless same is handed to an occupant of the property.
M. The licensee shall not indicate that the Borough endorses or sponsors any of the
views expressed or the organization for which support or contributions are sought.
N. The licensee shall not make false claims, misrepresentations or materially incorrect
statements concerning the solicitation, organizations represented, or the use to be
made of the amount solicited.
O. The licensee shall not engage in any course of alarming conduct or conduct himself/
herself so as to alarm or seriously annoy the residents.
P. The licensee shall not engage in any conduct which is prohibited by any statute,
regulation or ordinance in effect in the Borough of Shrewsbury.
Q. The distribution or dissemination of such shall be done without causing any litter or
debris to accumulate upon the public or private areas of the Borough of
Shrewsbury.
§ 132-10 HAWKING, PEDDLING AND CANVASSING § 132-10
132:9
§ 132-11. Deliveries exempted from chapter requirements.
The requirements of this chapter shall not affect or apply to any person engaged in the
delivery of goods, wares, merchandise or other article in the regular course of business
to the premises of persons ordering or entitled to receive the same.
§ 132-12. Time restrictions.
No soliciting, canvassing, peddling or handbill distribution shall be conducted in the
Borough of Shrewsbury before 9:00 a.m. or later than 8:00 p.m.
§ 132-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person required by this chapter to procure a license who violates the terms thereof
or fails to comply with N.J.S.A. 45:24-1 through 45:24-8, inclusive, as amended,
supplemented and in force, or who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term
of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding
90 days, or any combination thereof.
R. The licensee shall not be permitted to wear any kind of mask or head covering
which in any way conceals his identity.
§ 132-10 SHREWSBURY CODE § 132-13
132:10
Chapter 136
HOME-BASED BUSINESSES AND OFFICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 94.
§ 136-1. Purpose.
§ 136-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
HOME BUSINESS — An activity occurring from the residence for economic gain
which offers a product or merchandise for sale and employs more than one employee.
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity for economic gain, carried out in a residential
dwelling or accessory structure thereto, in which the services of the occupant are offered
on site to clients, patients, patrons or customers. Exception: in-home day-care use
approved by the Division of Youth and Family Services and family day-care homes,
subject to all state regulations governing day care and limited to a total of five children.
HOME OFFICE USE—An office activity carried on for gain by a resident in a dwelling
unit, which does not offer a product or merchandise for sale to the public but offers a
service, shall be permitted accessory use in residential zones.
§ 136-3. Home offices permitted; operational standards.
Home offices, as defined herein, are permitted in all residential zoning districts within
the Borough of Shrewsbury in accordance with the following standards:
A. As a result of rapidly changing technology, people are capable of conducting certain
low-intensity and unobtrusive businesses from their homes.
B. The advent and improvement of telephones, answering machines, pagers, cellular
communications, broadband cable, copy machines, facsimile machines, computers
and the Internet have brought changes in the manner in which business may be
conducted.
C. The Borough of Shrewsbury recognizes that with such changes in technology
certain business activities may be conducted from a residence without infringement
upon the right of all persons residing in a residential zoning district to be free from
the adverse impacts of business use.
D. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the first priority and paramount concern is to
preserve and protect the peace and tranquility of the Borough of Shrewsbury
residential zoning district.
A. The use is limited solely to office use;
§ 132-13 HOME-BASED BUSINESSES AND OFFICES § 136-3
136:1
§ 136-4. Uses prohibited in residential zones.
Home businesses and home occupations, as defined herein, are prohibited in all
residential zoning districts within the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 136-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
B. The use is operated by or employs in the residence only a resident or residents who
are permanent full-time residents of the dwelling unit, and no other persons;
C. No nonresident employees, customers, or business invitees or guests shall visit the
dwelling unit for business purposes;
D. The use shall be located in only one room of the dwelling unit, which shall not be
served by an entrance separate from the household;
E. Interior storage of materials shall only consist of office supplies;
F. There shall be no change to the exterior of buildings or structures because of the
use, and no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited to,
parking, storage, signs, or lights;
G. The use operates no equipment or process that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes,
odors, or electrical or electronic interference, including interference with telephone,
radio or television reception, detectable by neighboring residents;
H. The use does not require any increased or enhanced electrical or water supply;
I. The quantity and type of solid waste disposal is the same as other residential uses
in the zone district;
J. The capacity and quality of effluent is typical of normal residential use, and creates
no potential or actual detriment to the sanitary sewer system or its components;
K. Delivery trucks shall be limited to U.S. Postal Service, United Parcel Service,
Federal Express, and other delivery services providing regular service to residential
uses in the zone district;
L. All vehicular traffic to and from the home office use shall be limited in volume,
type and frequency to what is normally associated with other residential uses in the
zone district.
§ 136-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 136-5
136:2
Chapter 139
HOURS OF BUSINESS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 63.
Food establishments — See Ch. 126.
Hawking, peddling and canvassing — See Ch. 132.
Hours of operation at construction sites — See Ch. 141.
Massage businesses — See Ch. 157.
Tattooing and body piercing — See Ch. 231.
§ 139-1. Prohibited hours of operation.
All stores, establishments or places of business engaged in the direct sale to the public
of merchandise and food provisions primarily for consumption off the premises, located
within 500 feet of any residential zone in the Borough of Shrewsbury, shall be closed to
the public, and the business therein, together with all deliveries to said premises, shall be
and is hereby prohibited before the hour of 6:00 a.m. and after the hour of 10:00 p.m. on
all days.
§ 139-2. Prohibited hours of sales and deliveries.
§ 139-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof. Each day upon which any such violation shall occur
shall be deemed a separate offense.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall sell or offer to sell directly to the public, in any
store, establishment or place of business located within 500 feet of any residential
zone in the Borough of Shrewsbury, any merchandise or food provisions primarily
for consumption off the premises before the hour of 6:00 a.m. or after the hour of
10:00 p.m. of any day.
B. All deliveries to said premises shall be prohibited before the hour of 6:00 a.m. and
after the hour of 10:00 p.m. of any day.
C. No deliveries to or pickups from said premises, except by governmental agents,
servants or employees, shall be made between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m., prevailing time.
§ 136-5 HOURS OF BUSINESS § 139-3
139:1

Chapter 141
HOURS OF OPERATION AT CONSTRUCTION SITES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hours of business — See Ch. 139.
§ 141-1. Prohibited hours of operation.
Operating or permitting the operation of any tools, equipment or vehicles used in
construction, drilling, earthmoving, excavating, alteration, repairs, paving, demolition
work or any other construction work of any nature whatsoever in any residential zone or
any tract of land adjacent to any residential zone shall be and is hereby prohibited before
the hour of 8:00 a.m. and after the hour of 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and
before 12:00 noon or after the hour of 4:00 p.m. on Sundays and holidays.
§ 141-2. Hours of deliveries to sites restricted.
Deliveries of any construction equipment, materials or vehicles of any nature whatsoever
to any construction site as described in § 141-1 shall be prohibited before the hour of
8:00 a.m. and after the hour of 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and before 12:00
noon or after the hour of 4:00 p.m. on Sundays and holidays.
§ 141-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof. Each day upon which any such violation shall occur
shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 139-3 HOURS OF OPERATION AT CONSTRUCTION SITES § 141-3
141:1

Chapter 145
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 77.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 94.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 118.
Nuisances — See Ch. 163.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Sewer connections — See Ch. 193.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 202.
Solid waste — See Ch. 210
Swimming pools — See Ch. 226.
Vehicles, abandoned — See Ch. 250.
Sewage disposal systems, individual — See Ch. 272.
§ 145-1. Establishment of Property Maintenance Committee.
The President of the Board of Health, the Construction Code Official and the Sanitary
Inspector of the Borough of Shrewsbury be and they are hereby designated as the
Property Maintenance Committee123 (hereinafter referred to as the "Committee") to
exercise the powers prescribed by the within chapter, and they shall serve in such
capacity without any additional salary.
§ 145-2. Committee may find dwellings unfit for human habitation.124
For the purpose of the within chapter, the Committee may determine that a dwelling is
unfit for human habitation if it finds that conditions exist in such dwelling which are
dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such dwellings, the
occupants of neighboring dwellings or other residents of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the
foregoing): defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities;
lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural
defects or uncleanliness; failure to comply with the requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code or the certificate of occupancy.
§ 145-3. Certain buildings declared inimical to welfare of residents.125
A. Any building or buildings, or parts thereof, which have been damaged to such an
extent that nothing remains but the walls, or parts of the walls and other supports,
shall, regardless of the safety and sturdiness of those remaining walls or parts
thereof, be deemed inimical to the welfare of the residents of the municipality
wherein it is located, and the municipality may exercise its police powers to repair,
demolish, or cause the repairing or demolishing of the building or buildings, or
123.Editor's Note: See Ch. 3, Administration of Government, Article XVI, Property Maintenance Committee.
124.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
125.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 141-3 HOUSING STANDARDS § 145-3
145:1
§ 145-4. Adoption of New Jersey State Housing Code.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1), the "New
Jersey State Housing Code" as approved by the Departments of Health and Conservation
and Economic Development and filed in the Secretary of State's office is hereby
accepted, adopted and established as a standard to be used as a guide in determining
the fitness of a building for human habitation or occupancy or use. A copy of the New
Jersey State Housing Code is annexed to this chapter and three copies of the same have
been placed on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk and are available to all persons
desiring to use and examine the same.
§ 145-5. Hearing upon charges that a dwelling is unfit.126
Whenever a petition is filed with the Mayor and Council by a public authority as defined
in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of the municipality, charging that
any dwelling is unfit for human habitation as herein defined, or whenever it appears to
the Committee (on its own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, as
herein defined, it shall, if its preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges,
issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will
be held before the Committee at a place therein fixed not less than seven days nor more
than 30 days after the serving of said complaint; that the owner and parties in interest
shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or
otherwise and give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaints; and that the
rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the Committee.
§ 145-6. Repair and demolition orders; assessment of costs.
If, after such notice and hearing, the Committee determines that the dwelling under
consideration is unfit for human habitation, as herein defined, it shall state in writing its
findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order requiring:
parts thereof, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq., and the procedures set forth
therein.
B. Any building or buildings, or parts thereof, which have come into a state of
disrepair through neglect, lack of maintenance or use, fire, accident or other
calamities, or through any other act rendering the building or buildings, or parts
thereof, in a state of disrepair, to the extent that the building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, shall be deemed inimical to the welfare of the
residents of the municipality wherein it is located, and a public officer appointed
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq. may exercise his powers to
repair, demolish, or cause the repairing or demolition of the building or buildings,
or parts thereof, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5b.
A. The repair, alteration or improvement of the said building to be made by the owner
within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the order, or, at the option
126.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 145-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 145-6
145:2
of the owner, to vacate or to have said building vacated and closed within the
time set forth in the order; and, if the building is in such a condition as to make it
dangerous to the health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve the said building within the time specified in the
order, that the owner remove or demolish the said building within a reasonable time
as specified in the said order of removal.
B. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or, at the
option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Committee may cause
such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed; that
the Committee may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so
closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is prohibited
and unlawful."
C. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the building,
the Committee shall recommend to the Mayor and Council the removal or
demolition of the building and shall thereafter proceed under the direction of the
Mayor and Council for the removal or demolition thereof after advertisement,
where required by law, for and receipt of bids therefor, to be awarded to the lowest
qualified bidder.
D. That the amount of the cost of filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search
fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any proceeding taken under
this chapter determined in favor of the municipality, and such cost of such repairs,
alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if
any, or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if
any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or from any
contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred. If the building is removed or
demolished by the Committee, it shall sell the materials of such building. There
shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof, including the
clearance and, if necessary, leveling of the site, the proceeds of any sale of such
materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of the
building. If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the
total of such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so
due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor and a copy thereof shall be
forthwith mailed to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds
such costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
Committee, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such Court and
shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the Court to the persons
found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such Court; provided,
however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any
way the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party
in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate,
proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness
of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien
certificate.127
E. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened collapse of any
§ 145-6 HOUSING STANDARDS § 145-6
145:3
§ 145-7. Service of complaints and orders.
Complaints or orders issued by the Committee pursuant to this chapter shall be served
upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such
persons is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Committee in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, and the said Committee shall make an affidavit to that
effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by
publishing the same once each week for two successive weeks in one of the newspapers
officially designated by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury. A copy
of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the complaint or order, and a copy of such complaint or order shall be duly
recorded with the County Recording Officer of the County of Monmouth.
§ 145-8. Other powers of Committee.
fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the public officer may, after
taking such measures as may be necessary to make such building temporarily safe,
seek a judgment in summary proceedings for the demolition thereof.128
F. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power
of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or
abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor is anything in this act
intended to limit the authority of the enforcing agency or construction official under
the "State Uniform Construction Code Act" (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) or any
rules or regulations adopted thereunder.129
A. The Committee is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise such powers as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this chapter, including the following in addition to others herein
granted:
(1) To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Borough of Shrewsbury in order
to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence.
(3) To make lawful entry upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
B. Any action taken using revenues derived from the local property tax shall be taken
only after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor, pursuant to the provisions
of the "Local Public Contracts Law" (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.), unless the action
is necessary to prevent imminent danger to life, limb or property.130
127.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
128.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
129.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
130.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 145-6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 145-9
145:4
§ 145-9. Powers to be supplemental to other municipal powers.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power of the
municipality or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of its charter or its
ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers
conferred by this chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred
upon the municipality by any other law or ordinance.
§ 145-9 HOUSING STANDARDS § 145-9
145:5

Chapter 146
LANDSCAPING, LANDSCAPER LICENSING, REGISTRATION, AND NOISE
§ 146-1. Purpose.
No person shall landscape on or engage in any landscaping on any public or private
property within the Borough for hire without first registering with the Borough Clerk on
forms to be supplied by the Borough.
§ 146-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
FOR HIRE — To demand and/or accept payment or compensation for completion of
services.
LANDSCAPE and LANDSCAPING — Business, occupation, or trade of adorning or
improving property or portion of property by trimming or cutting grass and/or shrubs;
planting; installing or removing leaves, branches, grass, flowers, mulch, hedges, or
shrubs; planting, removing, or installing trees; or similar business activities. This shall
also include the solicitation of the services and products described herein.
§ 146-3. Application; registration; fees.
§ 146-4. Noise.
A. At the time of registration, applicants shall certify that they have received copies of,
understand, and shall comply with the applicable Borough ordinances, policies, and
provisions.
B. Each registration shall be issued and renewed annually, effective February of each
year, upon the Borough's acceptance of a fee of $10. This fee shall be assessed and
paid with each registration annually.
C. Registration shall not be required for services otherwise requiring registration to be
performed by the owner or tenant of such real property belonging to or under the
care of the owner or tenant.
D. The Borough makes no such affirmation, representation, support, or guarantee
regarding the fitness, knowledge, or qualification of any person or entity that is
registered by the Borough pursuant to this chapter.
A. In addition to the Borough's existing ordinances pertaining to noise restriction,
landscapers for hire shall not make or cause to make audible noise by landscape,
erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any real property or
improvements thereon other than between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, and in no case on
Sunday.
B. Residents performing landscaping services on their own property shall not make or
cause to make audible noise by landscape, erection, excavation, demolition,
§ 145-9 LANDSCAPING, LANDSCAPER LICENSING, § 146-4
146:1
§ 146-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity in violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
pay a fine not exceeding $200. Each day a violation occurs, even if in continuance of a
prior day's activities, shall constitute a separate violation.
alteration or repair to their real property and improvements thereon other than
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday.
§ 146-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 146-5
146:2
Chapter 152
LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 94.
Food establishments — See Ch. 126.
Hawking, peddling and canvassing — See Ch. 132.
Home-based businesses and offices — See Ch. 136.
Hours of business — See Ch. 139.
Massage, bodywork and somatic therapy businesses — See
Ch. 157.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
Private sales; auctions — See Ch. 188.
Tattooing and body piercing — See Ch. 231.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 236.
§ 152-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUSINESS—As used in both singular and plural sense, includes all kinds of vocations,
occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments and all other kinds of activities and
matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein,
any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on
any premises in the Borough of Shrewsbury, as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:52-1, as amended
and supplemented and in force. [Editor's Note: The former definition of "canvasser and solicitor," which immediately followed this definition,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III). See now Ch. 132, Hawking, Peddling and Canvassing.]
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE — Any automatic vending machine used for the
sale of cigarettes, cigars, tobacco and/or matches, and controlled by the insertion of a
coin or coins.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL —
Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet,
pamphlet, paper, booklet or other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies
of any matter or literature:
(1) Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or things; or
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly
promoting the interest thereof by sale; or
(2)
Which directs attention to or advertises any show, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which is charged an admission fee for the
purpose of private gain or profit; or
(3)
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominately and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or circulated
for advertising purposes or for private benefit and gain of any person so
(4)
A.
§ 146-5 LICENSES § 152-1
152:1
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALE — A sale held out in such manner as
reasonably to cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered
by fire, smoke, water or other means.
GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE — A sale held in such a manner as reasonably
to cause the public to believe that, upon the disposal of the stock and goods on hand,
the business will cease and be discontinued, including, but not limited to, the following
sales: adjuster's; adjustments; alterations; assignee's; bankrupts'; benefit of
administrators'; benefit of creditors'; benefit of trustee; building coming down; closing;
creditors' committee; creditor's; end; executor's; final days; forced out; forced out of
business; insolvent's; last days; lease expires; liquidations; loss of lease; mortgage sales;
quitting business; receiver's; trustee's.
HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR — Any person engaged in distributing commercial or
noncommercial handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, for
himself or any other person, upon any of the public and private streets, places and
premises, other than his own premises in the Borough of Shrewsbury. This definition
shall not prohibit sale of newspapers, regularly published, through newsboys, newsmen
or from news store premises in the Borough of Shrewsbury.
INSIGNIA or INSIGNE131 — Any tag, plate, badge, emblem, sticker or any other kind
of device which may be required for any use in connection with any license.
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or other opening,
or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated for the emission of songs,
music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine, operated mechanically,
electrically or otherwise, which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc,
may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, games and all rides, operations
or transactions similar thereto, under whatever name they may be included.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL—Any printed matter or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, magazine, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any letter or literature not included
in the aforesaid definition of a commercial handbill, and shall not include any newspaper
of general circulation as defined by general law.132
PERSON — Individual natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures, societies,
associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or unincorporated groups, or any
officers, agents, employees, servants, factors or any kind of personal representatives of
any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself or for any other person under either
engaged as advertiser or distributor.
"Commercial handbill" shall not include any newspaper of general circulation as
defined by general law.
B.
131.Note: Singular number of "insignia."
132.Editor's Note: The former definition of "peddler," which immediately followed this definition, was deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III). See now Ch. 132, Hawking, Peddling and Canvassing.
§ 152-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 152-1
152:2
personal appointment or pursuant to law.
PRECIOUS METALS — Items comprised of gold, silver, platinum, palladium and
alloys thereof, gems, coins containing precious metals and all forms of previously owned
jewelry which contain precious metals.[Added 12-10-1984 by Ord. No. 520]
PRECIOUS METALS BUYER — A person engaged in the business of purchasing
precious metals, gems, coins containing precious metals and all forms of previously
owned jewelry, either as a primary business or in connection with another business,
from any person who is not in the business of selling precious metals as required under
N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 to 51:6A-8.[Added 12-10-1984 by Ord. No. 520]
PREMISES — All land, structures, places and also the equipment and appurtenances
connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property which
is either affixed to or used in connection with any such business conducted on such
premises.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE—A sale held out in such a manner as reasonably to
cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue
business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock and goods on hand and then move
to and resume business at a new location within the Borough of Shrewsbury or will then
continue business from other existing locations in said Borough.133
VENDING MACHINE—Any machine or device, whether automatic or not, controlled
by the insertion of a coin or coins, for the vending of service, food, liquids, confections,
goods, wares, merchandise or articles of any type, kind or description.
§ 152-2. License required for businesses; annual fee. [Amended 1-16-1978 by Ord.
No. 411; 7-9-1979 by Ord. No. 435; 12-10-1984 by Ord. No. 520; 12-2-2002 by Ord.
No. 802; 10-7-2003 by Ord. No. 818]
A. Hereafter, any person, persons, corporation or corporations engaged in, conducting
or operating any business, including purchasing of precious metals, a canvasser or
solicitor, a commercial or noncommercial handbill distributor, a peddler, a transient
merchant, an itinerant merchant and the operator of a fire and other altered goods
sale, a going-out-of-business sale, a removal-of-business sale, a jukebox or other
vending machine, an electronic or mechanical amusement device or any other
business, as defined in this chapter, within the limits of the Borough of Shrewsbury
shall be required to secure a license for any business conducted and each device
operated and shall pay annually to the Borough of Shrewsbury a license fee of $100
for each such business conducted and a license fee of $25 for each such machine or
device operated.
B. No building, structure or land shall be occupied or used until such time as a permit,
signed by the Zoning Officer, approving the business use of the building structure
or land, has been submitted.
133.Editor's Note: The former definition of ”transient merchant, itinerant merchant and itinerant vendor,” which
immediately followed this definition, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
See now Ch. 132, Hawking, Peddling and Canvassing.
§ 152-1 LICENSES § 152-3
152:3
§ 152-3. Purpose of license fees. [Amended 1-16-1978 by Ord. No. 411; 7-9-1979
by Ord. No. 435; 10-7-2003 by Ord. No. 818]
The above-mentioned license fees are all imposed for the cost of regulation and
administration of the administrative code.
§ 152-4. Persons deemed engaging in business.
For the purposes of this chapter, any person shall be deemed engaging in business and
subject to the provisions of this chapter if he does one of the following:
§ 152-5. Agents personally responsible for compliance.
The agents, servants, employees or other representatives of corporations, partnerships,
resident or nonresident individual natural persons, joint ventures, societies, associations,
clubs, trustees, trusts or unincorporated groups shall be personally responsible for
compliance with this chapter by their principals and by the businesses which they
represent.
§ 152-6. Going-out-of-business and fire sales.
A. Sells any goods or services.
B. Solicits business or offers goods or services for sale or hire.
C. Acquires or uses any vehicle, machine or device, or any premises within the
Borough of Shrewsbury, for business purposes.
D. Buys or attempts to buy precious metals, gems, coins and all forms of previously
owned jewelry, whether on the basis of bulk value or individual item. [Added
12-10-1984 by Ord. No. 520]
A. No person shall be granted a license for a going-out-of-business sale, a removal-ofbusiness
sale or a fire or other altered goods sale unless:
(1) He has been the owner of a business as described in the application for a
license hereunder for a period of at least six months prior to the date of the
proposed sale; and
(2) He has not held a similar sale at the location stated in the license application
within one year from the date of such application; and
(3) The license applies to only one business and is not conducted or advertised in
cooperation or by participation with any other business.
B. Such license shall:
(1) Authorize only one type of sale described in the application at the location
named therein.
(2) Continue for a period not exceeding three months from the date of granting of
license and shall not be renewable, assignable or transferable.
C. The provisions of the preceding Subsections A and B shall not apply to:
§ 152-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 152-6
152:4
§ 152-7. Applications for licenses.
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this chapter shall
submit an application for such license to the Borough Clerk of the Borough of
Shrewsbury. Said application shall be accompanied by the full amount of the fees
chargeable for the license for which applied. Said application shall be a written statement
upon forms provided by the Borough Clerk and shall contain the following information:
§ 152-8. Licenses for persons not of good moral character prohibited.
No license or renewal thereof shall be issued to a person not of good moral character.
If the applicant is not an individual, these provisions shall apply to its officers and
managers.
§ 152-9. Investigation of criminal record of applicant. [Amended 12-10-1984 by
Ord. No. 520]
Upon written request of the Borough Clerk, the Police Department shall ascertain
whether or not the applicant has any criminal record and report in writing within 30
(1) Any person acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duty as public officials.134
A. The previous license history of the applicant, including any previous revocation or
suspension and the reasons therefor.
B. A statement that the applicant is not violating the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough
of Shrewsbury.135 If the applicant occupies a nonconforming use, proof of date of
occupancy and operation must be given.
C. A statement that the applicant is not in default under the provisions of this chapter
or indebted or obligated in any manner to the Borough of Shrewsbury, except for
current taxes.
D. Such other facts relative to the general personal history of the applicant, or its
officers and managers if said applicant is not an individual, so as to enable the
Borough Clerk to make a fair determination of the eligibility of the applicant.
E. Name of the person to whom the license will be issued, and his residence address.
If the applicant is not an individual, the names, positions and residence addresses of
all officers and managers of the applicant.
F. The premises at which the business is to be carried on, and the name and address of
the owner of said premises.136
134.Editor's Note: Former §§ 53-7, Solicitations by charitable nonprofit corporations, and 53-8, Dissemination of political
and religious ideas, as amended, which immediately followed this subsection, were deleted at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III). See now Ch. 132, Hawking, Peddling and Canvassing.
135.Editor's Note: See Ch. 94, Zoning and Land Development.
136.Editor's Note: Former § 53-10, Applications from transient merchants and peddlers, which immediately followed this
subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III). See now Ch. 132, Hawking,
Peddling and Canvassing.
§ 152-6 LICENSES § 152-9
152:5
days after the request. The Police Department shall set forth in its report reasons for
denying or granting the applicant a license. When an applicant files for a license to buy
precious metals, coins or jewelry, either as a primary business or in connection with
another business, said application shall be referred to the Police Department, which shall
conduct an investigation as stipulated in this section.
§ 152-10. Issuance of licenses; appeals from disapproved applications.
After submission of the application and the required fees to the Borough Clerk, the
Borough Clerk shall cause an investigation to be made and shall indicate in writing
approval or disapproval of the license application within 10 days following receipt of the
report of the Police Department as required in § 53-9 preceding. If approved, the license
shall issue forthwith in the name of the Borough Clerk. If disapproved, the Borough
Clerk shall forthwith notify the applicant in writing of such disapproval and reasons
therefor, and the applicant shall have 10 days from receipt of notice of disapproval to
appeal from the decision of the Borough Clerk to the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Shrewsbury, who after due hearing shall affirm or reverse the decision of the Borough
Clerk.
§ 152-11. Renewals and transfers of licenses.
Applications for renewal or transfer of a license shall follow the same procedure as is
outlined for original applications for licenses.137
§ 152-12. (Reserved)138
§ 152-13. Expiration of licenses; when fees due and payable.
All licenses shall commence as of the first day of July in each year and shall expire on
the 30th day of June in the following year. All license fees shall be due and payable on
the first day of July in each year.
§ 152-14. Transfer of license permitted; fee.
If a licensed business is transferred to a new location within the Borough of Shrewsbury,
or an established business remaining in the Borough is sold, the license therefor may be
transferred, provided that the annual license fee for the year has been paid and a transfer
fee of $5 is paid to the Borough Clerk.
§ 152-15. Issuance of duplicate licenses; fee.
A duplicate license may be issued by the Borough Clerk to replace any license
previously issued, which license has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed without any
willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing by the licensee of an affidavit
sworn to before a notary public of the State of New Jersey attesting to such fact and the
payment to the Borough Clerk of a fee of $5.
137.Editor's Note: Former § 53-15, Bond required of transient merchants and peddlers, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871. See now Ch. 132, Hawking, Peddling and Canvassing.
138.Editor's Note: Former § 152-12, Bond required of newly established businesses, was repealed 5-17-2010 by Ord. No.
942.
§ 152-9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 152-16
152:6
§ 152-16. Rebates and refunds of license fees prohibited.
No rebate or refund of any license fee or any part thereof shall be made by reason of
retirement of any licensee from business or by reason of the nonuse of such license for
all or any portion of the licensed year, or by reason of a change of location or business
or by reason of fire or other accident or other casualty rendering the use of such license
ineffective.
§ 152-17. Form of license.
Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following:
§ 152-18. Obligations of licensees.
Every licensee under this chapter shall:
A. The name of the licensee and any other name under which such business is to be
conducted.
B. The kind and address of each business so licensed.
C. The amount of the license fee therefor.
D. The dates of issuance and expiration thereof.
E. Such other information as the Borough Clerk shall determine.
A. Permit all reasonable inspections of his business.
B. Permit access to the licensed premises at all reasonable times by the Borough Clerk
or authorized agent.
C. Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations applicable to such
licensed businesses.
D. Avoid all forbidden, improper, unlawful or unnecessary practices, businesses or
conditions which do or may affect the public health, morals or welfare.
E. Refrain from operating the licensed businesses on premises after expiration of his
license and during the period when his license is revoked or suspended.
F. Post and maintain his license upon the licensed premises in a place where it may be
seen at all times. Moreover, in the case of cigarette vending machines, jukeboxes,
vending machines and mechanical amusement devices, the license or licenses
herein provided for shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location
of the machine or device in the premises wherein the same is to be operated or
maintained to be operated, and such machine or device shall have affixed thereto
any insignia delivered for use therewith upon the outside of same so that it may be
seen at all times.
G. Carry and display, at all times, his license and identification to any person
requesting the same, if the licensee is a transient merchant, itinerant merchant,
itinerant vendor, peddler, solicitor, canvasser or handbill distributor.
§ 152-16 LICENSES § 152-18
152:7
H. Not loan, sell, give or assign to any other person, or allow any other person to use
or display, or to destroy, damage or remove, or to have in his possession, except as
authorized by the Borough Clerk or by law, any license or insignia which has been
issued to said licensee.
I. Require persons regulated to purchase precious metals to require of anyone offering
to sell them merchandise regulated by this chapter to produce two identifications,
such as a driver's license, voter registration card, social security card or similar
identification. They shall also sign and give to the seller a receipt for said
merchandise and shall obtain from the seller the following information: name,
address, sex, date of birth, social security number, if available, and physical
description. A form for physical description shall be available if desired from the
Police Department. [Added 12-10-1984 by Ord. No. 520]
(1) All persons regulated by this section shall maintain a record of each purchase,
which record shall contain a description of the merchandise purchased, any
identifying numbers on the merchandise, a copy of the signed receipt given to
the seller and a record of all information required under this section.
(a) The receipt provided to the seller shall contain the following information:
[1] The price at which the precious metals are being bought, expressed
as a price per ounce.
[2] The weight of the precious metal purchased together with a full and
complete description of the items being purchased.
[3] If the item purchased is a gem or piece of jewelry not bought on the
basis of weight, the price being paid for the item together with a
description of the item.
[4] The name and address of the seller.
(b) These records shall be available for inspection by the Police Department
of the Borough of Shrewsbury and shall be maintained for two years from
the date of purchase.
(2) Within 24 hours of the close of business on any day except Saturday, all
persons regulated under this chapter shall deliver to the Police Department of
the Borough of Shrewsbury a list of all items of merchandise covered by this
chapter purchased by them. For all merchandise purchased on Saturday, said
list of items shall be delivered to the Police Department by no later than 12:00
noon of the Monday following. Said list shall contain a description of each
item, any identifying numbers, the time of purchase and the name and address
of the seller.
(3) No person regulated by this chapter shall sell, melt down or otherwise dispose
of any merchandise covered by this chapter purchased by him until after the
expiration of 72 hours from the close of business on the date of purchase;
provided, however, that no such waiting period shall be required if the
merchandise is purchased from a person regularly engaged in the business of
buying and selling precious metals and licensed and regulated pursuant to an
§ 152-18 SHREWSBURY CODE § 152-18
152:8
§ 152-19. Conducting or assisting unlicensed businesses prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to manage or conduct any business or use
for any business any wagon, vehicle, motor-driven vehicle, stand, store or other place
or thing herein required to be licensed, or to aid, assist or act as employee, clerk or
otherwise in the carrying on of such business or using any wagon, vehicle, motor-driven
vehicle, stand, store or other place or thing as aforesaid, unless such license fee has been
paid and such certificate obtained as hereinbefore required.
§ 152-20. Licenses not required for deliveries.
No license shall be required of any person for any mere delivery in the Borough of any
property purchased or acquired in good faith from such person at his regular place of
business outside of the Borough, where no intent by such person is shown to exist to
evade the provisions of this chapter.
§ 152-21. Duty of police to enforce compliance.
The Chief of Police and all police officers of the Borough of Shrewsbury shall examine
all places of business and all persons in said Borough to determine if this chapter has
been complied with, and shall enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person
found to be violating the same. Further, it shall be their duty to require any person seen
peddling, soliciting, canvassing or distributing and who is not known by such officer to
be duly licensed, to produce his peddler's, solicitor's, canvasser's or distributor's license,
as the case may be, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found
to be violating the same.
§ 152-22. Revocation of licenses.
Any permit or license granted or issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the
Mayor and Council, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
ordinance of another municipality similar to this chapter and requiring a
similar waiting period of not less than 72 hours:
(a) The license obtained in accordance with this chapter.
(b) The prices at which the precious metals are being bought, expressed as
price per ounce.
(4) No person who engages in the business of the purchase of precious metals,
gems, coins or previously owned jewelry shall purchase any such items from
any person under the age of 18 years.
A. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for
license.
B. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling
of goods, wares or merchandise.
C. Any violation of this chapter.
D. Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral
§ 152-18 LICENSES § 152-22
152:9
§ 152-23. Notice of hearing for revocation of license.
Notice of hearing for revocation of license, under § 152-22 preceding, shall be given in
writing by the Borough Clerk, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and
the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by certified mail to the
licensee, at his address indicated on his license application, at least five days prior to the
date set forth for the hearing.
§ 152-24. Complaints authorized; violations and penalties.
In addition to the provisions for revocation, the Chief of Police, any police officer of the
Borough of Shrewsbury or any taxpayer or resident of the Borough may make complaint
in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Shrewsbury for any violation of this chapter
or any section, paragraph or provision thereof. Upon conviction in such case, for each
and every violation, the person committing, taking part or assisting in the violation or
violations shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term
of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding
90 days, or any combination thereof. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
turpitude.
E. Conducting the business licensed under this chapter, through the applicant himself
or any of his agents, servants or employees, in any unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the general
welfare of the public.
§ 152-22 SHREWSBURY CODE § 152-24
152:10
Chapter 154
LIMOUSINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 90.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 236.
Towing — See Ch. 242.
§ 154-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AUTOCAB — Any automobile with a capacity of no more than 14 passengers (not
including the driver) or stretched not more than four passenger seats more than originally
manufactured, used in the business of carrying passengers for hire which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run over any of
the streets or public highways of the state, and which is hired by the charter or for a
particular contract, or by the day or hour or either fixed period, or to transport passengers
to a specified place or places, or which charges a fare or price agreed upon in advance
between the operator and the passenger. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
include taxicabs, hotel buses or buses employed solely in transporting school children
or teachers or autobuses which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Board of Public
Utilities, or interstate autobuses required by federal or state law or rules of the Board of
Public Utilities to carry insurance against loss from liability by law on account of bodily
injury or death.
LIMOUSINE OR LIVERY SERVICE — The business of carrying passengers for hire
by autocabs.
STREET — Any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway, or other public place.
§ 154-2. License required.
No person or entity shall operate a limousine business or limousine service with its
principal place of business within the Borough without applying for and obtaining a
license for that business or service, and complying with the terms of N.J.S.A. 48:16-3
et seq. [excluding 48:16-3 (b)]. No person or entity shall operate such a business/service
without a current license in place.
§ 154-3. Limousine and livery certification.
Any person or entity proposing to operate a limousine business or service with its
principal place of business within the Borough shall annually apply to the Borough Clerk
for a limousine license. That application and submission shall include but not be limited
to the following requirements and information:
A. A complete listing, including make, license number and VIN number, of all
vehicles to be used in the limousine business/service, including proof of ownership
§ 152-24 LIMOUSINES § 154-3
154:1
§ 154-4. Fee for certification.
Each applicant shall be charged the fee of $25 per limousine for a certification issued
pursuant to § 154-3 of this chapter.
and registration. If the vehicle is leased, a true copy of the lease must be supplied.
B. A copy of a certificate of insurance indicating the statutory minimum liability
coverage.
C. A complete and detailed description of the place and location where the limousine
business/service shall be operated, the number of employees working on site, the
approximate number of drivers operating vehicles and the location where vehicles
are parked daily and overnight.
D. The names, residence and business addresses of the owners/principal operators of
the business/service.
E. An executed power of attorney wherein the owner appoints the Chief Financial
Officer of the Borough for purposes of acknowledging service of process from any
court of competent jurisdiction.
F. Any other information or documentation deemed appropriate or necessary by the
Borough Clerk and/or the Police Department.
§ 154-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 154-4
154:2
Chapter 157
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPY BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Home-based businesses and offices — See Ch. 136.
Hours of business — See Ch. 139.
Licenses — See Ch. 152.
§ 157-1. Massage business license required.
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any establishment or utilize any premises
in the Borough of Shrewsbury as or for a massage business unless and until there first
has been obtained a license for such establishment or premises from the Borough Clerk
of the Borough of Shrewsbury in accordance with the terms and provisions of Chapter
152, Licenses, and the terms and provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any
business to have a person or persons engage in the practice of or attempt to practice,
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy, whether for a fee, or gratuitously performed,
without meeting the requirements as established in this chapter".
§ 157-2. License application; standards for approval.
Each and every applicant for a license shall submit the following information for review
and approval by the Borough Clerk before each licensing period:
A. Applicant's name, home address, e-mail and contact phone number.
B. The address of the applicant's establishment or premises where the massage
services will be provided.
C. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime
in this or any other state. The Borough Clerk or the Borough's Police Department
may ask the applicant for a consent to a fingerprint background check at any time,
cost to be the responsibility of the applicant.
D. A statement acknowledging that the premises or establishment to be licensed must
be in conformity with all the codes of the Borough.
E. A list of each person or persons engaging in the practice or attempt to practice
massage, bodywork or somatic therapy at your establishment. For each of the
individuals, the following information must be supplied for the review and approval
by the Borough Clerk and the Borough Police Department. If a new masseuse or
masseur begins to practice massage, bodywork or somatic therapy at anytime
within the licensing period, the paperwork noted within this chapter must be
delivered to the Clerk's office in a timely fashion, not to exceed 30 days.
(1) Name and address of each masseur and masseuse.
(2) A statement that each masseuse or masseur is over the age of 18.
§ 154-4 MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPY § 157-2
157:1
(3) A copy of a current New Jersey state certification for massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy issued by the New Jersey Office of the Attorney General,
Division of Consumer Affairs, Board of Nursing, for each masseur and
masseuse. This copy will remain in the Clerk's office files until its expiration.
It will be the responsibility of the applicant to forward a new certificate for
each masseuse or masseur upon the State certificate's renewal.
(4) If a masseuse or masseur does not currently hold a current New Jersey state
certification for massage, bodywork and somatic therapy issued by the Office
of the Attorney General, Division of Consumer Affairs, Board of Nursing, the
following information must be furnished by the applicant to comply with the
Borough's licensing requirements:
(a) A copy of a diploma or certificate of graduation from a school recognized
by the New Jersey Division of Consumer Affairs, Board of Nursing, as
an accredited massage, bodywork and somatic therapy institution, a list
of which was obtained from the New Jersey State Board of Nursing and
is maintained by the Borough Clerk. The Clerk shall have the right to
confirm the fact that the masseur or masseuse has actually attended and
matriculated from the accredited school.
(b) An original letter issued directly to the applicant by the New Jersey
Office of the Attorney General, Department of Law and Public Safety,
Division of State Police, stating that the masseur or masseuse's
fingerprints had been examined by the New Jersey State Police and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation and that the examination does not reveal
a conviction of a crime as defined in Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes,
excluding paragraph (4) of Subsection 2C:35-10. The only agency
recognized by the Borough and the New Jersey Division of Consumer
Affairs to conduct the criminal background check is Sagem Morpho, Inc.
The applicant is responsible for downloading the appropriate form from
the Sagem Morpho website and giving it to the masseur/masseuse so that
they may make the proper appointment to complete the fingerprint
background check. The fee incurred to complete the background check is
the responsibility of the applicant or the masseur/masseuse, not the
Borough. A full background check using the appropriate form will be
required for each masseur and masseuse practicing at the applicant's
establishment at the start of, or within, the applicant's licensing period.
(c) If the same masseur or masseuse is still practicing during the applicant's
subsequent licensing periods, the Borough will be satisfied with a
background check using a name check only. Applicants will submit the
authorized form directly to the Division of State Police for each masseur
or masseuse on a yearly basis so that the results are returned prior to the
start of the applicant's next licensing period. The cost of the name check
will be the responsibility of the applicant or the masseur or masseuse, not
the Borough. The Borough will need to see the original letter returned to
the applicant from the New Jersey State Police stating that the masseur or
masseuse continues to not reveal a disqualifier enumerated in
§ 157-2E(4)(b).
§ 157-2 SHREWSBURY CODE § 157-3
157:2
§ 157-3. License fees.
The applicant for a business license for an establishment or premises shall pay an annual
license fee of $100, which license fee shall become due on the first day of July in each
year.
§ 157-4. Employees/independent contractors.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that the requirements pursuant to
this chapter are followed for each and every masseur and masseuse practicing at their
establishment.
§ 157-5. Revocation of license.
§ 157-6. Grounds for revocation.
The license of a business offering massage services may be revoked upon one or more
of the following grounds:
A. No license shall be revoked until after due notice and hearing shall have been held
before the Borough Administrator and the Chief of Police, or Police Department
designee, to determine just cause for such revocation. Notice of such hearing shall
be given in writing and served at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing
thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaint against the holder of
such license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be
conducted.
B. The notice shall be served upon the license holder by delivering the same personally
or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the license holder
in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. In the event that the license
holder cannot be found, and the service of such notice cannot be otherwise made in
the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed, registered
postage fully prepaid, addressed to the license holder at his place of business or
residence, at least 10 days prior to the date of such hearing.
A. The applicant, masseur or masseuse practicing at the applicant's establishment is
guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, bodywork or somatic therapy or fraud or
deceit in their being licensed to perform the practice of massage, body- work or
somatic therapy.
B. That the applicant, masseur or masseuse practicing at the applicant's establishment
has been convicted of a crime as defined in § 157-2E(4)(b).
C. The applicant, masseur or masseuse practicing at the applicant's establishment is
engaged in the practice of massage, bodywork or somatic therapy under a false or
assumed name or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name.
D. That the applicant, masseur or masseuse practicing at the applicant's establishment
is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive advertising or that he or she
prescribes medicines or drugs or practices any other licensed profession without
legal authority thereof.
§ 157-3 MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPY § 157-6
157:3
§ 157-7. Exceptions. [Amended 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 986]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage or physical therapy treatments
given:
§ 157-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
E. That the applicant is guilty of employing, allowing or permitting any unregistered
person to perform massage in his or her establishment.
F. That the applicant has violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
A. In the office of and by a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or physical
therapist.
B. In a regularly established medical center, nursing or convalescent home, hospital or
sanatorium, by licensed physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors and/or physical
therapists.
C. By any licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or physical therapist in the
residence of his patient.
§ 157-6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 157-8
157:4
Chapter 163
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 77.
Housing standards — See Ch. 145.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
§ 163-1. Adoption of standards.139
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts, and each
of them, as a nuisance; requiring the proper heating of apartments; prohibiting lease
or rental of certain buildings; authorizing the inspection of premises by an enforcing
official; providing for the removal or abatement of certain nuisances and recovery of
expenses incurred by the Board of Health in removing or abating such nuisances, and
prescribing penalties for violations, is hereby established. A copy of the said code is
annexed hereto, and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein
set forth.
§ 163-2. Title; additions or modifications to code.
§ 163-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said New Jersey Public Health Nuisance Code (1953) have been
placed on file in the office of the Clerk of the Borough of Shrewsbury upon the
introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there until final action is taken on this
chapter for the use and examination of the public.
§ 163-4. Right of entry.
The said Board of Health and its agents or employees shall have the right of entry, at any
reasonable hour, into and upon any public or private building or premises for the purpose
of enforcing the provisions of such code and of this chapter or determining whether such
provisions or the rules and regulations of the Board of Health are being complied with
and obeyed. No person shall oppose such entry or hinder or interfere with this Board of
Health or its agents or employees in the performance of their duties.
A. The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and commonly
known as the "New Jersey Public Health Nuisance Code (1953)."
B. Added to same as part of Section 2, Paragraph 2.1(j), is the following:
(j) The burning of any leaves, flowers, grass, organic or inorganic matter or
material by any person within the confines of this municipality.
139.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 157-8 NUISANCES § 163-5
163:1
§ 163-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or code established herein
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. Each day a particular
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. In the event of any violation of a New Jersey State law, for which a greater penalty
is provided for than that contained in the aforesaid code and this chapter, the
Municipal Judge before whom the complaint is brought, based upon such violation,
shall, in his discretion, have the right to impose, in the place and in lieu of any
penalty provided for herein, that which is so provided for in the New Jersey State
law which has been so violated.
§ 163-5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 163-5
163:2
Chapter 166
NURSING AND ASSISTED LIVING HOMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mutual aid — See Ch. 35.
§ 163-5 NURSING AND ASSISTED LIVING HOMES § 163-5
166:1

ARTICLE I
Transportation Requirements
[Adopted 6-15-2020 by Ord. No. 1069140]
§ 166-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to preserve and enhance the availability of volunteer first
aid squad services for emergency medical situations in the Borough by regulating the
use of volunteer first aid squad services in certain nonemergency situations.
§ 166-2. Applicability.
This article shall apply to each and every nursing or assisted living home or similar
facility in the Borough which is a licensed health care facility, hospital, institution,
care center, convalescent home, old-age home, nursing home, assisted living facility,
rehabilitation center, mental health institution, or any other establishment or institution
for the care, treatment, lodging, or nursing of persons who are mentally ill, mentally
deficient, acutely ill, chronically ill, disabled, convalescent, infirm or in any way
afflicted, or who resided therein for any purpose whatsoever.
§ 166-3. Ambulance services required.
All such facilities described herein within the Borough shall be required to own or rent
to have promptly and readily available appropriately staffed private ambulance services
for the treatment and transport of patients in need of emergency and nonemergency care.
Such ambulance services must be available each and every day for 24 hours per day.
§ 166-4. Proof of availability and certification to be filed; penalties for
noncompliance.
A. In order to satisfy the requirements of this article, each such facility shall file proof
of availability of private ambulance services with the Borough Clerk within 60 days
of the final passage of this article. Such filings must also occur on or before January
5 of each year thereafter. Proof shall consist of a contract with no less than two
private ambulance service providers under which such providers are obligated to
respond promptly to the facility. If a facility elects to own and operate its own
ambulances, such proof shall consist of documentation of the make, model, year,
color, serial number, license plate number, location, and staffing of such
ambulance. A facility with its own ambulance service must provide proof of at least
one fully staffed ambulance per 100 patients on every given day. Additionally, a
facility with its own ambulance service must also provide the proof outlined herein
for at least one subsequent or backup ambulance service.
B. All such facilities must provide a certification by the facility's resident director,
manager, or authorized corporate officer affirming that adequate private ambulance
services are available and that all agents and employees of such facility have been
apprised of and trained in the use of such private ambulance services; this
certification is to be filed with the Clerk along with the proofs required herein in the
140.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Transportation Requirements, adopted 4-4-2016 by Ord. No.
1025.
§ 166-1 NURSING AND ASSISTED LIVING HOMES § 166-4
166:3
§ 166-5. Use of first aid squad; fees for violations.
timeframe herein.
C. The failure of a facility to comply with the requirements of this section shall
constitute an ordinance violation by the facility and its resident director, manager,
or authorized corporate officer punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 for the first
time and an additional $750 for every subsequent violation.
A. In the event that a facility takes actions resulting in the dispatch of a Borough's
volunteer first aid squad, and the responding volunteer first aid squad determines
that the basis for the dispatch did not constitute circumstances requiring use of
advanced life support or paramedic unit, the volunteer first aid squad, through its
responding members, shall certify, via a notarized affidavit, accordingly to the
Borough, and the facility shall be subject to an initial fee of $500. Upon the
Borough's receipt of such certification, the Borough shall provide a copy of the
certification to the facility via certified mail. The facility shall have 10 days from
the date the Borough mailed the certification to provide proof to contradict the first
aid squad certification. If the facility submits such proof, the first aid committee
shall review the first aid squad's and the facility's papers and make a determination
within 30 days.
B. The initial fee imposed under this section shall be $500; any subsequent fee shall
increase by $10 per violation. Violations will reset to $500 as of January 1 every
year.
§ 166-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 166-5
166:4
Chapter 168
ONLINE PURCHASE EXCHANGE ZONE
§ 168-1. Establishment.
The Borough of Shrewsbury hereby establishes an on-line purchase exchange zone for
conducting in-person private transactions involving a Borough resident that have been
facilitated through online marketplaces, to be located in an area of the Municipal Parking
Lot of the Municipal Complex located at 419 Sycamore Avenue, Shrewsbury, New
Jersey to be designated the "exchange zone".
§ 168-2. Size limitations.
Private exchange of motor vehicles or items that do not fit in a 10 feet by 10 feet parking
space shall not be permitted.
§ 168-3. Items not permitted.
Weapons, drugs and drug paraphernalia transactions shall not be permitted.
§ 168-4. Zone not supervised.
Borough officials will not provide police personnel or Borough staff to witness any
transaction in person, nor can they give legal advice or settle disputes related to any
transactions. The video surveillance by and proximity to police personnel is meant to
increase the public's peace of mind when engaging in such transactions with unfamiliar
individuals in the exchange zone.
§ 168-5. Items not guaranteed.
The Borough of Shrewsbury makes no guarantees, assurances, or promises with respect
to the condition or authenticity of any items exchanged between private parties.
§ 168-6. Safety and security not guaranteed.
The Borough of Shrewsbury makes no guarantees, assurances, or promises as to the
safety or security of any in-person transactions that may take place on Borough property.
§ 168-7. Availability not guaranteed.
The Borough of Shrewsbury makes no guarantees, assurances, or promises as to
availability of the Exchange Zone at any particular date or time.
§ 168-8. Precautions encouraged.
The Borough encourages all persons to engage in such transactions in daylight hours
only; to bring a cell phone along in case of an emergency; to notify friends and/or family
of the intention to meet to conduct such a transaction; to never invite strangers to the
home or agree to meet at a stranger's home; and to reconsider any transaction with
someone who refuses to meet at the Municipal Complex.
§ 166-5 ONLINE PURCHASE EXCHANGE ZONE § 168-9
168:1
§ 168-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a safe space for the conduct of private
transactions involving Borough residents facilitated by online marketplaces.
§ 168-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, which shall
be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of Shrewsbury, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
§ 168-11. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon adoption and approval in a time and manner
prescribed by law.
§ 168-9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 168-11
168:2
Chapter 170
PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreation Committee — See Ch. 9, Art. III.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 63.
Animals — See Ch. 67.
Bicycles — See Ch. 72.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 174.
Pet waste and wildlife feeding — See Ch. 215.
§ 170-1. Park and recreational facility rules and regulations. [Amended 5-16-2005
by Ord. No. 852]
A. Use of swings, teeters and related apparatus shall be limited to children 12 years of
age and younger. One child at a time shall be permitted on a swing.
B. No bicycles shall be ridden or walked on athletic fields, parks or playgrounds
except where specified bike paths are established or by specific authorization from
the Recreation Committee. [Amended 8-21-2017 by Ord. No. 1040]
C. No motorized vehicles, to include but not be limited to automobiles, motor bikes,
mopeds and go-carts, shall be permitted on any athletic field, park or playground
without specific authorization from the Borough Police Department and
Department of Public Works. [Amended 8-21-2017 by Ord. No. 1040]
D. No motorized airplane, drone or rocket shall be allowed on any athletic field, park
or playground without prior permission of the Borough Police Department and
Department of Public Works. [Amended 8-21-2017 by Ord. No. 1040]
E. Littering and disposal of trash and garbage on any athletic field, park or playground
shall be prohibited.
F. Climbing on fences, backstops, trees and buildings shall be prohibited.
G. Swimming, fishing, building of dams or blockage in public streams, brooks or
creeks shall be prohibited.
H. Golfing shall be prohibited.
I. No animals shall be permitted on any athletic field, park or playground, except in
Manson Park if they remain on a leash, and pet owners must clean up after their
animals. [Amended 8-21-2017 by Ord. No. 1040]
J. Baseball (hardball) or any activity deemed unsafe shall be prohibited on any athletic
field without prior permission of the Borough Police Department and Department
of Public Works. [Amended 8-21-2017 by Ord. No. 1040]
K. Carrying of any weapon or firearm on any athletic field, park or playground shall
be prohibited.
§ 168-11 PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES § 170-1
170:1
§ 170-2. Rules and hours to be posted. [Amended 8-21-2017 by Ord. No. 1040]
The rules and regulations and the hours of operation must be posted at each park and
recreational facility for the preservation of good order and protection of property.
§ 170-3. Special permits. [Amended 5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 852]
L. No radio, amplified audio device or musical instrument shall be played at a volume
to create a nuisance without permission from the Borough Police Department and
Department of Public Works. [Amended 8-21-2017 by Ord. No. 1040]
M. Anyone in possession, consuming or under the influence of an alcoholic beverage
or narcotic on any athletic field, park or playground shall be prohibited.
N. Use of basketball courts shall be limited to one hour per group. At the end of the
hour, use of the court must be relinquished to any waiting group that has requested
use of the court. If no group is waiting, play may continue for an additional hour or
to such time as use of the court is requested. One basketball court must be free from
being booked by groups for training, games and other activities. [Amended
8-21-2017 by Ord. No. 1040]
O. Playgrounds, parks, recreational facilities and tennis courts shall be open daily for
public use from 8:00 a.m. until sunset Monday through Saturday and 9:30 a.m. until
sunset on Sunday.
P. Skateboarding shall be prohibited.
Q. Fireworks shall be prohibited.
A. Person(s), group(s) or organizations may apply to the Borough Council for special
permission to conduct special events, operations or uses which otherwise would be
considered a violation of Borough ordinances regulating the use of Borough parks
and facilities. If so authorized by the Borough Council, a special permit to hold or
conduct these special events, with strict adherence to hours of operation, good order
and protection of property and stipulation that an adult shall be responsible for such
special events, may be granted to the event organizer.
B. Facility use request forms and reservations of any Borough facility will be handled
through the office of the Borough Clerk. A facilities use request form must be
completed and submitted for approval of Council seven days prior to scheduled
Council meeting.
C. Borough parks (areas of land set aside for public use). [Amended 8-21-2017 by
Ord. No. 1040]
(1) Active recreation parks: Parker Park (Patterson Avenue), Robert Graham
Athletic Felds (Sickles Park), Manson Park (Municipal Complex).
(2) Passive recreation parks: Buttonwood Park (Buttonwood Drive), Esther
Hymer Nature Preserve (Williamsburg Drive), Beech Tree Park (Sycamore
Avenue).
D. Borough facilities. Municipal Complex: Municipal Center, Courtyard, Shrewsbury
§ 170-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 170-3
170:2
§ 170-4. Tennis rules and regulations [Amended 5-16-2005 by Ord. No. 852;
9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 967]
Historical Society Museum, Wardell House, 9/11 Memorial Gazebo, lawns, open
space, parking areas.
E. Upon issuance of a special permit, a copy shall be submitted to the Police
Department at least seven days prior to the event for which the special permit was
issued.
A. All players 16 years of age and over shall have badges issued by the Borough of
Shrewsbury or shall not be permitted to use the Borough tennis courts. Said tennis
badges will be good from March 15 to October 31 and must be obtained at the
Borough Hall. There shall be no charge to Shrewsbury residents for badges.
Nonresidents may obtain a daily badge for $5 and an annual badge for $35.
[Amended 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 1001; 10-3-2016 by Ord. No. 1031]
B. In order to reserve a court, players are required to call the Borough Hall one day
prior to play, after hours, and leave a message with the badge number and time of
court reservation.
C. All courts can be reserved by badge holders or Borough children under 16. For
reservations of courts, the person making the reservations must possess a current
Shrewsbury Borough tennis badge. Reservations for weekends should be made no
later than 4:00 p.m. Friday.
D. Court reservations shall be limited to one-hour periods per badge holder. Play shall
be limited to two hours per day unless open court time permits. Badge holders who
have not played that day shall have first choice of open court time.
E. In any event, play shall be limited to not more than two consecutive hours by badge
holders.
F. No one shall sign up for court time in the name of another person other than
someone in the immediate family.
G. Tennis shoes are required.
H. No bicycle riding, skating, skateboarding or any use other than tennis is allowed on
the courts.
I. Persons other than actual tennis players are not allowed on the tennis courts. No
pets, playpens, strollers or baby carriages shall be permitted on the courts or within
the fence.
J. A court may not be used by more than four players at one time.
K. Persons waiting for courts must wait outside of the fence.
L. Instructors other than those employed by the Recreation Committee of the Borough
of Shrewsbury may not use the courts. Paid instruction is not permitted by a person
who is not hired by the Recreation Committee.
M. The Borough tennis courts shall be closed from November 1 through March 14.
§ 170-3 PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES § 170-4
170:3
§ 170-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 967]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter, which shall
be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of Shrewsbury, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
[Added 3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 1001]
§ 170-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 170-5
170:4
Chapter 174
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 39.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 59.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 63.
Bicycles — See Ch. 72.
Animals — See Ch. 67.
Firearms — See Ch. 106.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 110.
Hawking, peddling and canvassing — See Ch. 132.
Hours of business — See Ch. 139.
Nuisances — See Ch. 163.
Parks and recreational facilities — See Ch. 170.
Solid waste — See Ch. 210.
§ 174-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABODE — One's residence, home or place.
ACTOR — A person committing any act.
ACT or ACTION — Any bodily movement, whether voluntary or involuntary.
ASSAULT — An attempt or offer, with unlawful force or violence, to hurt or do
physical injury to another.
BATTERY — The actual doing of an unlawful hurt, however slight; an unlawful laying
of hands upon the person of another, no matter how light the touch.
BOROUGH ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person who is, by virtue of authority
vested in him or her by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury, required
to enforce any of the laws, codes and regulations of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
BREACH OF THE PEACE—Any violation of public order as amounts to a disturbance
of the general community.
CONDUCT — Any act, action or omission and its accompanying state of mind.
DISORDERLY CONDUCT — Those acts or omissions that tend to breach the peace
or cause a risk thereof, which include, but are not limited to, any of the following:
fighting; violent behavior; unreasonable noise; offensive or coarse utterances, gestures
or displays; the addressing of abusive language to another or the creation of a hazard or
physically offensive condition; or any act or omission that tends to endanger the morals,
safety or health of the community or a class of persons or a family.
DISORDERLY HOUSE — Any house, building or structure where acts are performed
that tend to corrupt the morals of the community or to promote a breach of the peace, or
any place kept for the purpose of public resort for thieves, drunkards, prostitutes or other
idle and vicious people, whether there is any actual disturbance of the public peace or
quiet and includes any place where unlawful and illegal practices are habitually carried
§ 170-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 174-1
174:1
on.
DRUNKENNESS — Any person who appears under the influence of alcohol or any
intoxicating beverages not therapeutically administered.
DWELLING — Any building or structure, though movable and temporary, or a portion
thereof, which is for the time being a person's home or place of lodging.
FIREARM — Any pistol, revolver, rifle, shotgun, machine gun, automatic and
semiautomatic rifle, or any gun or device or instrument in the nature of a weapon from
which may be fired or ejected a solid projectile, ball, slug or pellet.
HINDER — To hamper, delay, hold back, impede or prevent action.
INDECENCY — Any act morally offensive or tending to debauch the morals.
INTERFERENCE — To intentionally hinder or be in opposition to, or to come into
collision with.
INTOXICATION — An impairment of mental or physical capacities resulting from the
influence of alcohol, narcotics or other drugs.
LEWD — Anything that is wanton, lustful, vulgar or obscene.
LODGE — To provide temporary quarters for, or to establish or settle in a place.
LOITER—Being without any visible and lawful business or purpose and without being
able to give a satisfactory account of oneself. This shall also include prowling or being
in a place at a time not usual for individuals, under circumstances that warrant alarm for
the safety of persons and/or property in the vicinity.
NUDE —Naked.
OBSTRUCT — To render impassable with unreasonable hazard and inconvenience.
OFFENSIVE WEAPON — Any bomb, machine gun, sawed-off shotgun or firearm
specially made or specially adapted for concealment or silent discharge, or any
blackjack, sandbag, metal knuckles, dagger or other implement for the infliction of
serious bodily harm which serves no common lawful purpose.
OMISSION — Failure to act; something neglected or left undone.
PERSON—Any natural person and, where relevant, includes a corporation, partnership
or unincorporated association.
PROFANE — Lewd or vulgar.
PUBLIC CONVEYANCE—Any vehicle used in the general conveyance of passengers
for a fee.
QUASI-PUBLIC PLACE — Any place, privately owned, but to which the public is
invited, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: commercial, industrial
and business properties, stores, restaurants, bars, retail business establishments and their
adjoining or related parking areas.
WEAPON—Any item readily capable of lethal use and possessed under circumstances
not manifestly appropriate for lawful uses which it may have; the term includes a firearm
which is not loaded or lacks a clip or other component to render it immediately operable,
and components which can readily be assembled into a weapon.
§ 174-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 174-2
174:2
§ 174-2. Indecent exposure, acts and plays prohibited.
§ 174-3. Disorderly houses prohibited.
§ 174-4. Unnecessary disturbing noises prohibited.
No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, make or continue, or cause to be made
or continued, or permit any unnecessary noise, either physical, mechanical, electrical or
electronic, which shall disturb the comfort, rest or repose of any person or persons being
in his or her or their place or places of abode.
§ 174-5. Deposit of refuse in public places prohibited.141
No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, sweep, discard, deposit, throw or
leave any wastepaper, tin cans, bottles, garbage or refuse of any kind whatsoever in or
upon any parking place, street, road, avenue, park or other public place, or upon any
empty lot or vacant fields or other premises, except in receptacles or containers provided
for such purpose. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the placing of
leaves, branches and other natural debris at the curbline for Borough disposal.
§ 174-6. Use of sound-amplifying equipment restricted.
No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, use or operate, or cause to be used
or operated, a loudspeaker, sound wagon, public-address system or other similar soundproducing
device or apparatus in, on, about or near any public street, highway, park,
building or other public place, without first making written application to and obtaining
A. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, appear on any street, road,
avenue, park, lake, pond or any other body of water, or any other public or quasipublic
place, in a state of nudity or in any indecent or lewd dress, or make any
indecent exposure of the person or commit or do any lewd or indecent act, or
perform any indecent, immoral or lewd play or representation.
B. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, perform any of the acts
aforementioned in Subsection A above in or on any private property within the
limits of said Borough, that may be offensive to, or to the annoyance of, any passing
person or person lawfully therein, whether the actor has or has not the permission
of the owner or responsible person in charge of said property.
C. No person shall urinate or defecate in any public or quasi-public place.
A. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, keep or maintain a disorderly
house, or allow or permit any house, shop, store or other building or structure
owned or occupied by him or her to be used as a disorderly house.
B. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, permit any house, shop, store or
other building or structure owned or occupied by him or her to be frequented or
resorted to by drunkards, intoxicated persons, riotous or disorderly persons or by
prostitutes, gamblers or vagrants, or to become riotous or disorderly at any time to
the annoyance of others.
141.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 215, Stormwater Quality, Art. I, Yard Waste Collection Program.
§ 174-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 174-6
174:3
the permission of the Mayor and Council, said application to set forth the name and
address of the applicant and of the person who is to operate the said loudspeaker, sound
wagon, public-address system or other similar sound-producing device or apparatus, the
purpose for which the same is to be employed, the specific time it will be in use and the
approximate proposed range of audibility of the apparatus sought to be used. The Mayor
and Council shall thereupon cause an investigation to be made and, if satisfied that the
granting of the permit will not constitute a nuisance or be inimical to the peace, good
order or quiet of the Borough, shall issue a written permit to the applicant. No person
shall use or operate any such loudspeaker, sound wagon, public-address system or other
sound-producing device or apparatus in such a manner that its range of audibility shall
be greater than that named in the application for its use.
§ 174-7. Disturbing the peace.
§ 174-8. Entering, damaging and interfering with use of public or quasi-public
buildings prohibited.
§ 174-9. Damaging of property prohibited.
A. No person shall revel, quarrel, fight, brawl or otherwise engage in any disorderly
conduct so as to disturb the public peace and quiet.
B. No person shall molest, obstruct, interfere with or prevent free access by members
of the public or officers and employees of said Borough in or around any public
buildings, or obstruct the corridors, stairways or doorways to and in said buildings;
and no person shall, by his presence or by means either alone or in consort with
others, interfere with or interrupt the conduct of business or official meetings in the
offices or meeting rooms located in any such buildings.
A. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, enter any school, church, public
or quasi-public building or structure, or the premises on which the same is situated,
and break, injure, mar, deface, remove or destroy any property, real or personal,
located in or upon the same, and no person shall disturb, annoy or interfere with any
classes, exercises, devotions, ceremonies or public meetings, or any person
participating or engaging therein, on, in or about any school, church or other public
or quasi-public building, structure or place.
B. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, disturb the quiet and peace of
any public library, reading room or other public building.
A. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, maliciously destroy, damage or
injure any property not one's own.
B. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, open, injure, destroy, deface,
mutilate, break or tamper with any fire hydrant.
C. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, in any way injure, destroy,
break, mutilate, deface or tamper with any streetlight, utility pole, fixture or any
part thereof.
§ 174-6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 174-10
174:4
§ 174-10. Unauthorized posting of notices prohibited.
No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, paste, write, clip, paint, print, nail,
clamp or otherwise fasten, inscribe or affix any notice, placard or advertisement against
or upon any way, gate, house, store, shop, shed, fence, rock, stump, tree, shrub, bush,
building, structure or utility pole without the consent of the owner or occupant of the
same and in accordance with other ordinances of the Borough.
§ 174-11. Interference with enforcement officers prohibited.
§ 174-12. False alarms and interference with alarm systems and emergency
personnel prohibited.
§ 174-13. Use of intoxicating beverages restricted.
A. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, hinder or obstruct any Borough
enforcement officer in the performance of his duties, nor shall any person
knowingly resist or oppose any officer or person authorized by law in serving, or
attempting to serve, any writ, order or process, or knowingly resist or oppose any
police officer when making an arrest either with or without a warrant.
B. No person shall obstruct or prevent any municipal employee from performing his
or her duties either by force or threat of force. No person shall physically obstruct a
municipal employee from performing his or her duties in person or by other means.
A. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, by word, act, deed or other
means, willfully and maliciously give or cause to be given a false fire, police or
first-aid alarm. Nor shall any person willfully and maliciously destroy or injure any
other apparatus of any fire, police or first-aid alarm system.
B. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, during an alarm of fire or first
aid, hinder, prevent or deter by any device whatsoever any fireman, first-aid man or
policeman or other person from rendering lawful assistance in abating or quelling
such fire or providing first-aid assistance, or hinder or interfere with any fireman,
first-aid man or policeman from going to or returning from the place where any
building, structure or other property is on fire or from which a fire or first-aid alarm
proceeds; nor shall any person hinder or obstruct the passage of any fire engine,
hook or ladder truck or any other fire apparatus or any type of ambulance in going
to or from the place from which an alarm of fire or first-aid proceeds or where any
building or other property may be burning.
A. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, be intoxicated or drunk and
disorderly in any street, highway, thoroughfare, public or quasi-public place, or in
any private house, or in any hotel, boardinghouse, store, restaurant or other place,
to the annoyance of any person or persons lawfully therein.
B. No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, in any public or quasi-public
place, drink or have under his possession or control any intoxicating beverage while
in attendance, as a spectator or otherwise, at any place where an interscholastic or
other type of athletic event or contest is taking place.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years of age to knowingly
§ 174-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 174-13
174:5
§ 174-14. Disposition of fines.
All fines imposed and collected under and by virtue of this chapter shall be paid into the
treasury of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 174-15. Violations and penalties.
Each and every person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or beer in any motor vehicle, public or
quasi-public place, or in any private place within the limits of said Borough.
D. No person shall possess any open container containing alcoholic beverages in any
public place or parking lot of a quasi-public place.
§ 174-13 SHREWSBURY CODE § 174-15
174:6
Chapter 183
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 77.
Housing standards — See Ch. 145.
Nuisances — See Ch. 163.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 202.
Stormwater quality — See Ch. 215.
Trees, shrubbery and landscaping — See Ch. 246.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 250.
§ 183-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of
Shrewsbury."
§ 183-2. Findings.
It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the Borough structures and vacant lots
which are or may become in the future substandard with respect to structural integrity,
equipment or maintenance, and further that such conditions, including but not limited
to structural deterioration, lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential facilities and
utilities and existence of fire hazards and unsanitary conditions, constitute a menace to
the health, safety, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the
Borough. It is further found and declared that, by reason of lack of maintenance and
ensuing progressive deterioration, certain properties have the further effect of creating
blighting conditions and that, by reason of timely regulations and restrictions as herein
contained, the growth of this blight may be prevented and the neighborhood and property
values thereby maintained, the desirability and amenities of dwellings and
neighborhoods enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and
fostered.
§ 183-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by
establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance and condition of the exterior
of residential and nonresidential premises; to avoid, prevent and eliminate the
maintenance of or creation of hazards to the public health and safety; to avoid, prevent
and eliminate conditions which, if permitted to exist or continue, will depreciate or tend
to depreciate the value of adjacent or surrounding properties; to prevent the creation,
continuation, extension or aggravation of blight to fix certain responsibility and duties
upon owners, operators and occupants of property; and to provide for administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
§ 174-15 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 183-4
183:1
§ 183-4. Compliance required; applicability.
All vacant lots shall comply with the provisions of this code, and every residential
and nonresidential structure used for residential, commercial, business or industrial
occupancy, including vacant structures, and the premises on which it is situate in the
Borough, shall comply with the provisions of this code, whether or not such structure
shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this code
and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or
occupancy of the structure or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior
to the effective date of this code.
§ 183-5. Higher standards to prevail.
In any case where the provisions of this code impose a higher standard than that set
forth in any ordinance of the Borough or under the laws of the State of New Jersey,
then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail; but if the provisions of this code
impose a lower standard than any ordinance of the Borough or of the laws of the State of
New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in any such other ordinance or law shall
prevail.
§ 183-6. Existing remedies to be unimpaired.
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or impair any existing remedies of the municipality,
or its officers or agencies, relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings or
structures which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.
§ 183-7. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this
chapter, be defined as follows:
DETERIORATION — The condition of a structure, or part thereof, characterized by
holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical
decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or excessive use.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer or his authorized
representative.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building or structure which are
exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or adjacent properties, including all
outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto, and the open space on the premises outside
any building or structure erected thereon.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible materials
that may serve as their food by poison, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other
approved pest-elimination methods.
FIRE HAZARD — Anything or any act which increases or may cause any increase of
the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as
normal by persons in the public service of preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire
or which may obstruct, delay or hinder or may become the cause of an obstruction, delay,
hazard or hindrance to the prevention, suppression or extinguishment of fire.
§ 183-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 183-7
183:2
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
NUISANCE — Any public or private condition that would constitute a nuisance
according to the statutes, laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey, any of its
agencies or this code. Any physical condition existing in or on the exterior of any
premises which is potentially dangerous, detrimental or hazardous to the health or safety
of persons on, near or passing in proximity of the premises where said condition exists.
OCCUPANT—Any occupant, owner, agent, tenant, lessee, caretaker or other person or
corporation in charge of, residing, living or sleeping in or on the premises of or having
actual possession or use of a business, dwelling unit or rooming unit or other premises
affected by this chapter.
OPERATOR — Any person, persons or entity, not the owner, who has charge, care
or control of a structure or a part thereof, with or without the knowledge, consent or
authority of the owner.
OWNER — Any person, persons or entity who shall have legal or equitable title in
any form whatsoever to any premises or part thereof, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, or who shall have charge, care or control of any lot, premises,
building, structure or part thereof, as owner or agent of the owner or as fiduciary, trustee,
receiver, guardian, lessee or mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such possession
was obtained. Any person, group of persons or entity who is a lessee, sublessee or
assignee of a lessee of any part of or all of any building, structure or land shall be
deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor for the purposes of this section and shall have
responsibility over that portion of the premises so sublet, leased or assigned.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings, structures and
improvements thereon.
RIGHT-OF-WAY/STREET LINE — The line which separates the publicly owned or
controlled street right-of-way from the private property which abuts upon the street as
distinct from a sidewalk line, curbline or edge-of-pavement line. On a street or highway
shown on the adopted Master Plan of the Borough of Shrewsbury, the street line shall
be considered to be the proposed right-of-way line for the street. Where a definite rightof-
way has not been established, the street line shall be assumed to be at a point 25 feet
from the center line of the existing pavement.[Added 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 809]
RUBBISH — All combustible and noncombustible waste materials other than garbage,
including but not limited to the following: paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass,
crockery and the residue from burning wood, coal, coke or other combustible material
and solid commercial and industrial waste.
SIGHT TRIANGLE—The triangular area intended to remain free of visual obstructions
to prevent potential traffic hazards formed by two intersecting street lines or the
projection of such lines which border a corner property, and by a line connecting a point
on each line located 50 feet from the intersection of the street lines for Borough streets
and as required by Monmouth County for county roads and the New Jersey Department
of Transportation for state roads.[Added 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 809]
§ 183-7 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 183-8
183:3
§ 183-8. Duties of owners, operators and occupants.
Owners, operators and occupants shall have all the duties, obligations and
responsibilities prescribed in this chapter, and no such persons or entity shall be relieved
of any such duty, obligation or responsibility hereunder, nor may any such person or
entity assert as a defense against any charge made under this chapter that another owner,
operator or occupant or any other third person or entity is also responsible therefor and
in violation thereof.
§ 183-9. Maintenance standards; code adopted by reference.
A. Exterior of premises. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free from hazards
and nuisances which include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Garbage and rubbish, as defined in this chapter.
(2) Unsafe structures: structurally unsafe or unsound buildings, structures or
fences or abandoned, uncovered or structurally unsound walls, shafts, towers,
exterior cellar openings, basement hatchways, foundations or excavations and
abandoned septic tanks or cesspools.
(3) Discarded appliances and plumbing fixtures: abandoned refrigerators, boilers,
hot-water heaters, television sets and other similar major appliances, sinks,
bathtubs, commodes and other plumbing fixtures.
(4) Overhangings: loose and overhanging objects, whether natural or man-made,
and accumulations of ice and snow which, by reason of location above ground
level, constitute a threat to the health and safety of people if caused to fall.
(5) Ground surface hazards: hidden or uncovered ground or surface hazards, such
as holes, sudden depressions, excavations, sharp or jagged projections or
obstructions.
(6) Recurring accumulations of stormwater: stagnant surface or ground water
accumulations of water which create or are likely to create insect breeding
areas.
(7) Infestation: rodents, vermin, pest infestations and conditions causing the same.
(8) Lawn and landscaping: overgrowth or neglect of reasonable maintenance of
landscape plantings and ground covers, including failure to remove in a timely
manner dead or diseased trees and shrubbery, or parts thereof. Trees, hedges
and shrubbery shall not obstruct walkways or streets and obscure vision of
persons using same. [Amended 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 809]
(a) Trees shall be pruned in such a manner that branches will hang not less
than eight feet over sidewalks and walkways and 13 feet over roadways.
Hedges and/or shrubbery bordering walkways shall be pruned a
minimum of three inches from walkways and in such a manner to prevent
branches from obstructing or hindering pedestrians using walkways.
(b) Hedges and/or shrubbery planted, altered or replanted in any zone in the
Borough shall not exceed six feet above ground level, except as follows:
§ 183-8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 183-9
183:4
hedges and/or shrubbery located in the front yard shall not exceed 30
inches in height. All hedges and/or shrubbery must be planted within
the property lines; and no hedge or shrubbery shall be planted so as to
encroach upon a public right-of-way.
(c) Hedges and/or shrubbery shall not be located in any required sight
triangle or in a public right-of-way. No hedge and/or shrubbery higher
than 30 inches above curb level shall be permitted on any lot within the
sight triangular area.
(9) Inoperable vehicles: vehicles or parts thereof, including boats and trailers,
motorized or not, regardless of whether licensed or registered, which vehicles
or parts thereof have been dismantled or are in a state of visible disrepair or in
an abandoned condition.
B. Structural soundness. Every structure and accessory structure, and every part
thereof, shall be kept structurally sound and in a state of good repair to avoid safety,
health and fire hazards, including but not limited to the following:
(1) Foundation walls: inadequate or unsafe foundation walls, piers and columns
and other similarly unsound, damaged or defective load-bearing components
which are incapable of supporting the imposed loads safely at all points.
(2) Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes: structurally
unsound, loose, dangerous, crumbling, missing, broken, rotted or unsafe
exterior portions of buildings or structures, including but not limited to
porches, landings, balconies, stairways, handrails, steps, walls, overhangs,
roofs, fences, supporting members, timbers, abutments, fire escapes, signs and
eaves, crumbling or falling bricks, blocks, mortar or plaster.
(3) Projecting surfaces: exterior surfaces or parts of buildings or structures
containing sharp, rough or projecting surfaces or objects which might cause
injury to persons coming in contact therewith.
(4) Windows, doors, etc.: broken glass or windows; rotten, missing or
substantially destroyed window frames and sashes, door frames, exterior doors
or other junior exterior component parts of buildings or structures.
(5) Exterior walls, sidings and roof: exterior walls, sidings, gutters and leaders and
roof shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from defects.
(6) Exterior chimneys: exterior chimneys shall be maintained structurally sound,
free from defects and so maintained as to capably perform at all times the
functions for which they were designed.
C. Steps, walks, driveways and parking lots. Steps, walks, driveways, parking areas,
parking lots, parking spaces and similar areas shall be maintained so as to afford
safe passage under normal use and weather conditions. Any holes or other hazards
that may exist shall be filled, or necessary repairs or replacement shall be performed
promptly.
D. International Property Maintenance Code; adoption by reference. A document,
marked and designated as “The International Property Maintenance Code, 2009,”
§ 183-9 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 183-9
183:5
§ 183-10. Administration and enforcement.
published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Shrewsbury for the control of buildings
and structures as provided in the code; and each and all of the regulations of
the International Property Maintenance Code are adopted and made a part of
this section as fully as if set forth in this section, unless specifically set forth to
the contrary by ordinance. Commencing on the effective date of this Subsection
D, the most recent version of the International Property Maintenance Code shall
be designated and adopted as the Borough’s Property Maintenance Code. Three
copies of this code are on file in the office of the Borough Clerk. The terms
“certificate of occupancy” and “certificate of compliance” shall be synonymous.
[Added 10-18-2010 by Ord. No. 951]
A. Enforcement officer. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough to enforce the provisions of this code as herein provided.
"Code Enforcement Officer," throughout this chapter, shall also mean subordinates
of the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Coordination of enforcement. Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in
connection therewith under the provisions of this code shall be the exclusive
responsibility of the Code Enforcement Officer. Wherever, in the opinion of the
Code Enforcement Officer, it is necessary or desirable to have inspections of any
condition by any other department, he shall arrange for this to be done. No order
for correction of any violation under this code shall be issued without the approval
of the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. Inspections.
(1) The enforcement officer is authorized to enter upon any land at any reasonable
time for the purpose of performing his duty, with the consent of the property
owner.
(2) In the event that a property owner refuses such consent, the enforcement
officer is authorized to apply to the Judge of the Shrewsbury Municipal Court
for an administrative search warrant. The Judge may issue such warrant upon
review of an affidavit of the enforcement officer setting forth the following:
(a) The precise regulatory purpose of the proposed search.
(b) The frequency of previous requests for such warrants affecting the subject
premises, if any.
(c) The exact scope of the search sought, setting forth the area or areas of the
premises to be searched.
(d) The exact manner in which the search is to be conducted.
(3) All warrants so issued shall be limited to the purpose, scope and manner of the
search as set forth in the affidavit, and all searches conducted pursuant to this
section shall be as strictly set forth in such warrants.
(4) No search conducted pursuant to such administrative search warrant shall take
§ 183-9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 183-10
183:6
§ 183-11. Violations and penalties.
place other than during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., unless the
enforcement officer demonstrates that an emergency exists and the public
health, safety and welfare requires such search during earlier or later hours, as
the case may be.
(5) The inspections authorized hereunder are in addition to those which may be
authorized by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
D. Enforcement procedure. Whenever an enforcement officer determines that there is
or has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such
violation to the person, persons or entities responsible therefor under this section.
Such notice shall be in writing and shall include a concise statement of the reasons
for its issuance. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly and sufficiently served
if a copy thereof is sent by regular mail to the last known address of the person or
entity upon which the same is served, as shown by the most recent tax records of
the municipality, or a copy thereof handed to said person or persons or a copy
thereof left at the usual place of abode or office of said persons or entities. Notice
shall be given as aforesaid within or without the municipality. The notice shall also
state that unless the violation is abated, removed, cured, prevented or desisted
within 30 days of the date of service of such notice (exclusive of the date of
service), a summons shall be issued for such violation. The enforcement officer
may extend the period for compliance with the requirements of this section in
regard to the violation stated in the notice for a period in excess of the aforesaid 30
days if, in his judgment, the abatement, removal, prevention, cessation or cure of
the condition violated cannot reasonably be effected within the thirty-day period;
and in such cases, the enforcement officer shall state such reasonably required
extended period of notice, which shall then be applicable, instead of the aforesaid
30 days. In the event that the violation is not abated, removed, cured, prevented or
desisted from or otherwise fully remedied within said thirty-day period or within
such extended period as set forth in the notice, pursuant to the foregoing, a
summons shall be issued against the person, persons, entity or entities so notified.
Any extension beyond 60 days must be approved by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Shrewsbury.
E. Emergency conditions. Whenever the enforcement officer finds that an emergency
condition in violation of this chapter exists, which condition requires immediate
attention in order to protect the public health or safety, he may issue an order to
protect by service of notice as set forth in Subsection D above, reciting the existence
of such an emergency condition and requiring that such action be taken by the
violator as soon as is reasonably necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding
any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, such order shall be effective
immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith
immediately, and upon objection, in writing, to the enforcement officer, any such
person shall be afforded a hearing before the governing body of the Borough as
soon as is reasonably possible. After such a hearing and decision by the governing
body as to the existence or nonexistence of the emergency condition, the governing
body may continue such order in effect or modify or withdraw it, subject to the
issuance of a summons for violation thereof if such order is continued.
§ 183-10 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 183-11
183:7
§ 183-12. Provisions to be additional; effect on other laws.
A. Any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any
order promulgated hereunder shall, after a summons is issued under the terms
hereof, and upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof.
B. For purposes of this section, each and every calendar day on which a violation
exists may be considered to be a separate and distinct violation.
A. This chapter is in addition to and supplements the following ordinances:
(1) Chapter 77, Brush, Grass, Weeds and Debris.
(2) Chapter 210, Article I, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
(3) Chapter 145, Housing Standards.
(4) Chapter 250, Vehicles, Abandoned.
(5) Chapter 163, Nuisances.142
B. The adoption of this chapter is not in any way intended to be a repealer, either
explicitly or implied, of any of the aforesaid ordinances or any other ordinances
now in existence or subsequently adopted by the Borough of Shrewsbury.
142.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(6), regarding the weed control, which immediately followed, was deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 183-11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 183-12
183:8
Chapter 186
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 145. Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
§ 183-12 RENTAL PROPERTY § 183-12
186:1

ARTICLE I
Registration of Rental Units
[Adopted 7-16-2012 by Ord. No. 987]
§ 186-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to insure that residential rental units are properly maintained
in accordance with the Property Maintenance and related Codes as well as to protect the
property and the health, safety and welfare of Borough residents. To this end, this article
shall be liberally construed to assure the provision of decent and safe units of dwelling
space as follows.
§ 186-2. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words or phrases
when used in this article shall have the following meaning:
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by the owner as the person(s)
authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the owner by this article.
The term does not necessarily mean a licensed real estate broker or salesman of the
State of New Jersey as those terms are defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term
may include a licensed real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey if such
person is designated by the owner as the owner's agent.
APARTMENT or DWELLING — Any apartment, condominium, townhouse,
bungalow, cooperative, cottage or any room or rooms in a rooming/boardinghouse or
in any other dwelling unit consisting of one or more rooms occupying all or part
of a floor or floors in a building, whether designated with or without housekeeping
facilities for dwelling purposes and notwithstanding whether the apartment be designed
for residence, for office, or the operation of any industry or business, or for any other
type of independent use.
APARTMENT COMPLEX — Two or more buildings, each containing two or more
apartments/condominiums/townhouses which are located within close proximity of each
other and are owned by the same owner.
LOCAL ENFORCING AGENCY — The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of
Shrewsbury.
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation, limited liability
company, association, trust, any type of partnership, or other entity, who owns, operates,
exercises control over or is in charge of a rental facility.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust or other
legal entity, or any combination thereof.
RENTAL FACILITY—Every building, group of buildings or a portion thereof which is
kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a place where living accommodations
are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for pay or other consideration, to one or
more individuals and is meant to include apartments and apartment complexes.
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit which is available for lease or rental purposes and
is meant to include a dwelling unit offered for lease or rental, including but not limited
to one-family homes, two-family homes, three-family homes, etc., as well as individual
§ 186-1 RENTAL PROPERTY § 186-2
186:3
apartments/condominiums/townhouses located within apartment, condominium or
townhouse complexes.
§ 186-3. Registration.
Any landlord/tenant agreements not currently registered with the Borough must do so
within 30 days of ordinance passing. From thereon, each landlord is responsible for
filing the registration certificate/obtaining the Fire Marshal and the Code Enforcement
Officer's approval prior to the tenant's occupancy. A registration certificate is required
for each and every tenant-occupied unit.
§ 186-4. Registration forms; filing; contents.
Every owner of a rental unit shall file with the Borough Clerk of the Borough of
Shrewsbury a registration form for each unit contained within a building or structure,
which shall include the following information:
A. The name and address of each record owner or owners of the premises and each
record owner or owners of the rental business if not the same persons. In the case
of a partnership, the names and address of all general partners shall be provided
together with the telephone numbers for each of such individuals indicating where
such individual may be reached both during the day and evening hours. If the record
owner is a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent and all
corporate officers of said corporation together with the telephone numbers for each
of such individuals indicating where such individual may be reached both during
the day and evening hours. If the record owner is a limited liability company, the
name and address of the person(s) designated in the operating agreement together
with the telephone numbers for such individual(s) indicating where such
individual(s) may be reached both during the day and evening hours;
B. If the address of any record owner is not located in Shrewsbury, the name and
address of a person who resides in Monmouth County who is authorized to accept
notices from a tenant or a Borough representative and to issue receipts therefor and
to accept service of process on behalf of the record owner;
C. The name and address and telephone numbers of the agent of the premises
indicating where such individual may be reached both during the day and evening
hours;
D. The name and telephone numbers, including the dwelling unit number of the
superintendent, janitor, custodian or other individual employed by the owner or
agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any. For each such individual, a
statement as to where such individual may be reached both during the day and
evening hours;
E. The name, address and telephone number of an individual representative of the
owner or agent who may be reached or contacted at any time in the event of an
emergency affecting the premises or any unit of dwelling space therein, including
such emergencies as the failure of any essential service or system, and who has the
authority to make emergency decisions concerning the building and any repair
thereto or expenditure in connection therewith;
§ 186-2 SHREWSBURY CODE § 186-4
186:4
§ 186-5. Registration form indexing and filing.
The Borough Clerk shall file registration forms. The Borough Clerk shall index and
file the registration forms. In doing so, the Borough Clerk or designee shall follow the
mandates of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.1, as amended and supplemented, so that the filing of the
registration form will simultaneously satisfy the registration requirements of N.J.S.A.
46:8-28 to the extent that it applies to the property being registered and will also satisfy
the registration requirements of this article.
§ 186-6. Amended registration form.
Every person required to file a registration form pursuant to this article shall file an
amended registration form within 20 days after any change in the information required
to be included thereon.
§ 186-7. Inspections.
F. The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on the premises;
G. If fuel oil or natural gas is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the
heat in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil or natural gas dealer
servicing the building and the grade of fuel oil or natural gas used;
H. As to each rental unit, a specification of the exact number of sleeping rooms
contained in the rental unit. In order to satisfy the requirement of this provision, an
owner shall submit a floor plan outlining and identifying each room in the unit,
including the dimensions and floor location of each room, which shall become a
part of the application and which shall be attached to the registration form when
filed with the Borough Clerk.
I. Such other information as may be required by the Borough;
J. All addresses must include the full accurate street address; P.O. Box and like
information does not satisfy this requirement;
K. The name, age and gender, including children, of every tenant of record as to each
rental unit. The information contained in the registration form must set forth
information for each rental unit within the rental property and must include all
tenants in each rental unit. This information shall be available only to the Borough
Clerk. This information shall otherwise remain confidential and shall not be
available to the public.
A. Rental units shall be inspected by persons or agencies duly authorized by the
Borough for inspections.
B. Unsatisfactory inspection. In the event that the inspection(s) of a rental unit does
not result in a satisfactory inspection under the Codes, the owner or agent shall
cause all necessary repairs or corrections to be made within the time prescribed by
the applicable code, and if not made within that time period, the owner shall be
deemed in violation of this article and every day that the violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation subject to the penalty provisions of
§ 186-16.
§ 186-4 RENTAL PROPERTY § 186-8
186:5
§ 186-8. Access for inspections; repairs; complaints.
§ 186-9. Identification and conduct of inspection officers.
Inspection officers shall be supplied with official identification and shall exhibit such
identification when entering any rental facility, rental unit, rooming house and
boardinghouse or any part of any premises subject to this article. Inspectors shall conduct
themselves so as to avoid intentional embarrassment or inconvenience to occupants.
§ 186-10. Refusal of entry for inspection; use of search warrants.
A. All rental facilities, rental units, rooming houses and boardinghouses subject to this
article are subject to inspections to determine their condition in order to safeguard
the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of such rental facilities, rental units,
rooming houses and boardinghouses and of the general public. At the time of such
inspections, all rooms in the rental facilities, rental units, rooming houses and
boardinghouses shall be available and accessible for such inspections, and the
owner, operator and occupant are required to provide the necessary arrangements
to facilitate such inspections. Such inspections shall be made between 8:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. with the consent of the occupant, who is of legal age to grant such
consent, or with an administrative warrant, unless there is reason to believe that a
violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or safety,
requiring inspection and abatement without delay or where the time taken to apply
for and secure the issuance of a warrant would render ineffective the immediate
action necessary to abate the condition. Inspection officers shall make reasonable
attempts to obtain consent of the occupant prior to application of an administrative
warrant.
B. Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility, rental unit, rooming
house and boardinghouse access to any part of such rental facility, rental unit,
rooming house and boardinghouse in compliance with any prior arrangements for
such action the tenant and owner established including provision of any lease
entered into by the parties. Should the parties not have a written lease, prior
agreement regarding such course of action or any written lease is silent regarding
such measure, then the tenant shall provide access at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs and alteration as are necessary to effect compliance
with the provisions of this article, other Borough ordinances, or any lawful order
issued pursuant thereto.
C. Complaints. If a complaint alleging a violation of this article is received by the
Borough, the inspecting officer shall use his diligent and best efforts to conduct an
inspection as hereinabove provided within 10 days of the receipt of the complaint.
A. The inspection officer may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the Municipal
Court of the Borough for a search warrant, setting forth factually the actual
conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a
nuisance or violation of this article may exist on the premises, including one or
more of the following:
(1) The premises require inspection according to the cycle established by the
Borough for periodic inspections of premises of the type involved.
§ 186-8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 186-10
186:6
§ 186-11. Prohibitions on occupancy.
No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit, nor shall the owner permit occupancy
of any rental unit within the Borough of Shrewsbury unless the rental unit is registered
in accordance with this article.
§ 186-12. Fees.
At the time of the filing of the registration form, the owner or agent of the owner must
pay a registration fee of $10. If the owner of the property is a senior citizen (age 65
years or older) who resides in a unit of the property and rents out the remaining units and
would otherwise qualify under the State of New Jersey property tax deductions under
N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.41, there shall be no fee. After the initial registration, the fee for an
amended registration is $10.
§ 186-13. Providing registration form to occupants and tenants.
Every owner shall provide each occupant or tenant occupying a rental unit with a copy
of the registration form required by this article. This particular provision shall not apply
to any hotel, motel, or guesthouse registered with the State of New Jersey pursuant to the
Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Act in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.
§ 186-14. Posting of maximum number of occupants.
(2) Observation of the external condition of the premises and its public areas has
resulted in the belief that violations of this article exist.
(3) Circumstances such as age of building, type of building, particular use of
premises or other factors indicate that inspections of such building are
desirable in the interest of public health and safety.
B. If the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Borough is satisfied as to the matter set
forth in such affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting
access to an inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance or
violation may exist. Warrant for access may be issued by the Judge of the Municipal
Court upon affidavit of the inspections officer establishing reasonable grounds
therefor.
C. Where the inspection officer or his agent, in possession of an administrative
warrant, is refused entry or access or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the
owner, occupant or operator from conducting an inspection of the premises, such
person shall be in violation of this article and subject to the penalties hereunder.
A. The maximum number of occupants shall be posted in a conspicuous area within
each rental unit, on a form to be provided by the Borough, by the owner of each
rental unit. It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, agent or tenant,
to allow a greater number of persons than the posted maximum number of
occupants to sleep or occupy the rental unit. Any person violating this provision
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 186-16.
B. Only those occupants whose names are on file with the Borough as required in this
article may reside in the registered premises. It shall be unlawful for any other
§ 186-10 RENTAL PROPERTY § 186-14
186:7
§ 186-15. Occupancy standards.
§ 186-16. Violations and penalties.
person to reside in said premises, and any person, including the owner, agent or the
tenant, allowing a nonregistered party to reside in said premises shall be in violation
of this article and shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 186-16.
A. Occupants. Only those occupants whose names are on file with the Borough Clerk
as provided in the section may reside in the registered premises. It shall be unlawful
for any other person to reside in said premises, and this provision may be enforced
against the landlord, tenant, or other person residing in said premises.
B. Nuisance prohibited. No rental facility shall be conducted or maintained in a
manner to constitute a nuisance.
C. Compliance with other laws. The maintenance of all rental facilities and the conduct
engaged in upon the premises by occupants and their guests shall at all times be in
full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the Borough and
with all applicable state and federal laws, including, but not limited to, relocation
assistance laws.
D. Penalties. Any landlord, tenant or other person violating the provisions of this
section shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 186-16.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction in the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Shrewsbury or such other court having
jurisdiction, be liable to a fine not exceeding $1,250; or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days, or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
Each day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation
subject to the penalty provisions of this article.
B. Any person who is convicted of violating this article within one year of the date of
a previous violation of the same section and who was fined for the previous
violation, shall be sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat offender.
The additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense shall
not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of
the section, but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the
violation of the section.
§ 186-14 SHREWSBURY CODE § 186-16
186:8
Chapter 188
SALES, PRIVATE; AUCTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 94.
§ 188-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Private Sales and Auctions."
§ 188-2. Definitions. [Amended 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 905]
The following words and phrases as used in this chapter shall have the meanings and
definitions indicated:
PRIVATE AUCTION — The sale, offering for sale to the highest bidder, barter,
exchange or display of any new or used goods, including but not limited to furniture,
sporting goods, fixtures, tools, equipment, food, clothing, metal, glass, paper, rubber,
synthetics, household goods or rummage, conducted upon private premises, and
conducted by a person employed for said purpose whether compensated or not. "Estate
sales" are deemed to be private auctions and shall be governed by this definition.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or
temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds,
walk, driveway, porch, garage, steps or vestibule belonging or appurtenant to such
dwelling, house or other structure.
PRIVATE SALE — The sale, barter, exchange or display of any new or used goods,
owned by the licensee or consigned to him/her, including but not limited to furniture,
sporting goods, fixtures, tools, equipment, food, clothing, metal, glass, paper, rubber,
synthetics, household goods or rummage, conducted upon private premises. Private sales
shall include all sales entitled "private sale," "garage sale," "lawn sale," "rummage sale,"
"tag sale," or "flea market sale," or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property
which is advertised by any means whereby the public-at-large is or can be made aware
of said sale.
§ 188-3. General regulations.
A. No private sale or private auction shall be conducted within the Borough of
Shrewsbury except in conformance with the provisions of this section.
B. No private sale or private auction shall be conducted within the Borough of
Shrewsbury unless a permit shall have first been issued by the Borough Clerk
permitting same.
C. No private sale or private auction shall be conducted within the Borough of
§ 186-16 SALES, PRIVATE; AUCTIONS § 188-3
188:1
§ 188-4. Licensing procedures; fees.
Shrewsbury except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and sunset on the day for which
a permit is issued. No permit shall be issued for more than three consecutive days.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following persons or
sales:
(1) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction;
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials;
(3) Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal property
which are specifically named or described in the advertisement, and which
separate items do not exceed five in number;
(4) Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business, wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the Borough, or under the protection of
the nonconforming use section thereof, or any other sale conducted by a
manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be conducted from
properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited by an ordinance of the
Borough.
A. Upon filing an application with the Borough Clerk stating the name of the
person(s), firm, group, corporation, association or organization conducting such
sale; name of owner(s) or lessee(s) of the property on which the sale is to be
conducted; the date and place where the private sale or private auction is to be
conducted; the type of merchandise to be sold; and the date upon which the last
permit, if any, was issued, either to the applicant or for the same premises covered
by the current application, together with the filing fee, the Borough Clerk shall issue
a permit authorizing same.
B. An application shall be filed for a private auction not less than 21 days prior to the
date of the proposed auction, and one for a private sale not less than 10 days prior
to the date of the proposed sale, together with a fee in the amount of $5 for a private
sale, $50 for a private auction, for the issuance of a permit. The permit shall be
issued within five business days of filing.
C. Upon receipt of an application the Borough Clerk shall refer same to the Police
Department, which shall examine the proposed sale site to determine whether the
proposed sale poses a possible threat to pedestrian, vehicular or public safety. In the
event the Police Department determines that special conditions should be imposed
on the sale for reasons of pedestrian, vehicular or public safety, the Police
Department shall make such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to protect
the public. These conditions may include (but are not limited to) requiring the
permittee to employ a special police officer, or officers, to direct traffic and/or
pedestrians; limiting the hours of sale; requiring additional parking; limiting the
number of persons at the sale site; etc.
D. No person, firm or corporation shall be issued more than two permits within a one-
§ 188-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 188-4
188:2
§ 188-5. Advertising of sales and auctions.
§ 188-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof. Each day that such violation shall continue shall be
considered a separate violation.
§ 188-7. Enforcement.
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department. It shall be the duty of the Police
Department to investigate any violations of this section coming to its attention, whether
by complaints or arising from its own personal knowledge, and if a violation is found
to exist, it shall prosecute a complaint before the local Municipal Court pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
year period; nor shall more than two permits be issued for any one location within
a one-year period.
A. In connection with the conduct of any private sale or public auction, advertising
signs shall be permitted only on the premises at which the sale or auction is to be
held, on other private property with the permission of the property owner.
Placement of any other sign on public or private property is expressly prohibited.
B. The size of any sign permitted by the terms of this section shall not exceed two feet
by three feet.
C. No sign advertising any private sale or private auction governed by the provisions
of this section shall be erected earlier than two days prior to the commencement of
such sale or auction, and any such sign shall be removed immediately upon the
expiration of the permit authorized under § 188-4 of this chapter.
§ 188-4 SALES, PRIVATE; AUCTIONS § 188-7
188:3

Chapter 193
SEWER CONNECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Housing standards — See Ch. 145.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 272.
Sewerage authority rules — See Ch. 276.
§ 193-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter and unless the context indicates otherwise, the meetings of
following words used throughout this chapter shall be as follows (Note: *
designates source as TRWRA rules and regulations):
AUTHORITY — Two Rivers Water Reclamation Authority (TRWRA).
BOARD OF HEALTH — Borough of Shrewsbury Board of Health
BOROUGH — The Borough of Shrewsbury, a member of the Two Rivers Water
Reclamation Authority.
BUILDING — Any building or structure heretofore or hereafter constructed and
designed or used for dwelling or other use or occupancy by persons, either
temporary or permanent.
*CONNECTION DATE — The ninetieth day following a sewer being available to
serve a structure, except that, in the case of a structure completed subsequent to the
availability of a sewer to the premises on which a structure is located, shall mean
the date of the initial occupancy of said structure or the date of the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy therefor, whichever of said dates shall be the earlier.
*HEALTH OFFICER — The person duly licensed by the State of New Jersey
performing the duties of Health Officer appointed by the Board of Health.
*HOUSE CONNECTION — The sewer between a main or Authority sewer and
the curb or easement line.
*INDUSTRIAL USER — A facility that discharges industrial waste to the
Authority's sewerage treatment plant.
*OWNER — The property owner upon whose land is or will be a structure and
upon whose behalf an application for a sewer connection is made to the Authority.
*PLUMBING INSPECTOR — The person duly appointed by the Borough as
Plumbing Inspector.
*SEWAGE — A combination of domestic sewage and industrial waste, together
with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
*SEWER — Any pipe or main designed or used for collection or disposal of
sewage.
§ 188-7 SEWER CONNECTIONS § 193-1
193:1
§ 193-2. Adoption of Authority rules and regulations.
§ 193-3. Standards for sewage disposal systems.
*SEWER CONTRACTOR—A licensed plumber performing those duties set forth
in the rules and regulations of the TRWRA.
*STRUCTURE — Any house, building, or structure heretofore or hereafter
constructed and designed or used for dwelling or other use or occupancy by
persons, either temporary or permanent.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, a property shall be deemed to front on the system if
any of its boundaries abut a street or easement at a point opposite a sewer in such
street or easement which is part of a sewer of the Authority or where a building is
located upon a street or easement in which a sewer is now or hereafter constructed.
A. There are hereby adopted the rules and regulations of the Two Rivers Water
Reclamation Sewerage Authority with the understanding that the Authority
reserves the right to update these rules and regulations and/or establish more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater system if
deemed necessary to comply with the purposes of these rules and regulations.
B. The Authority rules and regulations provide for the regulation of contributors to the
Authority's wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain
nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements addressing
procedures regarding new connections to sewers; standards for individual
connections; prohibited discharges; industrial wastes; inspection and testing of
stormwater; violations and penalties; rates and service charges schedules;
connection charges per equivalent dwelling unit; schedule of charges; application
and permit forms.
C. Copies of the aforesaid rules and regulations shall be on file in the following
Borough offices:
(1) Two copies in the office of the Borough Clerk and will remain on file for use
and examination of the public.
(2) One copy filed with the Clerk of the Board of Health, the Secretary of the
Planning Board, and the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. All sewers and sewerage works shall be designed and constructed in accordance
with all current rules and regulations of the Authority and the NJDEP. The
plumbing fixtures used shall meet the requirements of Borough and state codes,
including those pertaining to water conservation devices.
B. The Plumbing Inspector of the Borough shall be responsible only for inspection of
the building sewer, extending from the building drain to the house connection at the
curb or easement line, for compliance with the Borough's plumbing codes.
C. The plumbing fees shall be in accordance with the Uniform Construction Code.143
143.Editor's Note: See Ch. 88, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 193-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 193-4
193:2
§ 193-4. Rates and service charges.
Every Borough property owner connected to the Authority system or who is required to
connect to the Authority system shall pay service and other charges in accordance with
the current TRWRA rules and regulations.
§ 193-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
§ 193-4 SEWER CONNECTIONS § 193-5
193:3

Chapter 198
SMOKING
§ 198-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
BOROUGH OF SHREWSBURY MUNICIPAL COMPLEX —
COURTYARD—A public square or open space located within the Municipal Complex.
GAZEBO — An open-sided, roofed structure or pavilion.
MUNICIPAL COURT — All sessions of the Municipal Court of the Borough of
Shrewsbury, regular and special, held in the Municipal Center.
OFFICE — All areas that are used by Borough officials for the transaction of Borough
business with the general public.
PARK—An area of land set aside for public use, having facilities for recreation, playing
fields, and playgrounds.
PARKING AREA — An open area used for the open storage of motor vehicles and
includes any driveways and access drives.
PUBLIC MEETING — Any meeting conducted in the Municipal Center and elsewhere
in the Borough of Shrewsbury by any board, commission, committee, council, agency
or department of the Borough of Shrewsbury to which the public is invited, allowed or
encouraged to attend.
SMOKING — Includes carrying or having in one's possession a lighted cigar, cigarette,
pipe or any other lighted smoking equipment.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy, use
or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the surface of the parcels of land.
Located at the intersection of and along Sycamore Avenue and Broad Street/State
Highway 35, and designated on the Borough of Shrewsbury Tax Map as Block 30,
Lots 13 (16.13 acres) and 13.01/13A.
A.
Structures located within the Municipal Complex:
Shrewsbury Municipal Center: designated as 419 Sycamore Avenue, used for
official business of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
(1)
Shrewsbury Historical Society Museum: used as an education and research
center.
(2)
Wardell House: a Colonial and Greek revival period building listed on the
State and National Historic Registers.
(3)
(4) Manson Park Gazebos: open-sided, roofed structures.
B.
§ 193-5 SMOKING § 198-2
198:1
§ 198-2. Statement of purpose.
To protect the health welfare and comfort of employees and the general public, all
facilities/structures, courtyard, parks, parking areas, walking paths, landscaped areas
and open spaces located within the Municipal Complex and all other Borough-owned
property and areas located in the Borough of Shrewsbury shall be smoke free at all times
to protect and preserve the health and comfort of the general public and employees from
the toxic and annoying effects of tobacco smoke, and to protect life and property from
fire.
§ 198-3. Smoking prohibited.
Smoking shall be prohibited in:
§ 198-4. Posting of restrictions.
§ 198-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. The Municipal Courtroom and Public Meeting Room located in the Shrewsbury
Municipal Center;
B. All rooms including but not limited to conference rooms, offices, lunchrooms,
locker rooms, rest rooms, and lavatories; all entryways, corridors, hallways and all
other portions of buildings located within the Municipal Complex;
C. Recreation areas, playgrounds, park facilities, playing fields and open spaces
located within the park area designated as Manson Park and shall be prohibited in
any future park constructed within the Municipal Complex.
D. Courtyards, parking areas or paths, landscaped areas and open spaces located within
the Municipal Complex.
E. Parker Park, located on Patterson Avenue.
F. Robert Graham Athletic Fields, located at the end of Sickles Place.
G. Esther Hymer Nature Preserve, located on Williamsburg Drive.
H. Buttonwood Park, located on Buttonwood Drive.
I. Beech Tree Park, located on Beech Tree Lane and Sycamore Avenue.
J. Public Works headquarters, grounds and parking areas, located on White Road.
K. Patriot Isle, located on Sycamore Avenue.
A. "No smoking" signs shall be conspicuously posted.
B. No person shall remove, deface or conceal any sign required or erected by or under
the authority of this chapter.
A. Borough Council may establish regulations by resolution to clarify or carry out the
purpose of this chapter.
§ 198-2 SHREWSBURY CODE § 198-5
198:2
B. Unless otherwise provided by law or statute, any person violating the above
prohibition shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 198-5 SMOKING § 198-5
198:3

Chapter 202
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 145. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 220.
§ 202-1. Removal required; time limit. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346;
8-13-1979 by Ord. No. 436]
The owner, tenant or occupant of any building or lands abutting upon any street within
the Borough of Shrewsbury shall cause the sidewalk in front of said property to be
cleared of snow or ice to a width of at least two feet within 24 hours after the cessation
of the snowfall or formation of ice. In case of ice on said sidewalk, should it be
impracticable to remove same, then the sidewalk shall be covered with sand or some
other suitable substance so as to cause said sidewalk to be made safe and convenient for
persons traveling thereon.
§ 202-2. Deposit of snow or ice in plowed streets prohibited.
No person shall sweep, throw or deposit any snow or ice in that part of the street which
has been or is being plowed, swept, cleaned or cleared by the municipality for the
passage of traffic.
§ 202-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-13-1979 by Ord. No. 436; 3-14-1994
by Ord. No. 679; 3-5-2001 by Ord. No. 777; 7-10-2006 by Ord. No. 875]
§ 202-4. Costs of municipal removal to be a lien. [Amended 12-8-1965 by Ord. No.
227]
After the expiration of the time limited as aforesaid for the removal of such snow or ice
as aforesaid, a member of the Police Department may cause the same to be removed, and
the costs and expenses paid and incurred for the removal of such snow or ice shall be
certified by a member of the Police Department to the Borough Council, with a statement
of the amount due in each case, and if found correct by the Borough Council, the cost as
shown thereon shall be charged against the lands abutting such sidewalk; the amount so
charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such land and shall be added to and become
A. The owner, tenant or occupant of any residential building charged with the duties
as aforesaid who shall violate any of the provisions of the foregoing sections or
refuse or neglect to comply with same shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of
$25, plus court costs, for each offense.
B. The owner, tenant or occupant of any nonresidential building or vacant property
charged with the duties as aforesaid who shall violate any of the provisions of the
foregoing sections or refuse or neglect to comply with same shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of $250, plus court costs, for each offense.
§ 198-5 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL § 202-4
202:1
and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to
bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same
officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 202-5. Complaints of violations. [Amended 12-8-1965 by Ord. No. 227;
9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346; 3-5-2001 by Ord. No. 777]
Complaints of violations shall be made in the Municipal Court of Shrewsbury by a
member of the Shrewsbury Police Department or by the Shrewsbury Code Enforcement
Officer.
§ 202-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 202-5
202:2
Chapter 206
SOIL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 77.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 94.
Nuisances — See Ch. 163.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 210, Art. I.
Street openings (excavations) — See Ch. 220.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 226.
§ 206-1. Purpose; definitions.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the regulations contained herein is:
(1) To protect the safety and welfare of the public by regulating the amount and
means by which soil may be excavated or imported from or to any lands within
the Borough of Shrewsbury.
(2) To minimize the potential for erosion of soils as a result of any excavation,
importing, or other movement of soils within the Borough of Shrewsbury.
B. Definitions. The terms used in this chapter shall be deemed and construed to have
the following meanings:
APPLICANT — Any person, firm, corporation or association making a request or
appeal under the provisions of any section of this chapter.
ESCROW — The sum of money deposited by the applicant with the Borough of
Shrewsbury to be delivered to the on the fulfillment of conditions pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
ESCROW ACCOUNT — Any fees deposited by an applicant pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and the accounting entries used to keep track of
expenditures.
MINING — The digging into or otherwise penetrating the land for ores, metals or
other minerals or substances.
MOVE — To dig, mine, excavate, remove, relocate, deposit, fill, grade, regrade,
level or otherwise alter or change the location or contour of land, soil or subsoil.
OWNER — Any person, including corporations, seized in fee simple of any lot or
subdivision or having any interest of estate therein which would permit effective
possession thereof or dominion thereover.
PROFESSIONAL REVIEW COSTS — Costs for attorney, engineer, or other
professional or expert retained on behalf of the Borough of Shrewsbury for the
purpose of review, analysis, inspection, or preparation of documents, charged to
and paid by the applicant.
§ 202-5 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-1
206:1
§ 206-2. Permission required for moving soil; mining prohibited.
§ 206-3. Application for permit.
SOIL — Any earth, clay, loam, mineral deposit, gravel, stone, sand, dirt or rock
without regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter.
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth and
which supports vegetation.
A. No person shall excavate, import, or otherwise move soil in excess of 10 cubic
yards from or to any premises in the Borough of Shrewsbury without first having
procured permission from:
(1) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, should soil removal from
the premises be ancillary to developments requiring site plan approval and/or
subdivision approval under the jurisdiction of the board(s).
(2) The Borough Engineer, should soil removal be necessary in the installation of
utilities or drainage facilities or street openings
(3) The Zoning Officer, should soil removal be necessary in a residential zone, for
residential purposes, or in any zone for reasons other than the reasons listed in
Subsection A(1) and (2) of this section.
B. The excavation or movement of soil in connection with mining or quarry operations
is specifically prohibited in the Borough of Shrewsbury, and no permit will be
granted for such operations.
A. The Zoning Officer shall not consider any application to move soil unless and until
the applicant shall first file with the Borough Clerk four copies of the application
requesting such application, for distribution to the Construction Official, the
Borough Attorney, the Borough Engineer and the Chief of Police. The Zoning
Officer shall determine whether or not plans and profiles, contour maps and cross
sections showing proposed grades resulting from such intended removal or
depositing of soil and existing and proposed drainage facilities are necessary for
inspection or approval, and the Zoning Officer shall inform the applicant in writing
within 45 days accordingly.
B. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consider requests for the
importing or removal of soil concurrently with site plan and/or subdivision
applications. The applicant shall only be permitted to obtain a soil removal permit
after satisfactorily satisfying all of the terms and conditions of said approval granted
by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. A separate soil removal
permit application and fee shall be filed with the Borough Clerk for distribution to
the Zoning Officer, Borough Engineer, and Chief of Police in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter; however, no additional review of grading or drainage
shall be required, nor shall separate review or inspection escrow deposits be
required.
C. The Borough Engineer shall not consider any application to move soil due to the
installation of utilities or drainage facilities or street openings unless and until four
§ 206-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 206-3
206:2
§ 206-4. Review of application; issuance of permit; hours of removal.
copies of the application have been filed with the Borough Clerk, along with
required application fees and escrow deposits, by the applicant for such permission,
for distribution to the Borough Engineer, the Borough Attorney, Zoning Officer,
and the Chief of Police. The Borough Engineer shall determine whether or not
plans and profiles, contour maps, and cross sections showing existing and proposed
grades resulting from such intended removal or depositing of soil and existing
and proposed drainage facilities are necessary for inspection or approval, and the
Borough Engineer shall inform the applicant in writing within 45 days accordingly.
D. In addition to the filing of the aforementioned plans and profiles, contour maps and
cross sections, the applicant shall also file a written application setting forth the
following data:
(1) Name and address of the applicant and his interest.
(2) Name and address of the owner of the land.
(3) Lot and block number of the land as shown on the current assessment map of
the Borough of Shrewsbury, along with the physical street address of the site
of work.
(4) Reason(s) for the movement of the soil.
(5) Quantity of soil to be moved in cubic yards, indicating amount of topsoil and
other soil types to be imported or removed from the site.
(6) Location to which soil is to be moved or imported from.
(7) Dates of commencement and completion of the movement of the soil. The
completion date shall not be later than one year from the approval of
application.
(8) The hours during which it is proposed the removal of soil shall take place.
(9) The route or routes over which it is proposed to move said soil.
(10) Such other pertinent data as the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, the Borough Engineer, the Zoning Officer, and/or the
Construction Official may deem reasonable and necessary.
(11) A stormwater management report prepared by a professional engineer licensed
in the state of New Jersey, identifying existing and proposed peak rates and
volumes of runoff for the two-, ten- and one-hundred-year storm event,
drainage areas of the site, and outlining any impacts to adjacent lands as a
result of soil movement. The report shall identify mitigations required to
attenuate postdeveloped peak rates of runoff to the predeveloped levels.
A. Upon receipt of the data provided for in § 206-3 of this chapter, or required as part
of the site plan or subdivision application materials, an opportunity to be heard shall
be granted the applicant within 45 days thereafter. The Planning Board, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, the Borough Engineer or the Zoning Officer, in considering
§ 206-3 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-4
206:3
§ 206-5. Conduct of operations.
If permission to move the soil shall be granted, the owner or person in charge shall
so conduct the operations that there shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions
and in such a manner that the area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris and
graded to conform with the contour lines and grades as approved by the Planning Board,
the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Borough Engineer or the Zoning Officer of the
Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 206-6. Replacement of topsoil required.
If permission to move the soil shall be granted, no owner shall take away or cause to be
and reviewing the application and arriving at its or his decision, shall be governed
by the municipal planning, public health and safety and general welfare, and
particular consideration shall be given to the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Surface water drainage, and impacts upon adjacent lands.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated physical
adjustment of the Borough and to public safety and health and general welfare
of the citizens of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
(7) Best use of soil within the Borough of Shrewsbury.
(8) On-site and off-site traffic consideration, along with impacts to Borough
roadways.
(9) Safety measures to be implemented during soil movement operations,
including grading, installation of utilities, transportation of soils, and all other
work ancillary to the soil removal permit.
B. If, after examining the application and the maps provided for in § 206-3 of this
chapter and after the hearing, the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
the Borough Engineer or the Zoning Officer shall be of the opinion that the
proposed soil movement will not create conditions inimical to the public health,
welfare or safety and will not result in the creation of any sharp declivities, pits or
depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems, depressed land values nor create any
drainage or sewerage problems or other conditions of danger, permission to move
the soil shall be granted.
C. In granting any permit to move soil, the Planning Board, the Borough Engineer or
the Zoning Officer reserves the right to fix the hours during which the movement
of soils shall take place, as well as the route or routes over which such movement
of soil shall take place as recommended by the Chief of Police.
§ 206-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 206-6
206:4
deposited any soil upon his lands without providing for a final layer of topsoil at least six
inches in depth to be placed thereon, pursuant to the levels and contour lines approved
by the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Borough Engineer or the
Zoning Officer of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 206-7. Surety bond required.
Before any permit to move soil shall be granted or issued, the owner or applicant
shall file with the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury a bond by a
surety company authorized to transact business in the State of new Jersey, or, in lieu
thereof, cash at the option of the applicant in such amount as, in the opinion of the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury on recommendation of the Borough
Engineer, shall be sufficient to ensure the faithful performance of the work to be
undertaken pursuant to the permission granted by the Planning Board, the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, the Borough Engineer or the Zoning Officer under and by virtue of
the provision of this chapter to indemnify the Borough for damages resulting from any
failure to comply with the provision of this chapter.
§ 206-8. Application fees and escrow deposits; discharge of bond.
A. Each applicant, upon filing a request with the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment for permission to move soil, shall deposit with the Borough of
Shrewsbury the sum of $50 for administrative costs. All engineering review and
inspection costs shall be deemed part of the actual site plan or subdivision review
and inspection escrow deposits.
B. At the time of filing of an application for a soil removal permit, where said permit
does not require a site plan or subdivision review by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, in addition to the administrative fees required above, a cash
escrow deposit shall be provided for the purposes of an engineering review of the
application, pursuant to the following schedule:
(1) Soil removal permits limited to the installation of utility conduits or
appurtenances, where no alteration of existing topography is proposed: $250.
(2) Soil removal permit applications ancillary to the construction or alteration of a
residential use, where the existing topography is to be altered: $750, plus an
additional $250 for each subsequent submission of revised plans or other
application materials.
(3) Soil removal permit applications for purposes other than those enumerated
above: $500, plus an additional $250 for each subsequent submission of
revised plans or other application materials.
C. Upon certification by the Borough Engineer that the soil movement has been
completed in accordance with the approved application, any balances remaining in
the escrow account shall be refunded to the applicant along with a final accounting.
D. The performance bond provided for in § 206-7 of this chapter shall not be
discharged until the Engineer shall certify to the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Shrewsbury that the work to be performed by the applicant has been performed
in a satisfactory manner and in accordance with the application filed with the
§ 206-6 SOIL REMOVAL § 206-8
206:5
§ 206-9. Permit and conformity with provisions required.
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed or deposited under the
provision of this chapter unless a permit therefor shall have been first obtained as proved
herein, and no excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed or deposited
except in conformity with the provision of this chapter. The Police Department shall be
the enforcing agency in determining whether or not persons conducting soil removal or
movement operations regulated herein have obtained permits.
§ 206-10. Appeals to Mayor and Council.
§ 206-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
§ 206-12. Right to injunctive relief reserved.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the municipal officials of the Borough of
Shrewsbury from bringing injunctive proceedings to restrain removal of topsoil as
described in this chapter.
Borough of Shrewsbury.
A. Applicants for permits required by the provision of this chapter shall have the right
to appeal to the Mayor and Council for a permit to remove soil from the Borough
of Shrewsbury, provided that the applicant has previously submitted his application
for review to the Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Borough
Engineer or the Zoning Officer, and has been denied a permit for the sole reason
that the applicant has made no provision to move soil to another location within the
Borough.
B. The Mayor and Council shall not consider any application to remove soil from the
Borough unless and until the applicant shall first file with the Borough Clerk 10
copies of the application requesting such permission, and citing evidence that all
means to retain soil within the Borough have been attempted with negative results.
Accompanying the application shall be three sets of plans and profiles, contour
maps and cross sections showing proposed contour grades resulting from such
intended removal of soil and existing and proposed drainage facilities.
C. Copies of the application are to be distributed to the Mayor and Council, the
Borough Attorney, the Borough Engineer and the Chief of Police. Copies of plans,
etc., are for the Borough file and the Borough Engineer and an approved plan
bearing the signatures of the Mayor and the Borough Clerk shall be returned to the
applicant with the permit.
D. Each applicant, upon filing with the Borough Clerk for permission to remove soil
from the Borough, shall pay a fee of $50 and be subject to the fee schedule outlined
in Subsections A, B and C of § 206-8.
§ 206-8 SHREWSBURY CODE § 206-12
206:6
Chapter 210
SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 77.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 118.
Food establishments — See Ch. 126.
Housing standards — See Ch. 145.
Nuisances — See Ch. 163.
Snow and ice removal — See Ch. 202.
Soil removal — See Ch. 206.
Yard waste, litter control and improper disposal of
waste — See Ch. 215.
Vehicles, abandoned — See Ch. 250.
Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 272.
Solid waste — See Ch. 281.
§ 206-12 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 206-12
210:1

ARTICLE I
Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse
[Adopted 2-3-1942 by Ord. No. 31 (Ch. 42 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 210-1. Definitions.
The following definitions and qualifications shall apply to the respective words
hereinafter set forth as used in this article:
ASHES — Cinders, partly burned fuel and the residue from the combustion of wood,
coal, coke or any other material ordinarily burned for household, domestic or heating
purposes.
CONTRACTOR—The person, firm or corporation having a contract or agreement with
the Borough to Shrewsbury, in the County of Monmouth, for the collection and removal
of garbage, and shall refer also to each of his agents and employees.
GARBAGE — Any waste material in process of or subject to decomposition or decay
incident to ordinary domestic or business use or purpose, and shall include, among other
things, kitchen refuse, animal or vegetable matter, offal and decaying and decomposing
substances.
MUNICIPAL — Under the control of the Borough, including under the control of any
intermunicipal or regional authority which may be established from time to time.[Added
9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
OCCUPANT — The owner, agent, tenant, lessee, caretaker or any other person in
charge of any premises affected by this article, whichever classification may be
appropriate and effective for the enforcement of this article.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, aggregation or association
of persons. Singular and plural pronouns may be used interchangeably so that either the
singular or the plural shall be inferred, whichever is appropriate. Whenever pronouns are
used in any gender, they shall be deemed to refer to the masculine, feminine or neuter
gender, whichever may be appropriate or applicable, and the words "and" and "or" may
be interpreted to be used interchangeably, whichever may appear appropriate, it being
the purpose that the particular word, gender or pronoun shall be intended which is apt
for the circumstances and inures to effectuating this article.
RUBBISH — Waste substances, excepting garbage and ashes, and shall apply
particularly to such articles as paper, paper cartons, tin cans, rags, corn husks, bottles,
broken glass, crockery, leaves, grass, rakings of yards and lawns (when free from earth),
beds, bed springs, mattresses, straw, excelsior, floor shavings, twigs of trees and bushes,
and all other waste material except garbage and ashes.
§ 210-2. Council to provide for and regulate collection; costs.
The Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury may provide for the collection, removal
and disposal of ashes, garbage, rubbish and other refuse matter in such manner as it
deems necessary and establish such reasonable rules and regulations, in conformity with
the provisions of this article, as circumstances may require, and all costs in connection
therewith and incidental thereto shall be paid by general taxation.
§ 210-1 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 210-3
210:3
§ 210-3. Collection work contracted out.
If, in the opinion of the Borough Council, it is more advantageous for the Borough to
have the ashes, garbage, rubbish and other refuse matter or any part thereof collected,
removed and disposed of by any person or persons other than employees of the Borough,
it may make a contract or contracts for such work or any portion thereof with an
individual or individuals, corporation or corporations, municipality or municipalities in
accordance with specifications to be adopted for the doing of such work in a sanitary and
inoffensive manner, which specifications may provide for alternative methods of doing
said work and are to be filed in the office of the Clerk of the said Borough.
§ 210-4. Contracts awarded to lowest bidder.
Said contract or contracts shall be entered into and made only after bids therefor
shall have been advertised in a newspaper published in the County of Monmouth and
circulating in the Borough of Shrewsbury, at least 10 days prior thereto, and then only
with the lowest bidder or bidders who shall give satisfactory bonds or security for the
faithful performance of the work.
§ 210-5. Granting of exclusive franchise authorized.
The Borough Council shall have the right to grant the exclusive privilege of removing
and transporting ashes, garbage, rubbish and other refuse matter, for a term not
exceeding three years, upon competitive bidding, to the lowest responsible bidder who
complies with the regulations respecting the bidding and who furnishes a proper bond,
satisfactory to the Borough Council, in the amount of the contract price to be paid each
year, the contractor being required to furnish a new bond for each year that the contract
shall have to run, conditioned for the faithful performance of the obligations of the
contract. Failure to furnish such acceptable bond 10 days before the beginning of any
contract year shall be sufficient cause for revocation of such contract.
§ 210-6. Collection and removal procedures subject to Borough supervision.
The collection and removal of ashes, garbage, rubbish and other refuse matter shall be
done in accordance with the provisions of this article and shall be subject to the general
supervision of the Borough Council and of the Board of Health and shall be subject to
such additional rules and regulations as the Borough Council and Board of Health may
from time to time prescribe by resolution, not inconsistent with the terms of this article.
§ 210-7. No collections at multiple dwellings, shopping centers or from dumpsters
at nonresidential sites. [Added 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346; amended 11-9-1987 by
Ord. No. 566]
Collection by the contractor for the municipality or municipal collector shall not be made
at multiple dwellings, at shopping centers or from dumpsters at nonresidential sites, all
as defined and delineated in the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Shrewsbury.144
144.Editor's Note: See Ch. 94. Zoning and Land Development.
§ 210-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 210-8
210:4
§ 210-8. Occupants to supply receptacles and separate wastes.
The occupant of each property in the Borough shall provide suitable receptacles, as
hereinafter prescribed, in which the occupant shall place and keep garbage separately
in one container and shall keep separately ashes and rubbish in another container or
containers, and the occupants shall securely tie all wastepaper in bundles.
§ 210-9. Collector not to accept garbage mixed with other wastes. [Amended
9-9-1971 by Ord. No. 316; 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
The contractor or municipal collector shall not be obligated to accept for removal
any ashes or rubbish when mingled with garbage in the same receptacle and, upon
finding such mingled substances, shall report the circumstances to the Health Officer.
The contractor or municipal collector shall, furthermore, not be obligated to accept for
removal any automobile, truck or vehicle tires and when finding the same shall leave
them uncollected and shall report the circumstances to the Health Officer.
§ 210-10. Disputes to be reported; contractor to maintain office with telephone
connections. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
§ 210-11. Receptacle specifications; placement of receptacles for collection.
A. The contractor or municipal collector shall, on the same day, report to the Public
Works Manager any dispute that occurs between himself and an occupant with
respect to removal or disposition of ashes, garbage, rubbish or other refuse matter,
and the Public Works Manager shall thereupon immediately investigate the subject
matter and take the steps that may be necessary under the circumstances and give
necessary or emergency instructions and thereupon report in writing concerning the
subject to the Borough Council and the Board of Health at their next subsequent
meetings.145
B. Any contractor shall maintain an office in the Borough of Shrewsbury or adjacent
municipality in Monmouth County, with telephone connections, and a person shall
be in attendance in the office at least during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
A. Receptacles, as approved by the Board of Health for garbage, shall be sufficiently
strong for the purpose and may be pails or cans; they shall be watertight and shall
have close-fitting covers, and said receptacles shall be kept covered except when
opened for filling or emptying of material. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No.
346146]
B. All receptacles for garbage, ashes or rubbish, and all bundles of wastepaper shall be
placed by the occupant for collection by the contractor or municipal collector inside
the curb or on the property side of the edge of the street line subsequent to 6:00 p.m.
on the evening prior to the date scheduled for collection. Within a reasonable time
after collection and on the date thereof, all said receptacles must be placed by the
owner or occupant at the rear of the dwelling or main building upon the premises,
145.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
146.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III). Former Subsections B
and C of this section, regarding receptacles for ashes and rubbish, which immediately followed this subsection, were
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 210-8 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 210-11
210:5
§ 210-12. Vehicle specifications and cleanliness standards.
§ 210-13. Collection regulations. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
in close proximity to rear door or rear line of dwelling or building, and must remain
at said location until the next collection date as provided hereinabove. No private
arrangement shall be made between the contractor or municipal collector and the
owner or occupant of any dwelling or building by which any receptacles may be
kept or permitted to remain on any street, sidewalk or any portion of property other
than as provided herein. [Amended 1-14-1944 by Ord. No. 38; 3-14-1967 by Ord.
No. 243; 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
C. The occupant shall keep all receptacles clean and in proper condition for safe
handling.
D. In buildings in which two or more families reside, each family shall mark its own
receptacles with the initials of the respective name so as to render receptacles
readily identifiable.
E. Immediately after receptacles are properly emptied, the contractor or municipal
collector shall return them to the point from which he took them. [Amended
9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
A. All vehicles used in the removal of ashes, garbage, rubbish and other refuse matter
shall be of the motor-driven type, and no such vehicle shall be drawn by any horse
or animal.
B. All vehicles used for collection or removal of garbage shall be of a type approved
by the Borough Council and shall be provided with a watertight box, body or
container, closely and entirely covered with suitable covers, adequate to prevent
leakage or dripping or material being blown from the vehicle. Such vehicle shall be
kept closed at all times, except during the period of emptying or filling, and shall
be kept clean and shall be thoroughly washed, inside and outside, between each
collection and the next subsequent collection, and shall be disinfected between each
collection and the next subsequent collection, and the contractor or municipal
collector shall not permit any such vehicle at any time to become offensive either
through odor, appearance or for any other reason. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord.
No. 346]
C. Every vehicle used by the contractor or municipal collector for removal or
transportation of garbage, ashes or rubbish shall carry at least one shovel and one
broom and any other equipment which may be necessary for keeping the vehicle
clean and for cleaning up the area at which such substances are collected. The
contractor or municipal collector shall carefully clean the area from which ashes,
garbage, rubbish or receptacles have been removed or in any area or space from the
place of collection to the vehicle. If any ashes, garbage, rubbish or other refuse
matter shall fall from a vehicle either during collection or transportation, such
articles shall be immediately gathered and replaced in the vehicle and the place
rendered clean. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
A. The contractor or municipal collector shall report to the Public Works Manager and
§ 210-11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 210-13
210:6
§ 210-14. Equipment and dumps subject to health inspections. [Amended
9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
All equipment used by the contractor or municipal collector, and any dump used by the
contractor or municipal collector, shall be subject to inspection by the Health Officer or
anyone deputized by him for that purpose, at any reasonable time.
§ 210-15. Collection times; unnecessary noise prohibited; collection dates.
to the Borough Council in writing within 24 hours all cases in which it is
impossible, because of freezing or otherwise, to collect and remove ashes, garbage,
rubbish or other refuse matter.147
B. No garbage or refuse shall be piled higher than the regular height of the side boards
of the vehicle.
C. Garbage can covers may be removed only at the time of collection.
D. Neither the contractor or municipal collector nor any of his agents, collectors or
employees shall pick or sort garbage, ashes or rubbish, and the contents of
containers of ashes, garbage and rubbish shall be immediately transferred at the
time of collection without any unnecessary delay or exposure and without any
spilling.
E. The contractor or municipal collector shall see to it that his employees, agents and
collectors shall deport themselves in a quiet, decent and law-abiding manner and
apply themselves diligently to the performance of the necessary work, and shall
refrain from neglect or insolence or any improper conduct, and a contractor shall
discharge any employee, agent or collector failing in these requirements. A
municipal collector shall report municipal employees failing in these requirements
to the Borough Council for such disciplinary action as the Council shall provide,
subject to provisions of any law or other ordinance affecting the discipline or
removal of municipal employees.
F. It shall be part of the duty of the contractor or municipal collector in the collection
of ashes, garbage and rubbish to collect and remove from the streets and highways
of the Borough, and from the sidewalks along the same, all dead dogs, cats, rats or
other small animals which may be found thereon, or from private property when
requested.
G. The contractor or municipal collector shall not sprinkle or place any disinfectant or
poisonous chemical upon any garbage or waste matter within the limits of the
Borough of Shrewsbury.
A. Ashes, garbage and rubbish shall be collected promptly and punctually at such
times as may be specified by the Borough Council or in the contract between the
municipality and the contractor, and the removal shall be made not earlier than 6:00
a.m. and not later than 6:00 p.m. on the days designated.
B. Neither the contractor or municipal collector nor any of his employees or agents
147.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 210-13 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 210-15
210:7
§ 210-16. Collector to comply with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.
[Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
The contractor or municipal collector, in the collection, removal and disposal of ashes,
garbage and rubbish, shall comply with the provisions of this article and any other
ordinance, and with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health, and with any state
law or regulations which may pertain to the subject matter.148
§ 210-17. One attendant on each vehicle to speak English. [Amended 9-27-1973 by
Ord. No. 346]
With each vehicle used by the contractor or municipal collector for the collection of
ashes, garbage or rubbish, there shall be at least one attendant or collector or assistant
who is able to understand and speak the English language intelligibly.
§ 210-18. Contracts not assignable without permission.
No contract for the removal of ashes, garbage or rubbish made between the municipality
and a contractor shall be assignable or interchangeable to or with any other contractor,
except with the written consent of the Borough Council. Any transfer of contract without
such consent shall, at the option of the governing body, render the contract null and
void and empower the Borough Council, at its option, to award the work to some other
person, and the contractor shall be answerable for any loss or damage suffered.
§ 210-19. Dumping by public prohibited. [Added 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
No member of the public shall dump any ashes, garbage, rubbish or other refuse matter
in any place, whether public or private, in the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 210-20. Location of dumping site to be approved.
The contractor shall provide a suitable place or places outside the limits of the Borough
of Shrewsbury for the disposing of ashes, garbage or rubbish. No ashes, garbage or
rubbish shall be removed to any place within the limits of the Borough of Shrewsbury
or disposed of at such place unless prior thereto the contractor has received permission
from the Borough Council, and no place, either within or outside the limits of the
Borough of Shrewsbury, shall be used for removal or disposal of garbage, ashes or
rubbish under contract with the Borough unless and until such place and location have
shall engage in any loud or unnecessary talk, or make or occasion any unnecessary
noises, in the collection or removal of garbage, ashes or rubbish, and all such
collection and removal shall be done quietly. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No.
346]
C. The contractor or municipal collector shall notify occupants of the dates set for
collection of ashes, garbage and rubbish and shall also notify them when any
change in such dates has been duly authorized. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No.
346]
148.Editor's Note: Former § 42-17, Cleanup week, as amended, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 210-15 SHREWSBURY CODE § 210-20
210:8
been approved by the Borough Council and the Board of Health.
§ 210-21. Permits from municipality in which dump is located to be submitted.
In the event that the contractor shall obtain the approval of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Shrewsbury to deposit ashes, garbage or rubbish at any place outside the
Borough limits, he shall secure and submit to the Borough Council all necessary permits
from the proper authorities of the municipality in which such ashes, garbage and rubbish
may be deposited and also from each and every municipality through which such may
be conveyed.
§ 210-22. Burning of refuse within Borough limits restricted.
§ 210-23. Instructions violating provisions prohibited.
No person shall give any instructions or directions or commands, the result of which
or compliance with which would involve a violation of any of the provisions of this
article. Any person giving and any person complying with such instructions, directions
or commands shall be deemed guilty of violating this article.
§ 210-24. Building or excavation materials and boiler ashes not to be collected.
This article shall not be deemed to apply to the collection or removal of earth, stone,
plaster, wood or other material accumulated solely from excavating or from
constructing, building or repairing any building, nor to ashes accumulated solely from
boilers which are used solely to generate steam for a purpose other than heating.
§ 210-25. Excessive accumulations restricted. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No.
346]
Five days before the contractor or municipal collector begins his work under the
provisions of this article, all owners or occupants of property in the Borough shall
remove or cause to be removed from same at their own expense all accumulated ashes,
rubbish and garbage of all kinds which may exist, so that no controversy may arise
between the contractor and said owners or occupants. Owners of or agents for property
are responsible that tenants moving out of such property do not leave excessive amounts
of ashes, rubbish and garbage to be removed by the contractor. Failures to comply with
this section, if complained of by the contractor, will subject such owners or agents to a
A. If permission is granted to deposit ashes, garbage or rubbish within the limits of the
Borough of Shrewsbury, the contractor shall not burn any rubbish thereon except
upon the written consent of the Borough Council and with permission and under the
supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department of the Borough.
B. Any inflammable refuse dumped within the limits of the Borough, under
permission obtained in accordance with the provisions herein, shall, under
permission and supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department, be burned and
covered daily with earth or ashes containing no inflammable amount of unburned
material. Any dump or place for depositing of ashes, garbage or material for which
permission has been granted within the limits of the Borough shall be fenced or
otherwise protected to prevent the scattering of paper and refuse.
§ 210-20 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 210-25
210:9
fine of not to exceed the cost of removal of said ashes, garbage and rubbish.
§ 210-26. Prevailing time.
Whenever daylight saving time is adopted and is effective in the Borough of
Shrewsbury, then any time or hours mentioned in this article shall be deemed to refer to
daylight saving time.
§ 210-27. Enforcing officials. [Added 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
The Superintendent of Public Works and any person so delegated by the Superintendent
shall enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 210-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-14-1967 by Ord. No. 243;
9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof, in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
§ 210-25 SHREWSBURY CODE § 210-28
210:10
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 12-8-1986 by Ord. No. 552 (Ch. 62 of the 1973 Code)]
§ 210-29. Separation of materials required; effective dates. [Amended 10-5-1987
by Ord. No. 561; 12-30-1991 by Ord. No. 634]
§ 210-30. Used motor oil.
A. On or after April 1, 1987, it shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners,
lessees and/or occupants of residential property to separate newspapers, leaves,
glass bottles and jars and aluminum, as hereinafter defined, from all other solid
waste produced by such residence for the collection and ultimate recycling of said
materials.
B. On and after April 1, 1988, it shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners,
lessees and/or occupants of residential property to separate tin and bimetal cans
from all other solid waste produced by such residence for collection and ultimate
recycling of said materials.
C. On and after April 1, 1988, it shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees and/or
occupants of business and industrial property and of private, public and
governmental institutions and buildings to separate newspapers, leaves, glass
bottles and jars, aluminum, tin and bimetal cans, corrugated cardboard and/or highgrade
paper from all other solid waste produced by said nonresidential
establishments for collection and ultimate recycling of said material.
D. On and after October 1, 1988, no owner, lessee and/or occupant of any residential
property, business or industrial property or private, public or governmental
institution or building shall be permitted to place any construction, demolition or
land-clearing debris, which includes asphalt, concrete and/or wood waste, such as
stumps, large tree parts, pallets and larger pieces of lumber, with other solid waste
for landfill disposal.
E. On and after January 1, 1992, the Public Works Department shall no longer collect
grass clippings placed at curbside. However, thatch shall still be collected at
curbside during a two-week period in March and during a two-week period in
October, dates to be announced annually.
F. On and after March 1, 1992, magazines, junk mail and paper products other than
newspapers shall be separated from all other solid waste, for the ultimate recycling
of said materials. Magazines, junk mail and other paper products will be collected
separately, as announced, and may be placed in paper bags. In addition, a bin shall
be provided at the Shrewsbury Borough Public Works Department for the
collection of magazines, junk mail and other paper products.
A. On and after the adoption of this article and in accordance with existing state
regulations (N.J.A.C. 14A:3-11), all service stations, oil retailers and motor vehicle
reinspection stations with used oil holding tanks shall accept up to five gallons at a
time of used motor oil from individuals changing oil from cars, lawn mowers or
motorcycles and shall post a sign informing the public that they are a used oil
§ 210-29 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 210-30
210:11
§ 210-31. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALUMINUM — Includes all disposable items made of aluminum, including aluminum
containers used for soda, beer or other beverages, foil, wrappers, containers for prepared
food, screen frames and lawn chairs.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Includes cardboard of the type used to make
cardboard boxes, cartons, pasteboard and similar corrugated and kraft paper material.
GLASS — Includes all products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone, the
product being transparent or translucent and being used for packaging or bottling of
various matters, excluding, however, blue or flat glass commonly known as "window
glass."
HIGH-GRADE PAPER — Includes white and/or off-white stationery, photocopy and
computer paper.
SOLID WASTE — Includes all garbage and rubbish normally produced by the
occupants of commercial, industrial and residential property and disposed of by private
or public pickup.
§ 210-32. Recycling Coordinator.
§ 210-33. Collection of materials; agreements.
collection site.
B. The Department of Public Works shall also provide a tank for the disposal of used
oil. It is mandatory that used oil be separated from other solid waste and disposed
of in used oil holding tanks.
A. The position of Recycling Coordinator is hereby created and established within the
Borough of Shrewsbury.
B. The Recycling Coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of
Borough Council, for a term of one year, expiring December 31 of each year. The
term of the person first appointed as Recycling Coordinator shall expire December
31 of the year of that person's appointment.
C. The Recycling Coordinator, after consultation with the Superintendent of Public
Works and subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Shrewsbury, shall establish and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations as to
the manner, days and times for the collection, sorting, transportation, sale and/or
marketing of said recyclable materials in order to encourage the preservation of
material resources while minimizing the cost of the recycling program to the
Borough of Shrewsbury.
A. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury may use municipal
personnel to collect recyclable material set forth herein at curbside and/or from a
drop-off center and shall sell said recyclable material, if a market exists therefor,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 210-30 SHREWSBURY CODE § 210-33
210:12
§ 210-34. Materials to be Borough property.
Recyclable material, as defined herein, shall be the property of the Borough of
Shrewsbury once placed on the curbside or brought to a drop-off center.
§ 210-35. Collection by unauthorized person prohibited.
It shall be a violation of this article for any person not authorized by the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury to pick up or cause to be picked up said
recyclable material, as defined herein. Each such collection in violation hereof shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 210-36. Direct disposal by resident.
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any person, partnership or corporation
who is owner, lessee or occupant of a residential or nonresidential property may donate
or sell said recyclable material, as defined herein, to any person, partnership or
corporation, whether or not operating for profit. Said person, partnership or corporation,
however, shall not pick up said recyclable materials at curbside or at a municipal dropoff
center.
§ 210-37. Drop-off center. [Added 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 730]
The use of the drop-off center of the Borough of Shrewsbury shall be limited to Borough
residents, and identification establishing residency may be required prior to the use of
the drop-off center.
§ 210-38. Removal of refrigerant appliances; sticker fee. [Added 10-19-1992 by
Ord. No. 652]
§ 210-39. Dumpster rental. [Added 2-6-2012 by Ord. No. 976149]
Residents of the Borough of Shrewsbury shall be permitted to rent a dumpster from the
Shrewsbury Department of Public Works subject to availability and the following terms
and conditions:
B. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury may elect to enter into
agreements with qualified persons or corporations authorizing them to collect said
recyclable material at curbside or from a drop-off center and to sell said recyclable
material.
A. No appliance which contains refrigerants, such as a refrigerator, freezer or air
conditioner, shall be picked up unless a removal sticker has been obtained from the
Borough Clerk's office and affixed to the appliance.
B. The person applying for the removal sticker shall pay a fee of $15 to the Borough
of Shrewsbury and shall affix the sticker directly to the appliance to be removed.
A. There shall be a weekday rental fee of $75 per 24 hours or portion thereof.
149.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 210-39 as § 210-40.
§ 210-33 SOLID WASTE; RECYCLING § 210-39
210:13
§ 210-40. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 730; 5-15-2000
by Ord. No. 772; 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871; 2-6-2012 by Ord. No. 976]
B. There shall be a weekend rental fee of $75 from Friday afternoon through Monday
morning.
C. Residents will be charged $75 for the use of the container, as set forth above, plus
the tipping fees for debris. Tipping fees are set by the Monmouth County
Reclamation Center.
D. Residents must call to reserve the container and must be home when the container
is delivered to ensure proper placement and to sign all paperwork.
E. The container will only be placed on the resident's driveway; the container will not
be placed in the street.
F. No chemicals or paints may be placed in the container for disposal, and concrete
may not be mixed with construction debris.
G. The container is for residents use only; contractors must provide for removal of
construction debris on their own.
H. Residents will be charged a fee of $100 for any materials placed in the container
that are not permitted to be dumped.
I. Residents are required to pay the container and tipping fees within 60 days, or a lien
shall be placed by the Borough against the property.
A. Any person, firm or corporation which violates or neglects to comply with any
provision of this article or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto shall
be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250
or a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both, except that the maximum
fine or penalty for the failure to comply with § 210-29A and B thereof, or any rule
or regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, shall not exceed $50. As an alternate
penalty, a convicted person may be ordered to perform community service in the
recycling program for a period not to exceed 90 days.
B. Each day that such violation or neglect is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.
C. In addition, any person, firm or corporation which violates this article in any respect
shall be denied having any solid waste collected until such time as it ceases such
violation.
§ 210-39 SHREWSBURY CODE § 210-40
210:14
Chapter 215
STORMWATER QUALITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 67.
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 77.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 118.
Flood hazard areas — See Ch. 122.
Nuisances — See Ch. 163.
Parks and recreation facilities — See Ch. 170.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Sewer connections — See Ch. 193.
Solid waste — See Chs. 210 and 281.
§ 210-40 STORMWATER QUALITY § 210-40
215:1

ARTICLE I
Yard Waste Collection Program
§ 215-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a yard waste collection and disposal program
in the Borough of Shrewsbury, so as to protect public health, safety, and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 215-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in biodegradable bags only, such
as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or blowing out into the street and coming into
contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or
political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive, or other
way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway, and includes the land
between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement,
shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, brush, and thatch, but does not include grass clippings.
§ 215-3. Yard waste collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not containerized at
the curb or along the street is only allowed during the seven days prior to a Borough
scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be placed closer than 10 feet from
any storm drain inlet. Placement of such yard waste at the curb or along the street at any
other time or in any other manner is a violation of this article. If such placement of the
yard waste occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove
the yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this article.
§ 215-4. Container required.
The owner or occupant of any residential property shall provide biodegradable bags for
contractors of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services should the schedule of work on the property preclude compliance with the
"seven-day rule" for placement of yard waste along the street.
§ 215-5. Prohibited acts.
The following acts are prohibited:
§ 215-1 STORMWATER QUALITY § 215-5
215:3
§ 215-6. Enforcement.
The provisions of the article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough
of Shrewsbury.
§ 215-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
A. Placement of grass clippings at the curb or along the street at any time.
B. Placement of yard waste at curb or along the street prior to Borough scheduled
periods as specified in this article.
C. Placement of brush at the curb or along the street from November through March
of the following year.
D. Placement of leaves at the curb or along the street in the months of January,
February, March, July and August.
E. Placement of yard waste within 10 feet from any storm drain.
F. Containers shall not be placed at street curb at any time except on the Borough
scheduled pickup date.
§ 215-5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 215-7
215:4
ARTICLE II
Pet Waste
§ 215-8. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid
waste in the Borough of Shrewsbury, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 215-9. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or harbor any pet
or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or
political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal) kept for
amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other suitable
container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly emptied by the
municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey
domestic sewage for proper treatment and disposal.
§ 215-10. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly dispose of their
pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by
that person.
§ 215-11. Exemptions.
Any owners and keepers who require the use of a disability assistance animal shall
be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being used for that
purpose.
§ 215-12. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough
of Shrewsbury.
§ 215-8 STORMWATER QUALITY § 215-13
215:5
§ 215-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
§ 215-13 SHREWSBURY CODE § 215-13
215:6
ARTICLE III
Wildlife Feeding
§ 215-14. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public
park or on any other property owned or operated by the Borough of Shrewsbury, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 215-15. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible material with
the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife. Feeding does not include baiting
in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or
political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 215-16. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or operated
by the Borough of Shrewsbury, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for example,
wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at
environmental education centers).
§ 215-17. Enforcement.
§ 215-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of
Shrewsbury.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to cease the
feeding immediately.
§ 215-14 STORMWATER QUALITY § 215-18
215:7

ARTICLE IV
Litter Control
§ 215-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements to control littering in the Borough
of Shrewsbury, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 215-20. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has been
discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or other natural or
synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle,
jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted
cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines,
glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging or construction material,
but does not include the waste of the primary processes of mining or other extraction
processes, logging, saw milling, farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or
political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
§ 215-21. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
§ 215-22. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 215-23. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise place any
litter of any nature upon public or private property other than in a litter receptacle,
or, having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a vehicle or boat
in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or both, of the motor vehicle or
boat shall also be deemed to have violated this article.
§ 215-19 STORMWATER QUALITY § 215-23
215:9

ARTICLE V
Improper Disposal of Waste
§ 215-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) operated by
the Borough of Shrewsbury, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 215-25. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is owned or
operated by the Borough of Shrewsbury or other public body, and is designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems,
which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or
political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that
runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by separate
storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
§ 215-26. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the municipal
separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Shrewsbury is prohibited. The
spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater in such manner as to
cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate stormwater system is also
prohibited.
§ 215-27. Exceptions to prohibition.
The following are exceptions to the prohibition:
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or basement sump
pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling water).
§ 215-24 STORMWATER QUALITY § 215-27
215:11
§ 215-28. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 215-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir discharges and
diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Rinsing of equipment.
(1) Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for their
intended purposes; and
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior to
rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials must be
removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum extent practicable
using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered
materials are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
(2) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to exterior,
undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to engines or other
enclosed machinery.
§ 215-27 SHREWSBURY CODE § 215-29
215:12
ARTICLE VI
Illicit Connections
§ 215-30. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Shrewsbury, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 215-31. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below are the
same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE—Waste and wastewater from humans or household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that discharges
domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater, or other industrial
waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Borough of Shrewsbury, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows,
or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but limited to, those
pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act [33
U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is owned or
operated by the Borough of Shrewsbury or other public body, and is designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems,
which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature for the
purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact with any raw material,
intermediate product (other than heat) or finished product. Noncontact cooling water
may, however, contain algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as
heat exchangers and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or
political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
§ 215-30 STORMWATER QUALITY § 215-31
215:13
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material,
intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product. Process
wastewater includes, but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than
noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and snow) that
runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by separate
storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
§ 215-32. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit connection to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Shrewsbury
any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater, or other industrial
waste (other than stormwater).
§ 215-33. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
§ 215-34. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
§ 215-31 SHREWSBURY CODE § 215-34
215:14
ARTICLE VII
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 1002]
§ 215-35. Purpose.
This article requires the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are in direct
contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities
on private property, to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic
bottles, cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Shrewsbury so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and prescribes penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 215-36. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this article clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in
the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is owned or
operated by the Borough of Shrewsbury or other public body, and is designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or
political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect stormwater
runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet,
and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams and
bodies of surface- or groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within the boundaries of
the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 215-37. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one single-family
dwelling) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of individual
potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a
thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact
with an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid and floatable
materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 215-38 below prior to the
completion of the project.
§ 215-35 STORMWATER QUALITY § 215-38
215:15
§ 215-38. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 215-37 above shall comply with the following standard
to control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
purposes of this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard
see § 215-38C below.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they use a grate
in pavement or another ground surface to collect stormwater from that surface into
a storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle safe grate,
which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an area of no
more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest
dimension.
(3) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate inlets, the
grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets, grates on
storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in
slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in that curb
opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or more clear
spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than
2.0 inches across the smallest dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would cause
inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably be overcome by
using additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting
facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is
designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable materials
that could not pass through one of the following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide (this option
does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel bars with oneinch
spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection determines,
pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C.
§ 215-38 SHREWSBURY CODE § 215-38
215:16
§ 215-39. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of
Shrewsbury.
§ 215-40. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to
meet the design standard.
§ 215-41. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is declared to be an
independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase, and the finding or holding
of any such portion of this article to be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any
cause, or reason, shall not affect any other portion of this article.
§ 215-42. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon final passage and publication according to law.
7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an undertaking that constitutes
an encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed
historic property.
§ 215-38 STORMWATER QUALITY § 215-42
215:17

Chapter 220
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 9, Art. II.
Bicycles — See Ch. 72.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 90.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 94.
§ 215-42 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 215-42
220:1

ARTICLE I
Street Openings
[Adopted 10-6-1964 by Ord. No. 212 (Ch. 79 of the 1973 Code); amended in its
entirety 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
§ 220-1. Permit required.
It shall not be lawful for any person or persons, firm or corporations, on or after the
effective date of this article, to excavate or make any opening in any street, road, avenue
or highway owned or under the jurisdiction of the Borough of Shrewsbury for any
purpose whatsoever without having first obtained a written permit on such forms as shall
be approved by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury. Permits shall not
be issued for a period in excess of one month, and expired permits may be renewed only
upon written request.
§ 220-2. Application for permit.
Applications for permits shall be filed in triplicate upon forms provided by the Borough
of Shrewsbury. Copies of each application shall be distributed to the permittee, Borough
Clerk and Department of Public Works Superintendent. The application shall contain the
following information: the date upon which the work shall commence; the dimensions
of the trench and its distance from the center of the roadway, together with a detailed
diagram pertaining thereto; a description of any special conditions; the name and address
of the individual upon whom notices are to be served; and such additional information as
the Mayor and Council by resolution shall require. The application shall further provide
that the applicant shall not open any section of the road, street or highway which is
not encompassed within said application except upon receipt or written approval by the
Street Superintendent.
§ 220-3. Application fee.
At the time of filing, each application for a street opening permit shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable application fee of $25. Said application fee shall be in the form of
cash or certified check.
§ 220-4. Security deposit.
A. At the time of filing, each application for a street opening permit shall be
accompanied by a performance guarantee, in the form of cash or certified check, to
ensure the satisfactory completion of work and restoration of the roadway surface.
The amount of performance guarantee required shall be the sum of the following:
(1) A street opening with a total area of disturbance of 10 square yards or less:
$500;
(2) Plus, for each square yard of disturbance greater than 10, to a maximum of 20:
$50 per square yard;
(3) Plus, for each square yard of disturbance greater than 20: $30 per square yard.
B. In lieu of a deposit by cash or certified check, the applicant may deposit a bond of
§ 220-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-4
220:3
§ 220-5. Inspection fee escrow deposit.
§ 220-6. Completion of other projects required.
The Mayor and Council may deny any applicant permission to open or excavate any
Borough street if the applicant has not completed the restoration of any other street
opening within the Borough to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer. Upon the
an amount computed by the Borough Engineer and approved by the Mayor and
Council. All reasonable and necessary costs for the estimation of the bond amount
shall be charged against the inspection fee escrow deposit, in addition to fees for
the actual inspection of work.
C. Where several permits are desired throughout the year, a blanket bond in a sum to
be fixed by the Borough Council, based on the estimated number of permits to be
issued, may be permitted in lieu of a separate bond or deposit for each individual
permit, the bond to be renewed annually. No permit shall become effective until the
deposit is made. Any permit issued may be on such other reasonable terms and
conditions as the Borough may require in the public interest. The deposit shall be
retained by the Borough until 30 days have elapsed from the date of completion by
the applicant of the work of restoring, at least to its original condition and
appearance, any section so excavated, and until that time shall be security for such
restoration as well as security for any other damage or other loss that the Borough
may incur or become subject to by reason of the excavation or any work connected
therewith. In the event that restoration is not completed within the time and on the
terms and conditions set forth in the application or permit or in the event that such
restoration is not completed in a workmanlike and approved manner and in
accordance with standard practice or in the event that the Borough incurs or
becomes subject to any damage or other loss by reason of the work or excavation,
then the deposit may be used and applied by the Borough to the Borough's work of
restoration or to any such damage or loss, and if the deposit is insufficient, then the
applicant shall become liable to the Borough for any excess cost over the deposit.
In the event that the deposit is entirely sufficient and there is a surplus, the Borough
shall repay to the applicant any balance remaining.
A. At the time of filing of an application for a street opening permit, the applicant shall
be required to post a cash inspection fee escrow deposit; the amount of such deposit
shall be computed based upon the sum of the following:
(1) A street opening with a total area of disturbance of 10 square yards or less:
$150;
(2) Plus, for each square yard of disturbance greater than 10, to a maximum of 20:
$20 per square yard;
(3) Plus, for each square yard of disturbance greater than 20: $10 per square yard.
B. The Borough shall perform, or cause to be performed, such inspections which are
deemed reasonable and necessary to protect the interest of the Borough. The actual
cost to the Borough of such inspections shall be paid from said deposit, and the
balance, if any, shall be returned to the applicant, without interest.
§ 220-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 220-6
220:4
completion of restoration to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer, the applicant shall
be issued a permit to proceed with its proposed street opening or excavation.
§ 220-7. Repaving of streets; notice to property owners, utilities and authorities.
§ 220-8. Adherence to rules and regulations required; revocation of permit.
§ 220-9. Protection of openings; lighting at night.
A. Notice. When the Borough intends to repave any street, written notice of the
proposed repaving shall be given by the Borough Clerk to all persons owning
property abutting that portion of the street to be repaved and to all public utilities
and authorities operating in the Borough. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail
to the address of the property owners as shown on the official tax records of the
Borough and to the utilities or authorities at their principal places of business. It
shall advise them of the nature of the proposed work and notify them that they have
15 days from the date of mailing to notify the Borough if they intend to open or
excavate the street within the next five years.
B. Failure to respond to notice. Following such notice, no permit to open or excavate
a repaved street shall be issued by the Borough Clerk within five years of such
repaving to any person receiving notice under this section unless the applicant can
clearly demonstrate that the public health or safety requires that the proposed work
be permitted or unless an emergency exists. If a permit is issued pursuant hereto to
open any repaved street less than five years old, a penalty charge shall be made for
the opening unless the work is of an emergent nature. The penalty charge shall be
on a sliding scale and shall be equal to 2% of the cost of restoring the opening for
each unelapsed month or fraction thereof of the five-year restricted period.
A. Every permittee under any permit issued hereunder shall fully comply with the
following rules, regulations and conditions, and, in addition to any other remedies
available to the Borough, the Borough shall have the right at any time when the
interest of the public requires it, upon failure of the permittee to comply with any
of said rules, regulations and conditions, to suspend or revoke any permit issued to
such permittee who has violated or is violating any of such rules, regulations or
conditions. Upon written notice of permit revocation, the applicant shall
immediately repair the affected street, or portions thereof, within 48 hours. Failure
of the applicant to make satisfactory repairs in the time prescribed shall cause the
Borough to utilize the performance guarantee and inspection fee escrow deposits to
fund the repair. Should the cost of the repairs exceed the amount(s) deposited,
including construction, engineering, or inspection costs, the applicant shall
immediately be liable for the balance. Any monies remaining in said accounts
following a permanent repair by the Borough shall be returned to the applicant.
B. Revocation may be by a written notice to that effect, served upon the permittee's
foreman or other person in charge of the work of the applicant or any other person
and at any other address furnished in the application. A hearing on any revocation
or suspension may be had before the Mayor and Council upon application for the
same being made by the permittee and upon giving five days' notice to that effect
and by serving said notice upon the Borough Clerk.
§ 220-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-9
220:5
§ 220-10. Permittees to save Borough harmless.
The permittee shall indemnify and save harmless the Borough of Shrewsbury, its
officers, agents and servants from and against any loss, injury or damage resulting from
the performance of the work encompassed by the permit.
§ 220-11. Time limits for openings; filling by Borough authorized.
A. The permittee shall be solely obligated to provide adequate traffic control measures
to ensure the safety of workmen and the public alike. Traffic control measures shall
meet the minimum requirements of the NJDOT Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction, latest edition. In doing the work, there shall be as little
interference as possible with travel along the road, and no greater part of the road
shall be opened at any time than shall be allowed by the Department of Public
Works Superintendent or other person in charge. Transverse openings involving the
full width of the highway shall be made so that only 1/2 of the highway shall be
obstructed at any one time. The work shall be scheduled and executed so as to
present a minimum of inconvenience to the traveling public. Where feasible, pipes,
mains and conduits shall be bored under all pavements. Tunnels may be driven if
and where directed.
B. If any opening herein authorized and of the type herein authorized is not completely
enclosed at night or is partially completed and not finished, then during the hours
of dark that such excavation continues in existence in such manner there shall be,
in addition to precautions required for the safety of the public during the daytime,
sufficient barriers which shall be lighted with sufficient lighting so as to enable the
public using said public street, road or highway to be warned of the presence of
same therein, which lights or flares so used shall be of such size and be so
constructed that they shall be visible for a distance of at least 200 feet from their
location and shall be placed at each end of the excavation so that there shall be at
least one of such lights or flares at each end thereof, which shall be located at a
distance not closer than 50 feet to said opening in both directions. This requirement
for one of such lights or flares at each end shall be considered to be a minimum
requirement in connection with any such excavation left unattended or exposed at
night and shall not relieve any person from otherwise providing other adequate
barriers and lights as may be reasonably required to safeguard the public. Should it
be necessary for the street opening to be carried out during periods of darkness,
adequate lighting shall be provided in accordance with NJDOT standards.
A. In no event shall any opening or excavation be made in any public street in the
Borough of Shrewsbury which shall be of a greater size or length than can be filled
in and completed within 48 hours by the available material and equipment located
at the site for the doing of said work.
B. In case the work has not been completed before the day of expiration as shown on
the permit and the permittee has not requested an extension of time, the Street
Superintendent or other person in charge may, if he deems it advisable, take steps
to backfill the trench and replace a permanent pavement over the opening for which
the permit has been issued, and if any extension of time beyond said date is needed
for the completion of the work, a new application must be filed if required by the
§ 220-9 SHREWSBURY CODE § 220-11
220:6
§ 220-12. Interference with utility lines and trees restricted.
The work shall be so conducted as not to interfere with any existing water main, sewer,
gas, telephone, electric or cable or their connections with houses or so as to damage any
existing trees or roots thereof until permission of the proper authorities shall have been
obtained.
§ 220-13. Backfilling and temporary paving.
§ 220-14. Replacement of permanent paving.
Department of Public Works Superintendent or other person in charge. All costs
to the Borough for the execution of said work, including engineering, inspection,
materials, equipment, labor, and all else reasonable and necessary to complete shall
be borne solely by the permittee.
A. All excavations within Borough streets shall be backfilled using dry granular
material found suitable by the Borough Engineer. Said backfill materials shall not
contain debris or excessive fine soil particles, and shall be compacted in six-inch
lifts to 95% Modified Proctor Density using mechanical means found satisfactory
by the Engineer. Backfilling and compaction shall be carried out in a workmanlike
manner in accordance with the minimum standards contained in the NJDOT
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition.
B. Trenches may not be flushed except under specific permission of the Borough
Engineer. If for any reason, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, immediate
replacement of permanent pavement is not feasible, the excavation shall be
backfilled and consolidated as specified above, after which not less than two inches
of cold patch material shall be placed at highway grade. Temporary riding surfaces
shall only be used when expressly permitted by the Borough, and in such case shall
be comprised of not less than six inches of dense graded aggregate base course, or
recycled concrete pavement meeting NJDOT material specifications, overlain by
two inches of cold-patch asphalt. The permittee is required to maintain the
temporary pavement in a satisfactory condition until permanent repairs are made.
A. After backfilling of the trench has been completed as above specified, replacement
of the permanent surface pavement will be made by the permittee as set forth
hereinafter. The permanent pavement repair shall be carried out in a workmanlike
manner and shall consist of hot mix asphalt, placed at the same depths as the
existing street; however, in no case shall the minimum pavement section be less
than the following:
(1) A six-inch-thick layer of dense graded aggregate base course place upon a
suitable prepared and compacted subgrade as specified above.
(2) A four-inch-thick layer of hot mix asphalt base course, Mix I-2.
(3) A two-inch-thick layer of hot mix asphalt surface course, Mix I-5.
B. Any street, road or highway in the Borough of Shrewsbury which requires opening
and repairing by the intent of this article, but which is not a bituminous surface
street, shall be repaired by the permittee in the manner as will be prescribed by the
§ 220-11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-14
220:7
§ 220-15. Replacement of grass, walks and curbs.
In case of an opening in a grass area, the permittee shall restore the affected grass area
with an approved quality of sod in the approved manner on a suitable base. Any walks,
curbs and appurtenant items damaged or affected herewith shall be restored in a manner
as will be approved by the Borough Engineer.
§ 220-16. Emergency work.
Under a situation deemed as a true emergency by the Borough Police Department or
other appropriate agency or official, any person, persons, firm or corporation may enter
upon any street in the Borough of Shrewsbury and make an opening without first making
application and obtaining a permit, without penalty, providing such application is made
and permit is obtained as soon as possible after the emergency subsides. No other portion
of this article is waived under this emergency provision.
§ 220-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
Borough Engineer at his discretion.
§ 220-14 SHREWSBURY CODE § 220-17
220:8
ARTICLE II
Street Acceptances
[Adopted 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346 as Ch. 77 of the 1973 Code]
§ 220-18. Requirements for acceptance. [Amended 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871]
No road, street, avenue or highway in the Borough of Shrewsbury dedicated to public
use shall be accepted as a public road, street, avenue or highway unless and until
all applicable requirements of Chapter 94, Zoning and Land Development, have been
complied with.
§ 220-18 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-18
220:9

ARTICLE III
Utility Poles on Public Streets
[Adopted 8-18-2008 by Ord. No. 920]
§ 220-19. Prohibited uses.
The following uses on utility poles located on public streets within the Borough of
Shrewsbury are prohibited:
§ 220-20. Violations and Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term
of imprisonment of not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service of not
exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof.
A. Attachment of temporary decorative lighting fixtures.
B. Attachment of signs, advertisements, messages or any other documentation of any
nature whatsoever.
§ 220-19 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 220-20
220:11

Chapter 226
SWIMMING POOLS AND HOT TUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 94.
Nuisances — See Ch. 163.
Soil removal — See Ch. 206.
§ 220-20 SWIMMING POOLS AND HOT TUBS § 220-20
226:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 226-1. Terms defined.
The words, terms or phrases listed below, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be
defined and interpreted as follows:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Board of Health.
ALTER—Includes any major replacement or repair to any portion or unit of an existing
swimming pool.
APPROVED — Accepted or acceptable under applicable specifications stated or cited
in this code or accepted as suitable for the proposed use under procedures and powers of
administration delegated in this code.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — A licensed health officer, sanitary inspector or any other
properly qualified and licensed person who is delegated to function within specified
limits as the agent of the administrative authority.
CONSTRUCT — Includes building or installing a new swimming pool or enlarging an
existing swimming pool or any of its facilities.
LOCATE — Designating the site or place of a swimming pool.
OPERATE — To conduct, maintain or otherwise provide facilities for bathing at
swimming pools.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies as well as individuals.
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL — A swimming pool that is operated for profit
and open to the public or to a limited number of members and their guests, upon payment
of an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, annual or other fee or operated as a service.
SWIMMING POOL, NONCOMMERCIAL — A swimming pool operated as part of
the common property of a homeowners' association for the use and enjoyment of the
residents of a specific development.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE—A swimming pool located on a single-family lot with
a residence on it and used as an accessory to the residence, and said pool is utilized with
no admission charges and not for the purpose of profit.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — The same as "swimming pool, commercial."
§ 226-1 SWIMMING POOLS AND HOT TUBS § 226-1
226:3

ARTICLE II
Private Hot Tubs and Swimming Pools
§ 226-2. Permits required.
It shall be unlawful to use, maintain, establish or construct a hot tub, noncommercial or
private swimming pool without first obtaining a zoning permit and construction permit
from the appropriate agencies.
§ 226-3. Street openings.
In the event that the drainage shall be by discharge into a municipal storm drain, no street
opening shall be permitted unless there is compliance with the Borough ordinance or
ordinances pertaining to street openings.150
§ 226-4. Construction materials; maintenance standards.
All materials used in the construction of private swimming pools shall be approved by
the Construction Official as provided in § 94-8.45 of Chapter 94, Zoning and Land
Development. The bottom and sides of the pool shall be either white or a light color,
except that aluminum paint shall not be permitted. Construction and design of said pool
shall be such that the same may be maintained and operated as to be clean and sanitary
at all times. The owner of every private swimming pool shall be responsible to maintain
said pool in such condition as to prevent breaks in the pool chassis or water from pool
overflowing onto adjacent public or private property.
§ 226-5. Discharge of pool water into potable water supplies prohibited.
There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or private water supply
system and such pools at a point below the maximum flow line of the pool or to a
recirculating or heating system of a pool unless such physical connection is so installed
and operated that no pool water can be discharged or siphoned into a potable water
supply system.
§ 226-6. Drainage of pool water.
§ 226-7. Disinfection, filtering and bacteriological standards.
All private swimming pools shall be so constructed, installed and maintained as to
provide necessary equipment for chlorination and other disinfection and filtering,
A. No water from a swimming pool shall be emptied or discharged so that the same
flows into, on or along a public street or road.
B. All private swimming pools hereafter constructed shall be provided with not over
one two-inch-diameter galvanized iron pipe or approved equal drain so located as
to completely drain the pool. No filtering backwash water can be recirculated but
must be disposed of on the property.
C. The pool shall be so situated that surface water shall drain away from the pool.
150.Editor's Note: See Ch. 220, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 226-2 SWIMMING POOLS AND HOT TUBS § 226-7
226:5
including a hair and lint catcher, said filtering to comply with the following approved
bacteriological standards. Water treatment facilities shall be located below grade or, if
above grade, be enclosed by a suitable structure.
§ 226-8. Location restrictions, provisions applicable to all pools and hot tubs.
§ 226-9. Lighting restrictions.
§ 226-10. Fencing requirements.
All private outdoor swimming pools and hot tubs shall be surrounded by an appropriate
pool barrier in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
A. Location restrictions.
(1) All types of swimming pools to be located within residential side or rear yards
are governed by the provisions of § 94-8.45 of Chapter 94, Zoning and Land
Development.
(2) Any hot tub shall be located only in the rear yard of a single-family residence
and shall meet the setback requirements for a swimming pool in the zoning
district in which it is located. Where the hot tub is located on a corner lot, the
rear yard shall be deemed to be that portion of the property to the rear of the
residence, but in all other respects, the lot and the setbacks shall satisfy the
requirements of corner lots established in Chapter 94.
(3) Hot tubs may be located within the dwelling unit or they may be located on a
porch, deck or patio, provided the hot tub is within an area enclosed by a fence
or wall that is not less than four feet in height. Where the hot tub is located on
a patio or deck attached to the principal building.
B. General provisions.
(1) No private residential pool or hot tub shall be installed on any lot unless said
lot shall contain a residence.
(2) Pools and hot tubs shall otherwise be installed, operated and used in
accordance with other health and safety ordinances regarding water filtration,
circulation and treatment.
(3) Outdoor hot tubs shall be required to have a cover capable of being locked.
A. No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with said pool
in such a manner as to be a nuisance to or an annoyance to neighboring properties.
B. All outdoor light fixtures for a swimming pool or hot tub shall comply with the
requirements of § 94-8.22 of Chapter 94, Zoning and Land Development.
C. No overhead electric lines shall be carried across any swimming pool or wading
area.
§ 226-7 SHREWSBURY CODE § 226-11
226:6
§ 226-11. Applicability of article provisions.
The provisions of this article shall apply to private swimming pools now existing which
are located 200 feet or nearer to any property line, and to any private swimming pools
hereafter constructed; provided, however, that as to swimming pools now existing and
not enclosed by a fence, there is hereby established a period of 160 days from the
effective date hereof within which to construct such fence.
§ 226-12. Compliance and abatement of nuisances required.
Every private swimming pool constructed or to be constructed in the Borough shall at
all times comply with the requirements of this article and all health authorities having
jurisdiction on the premises, and any violation, nuisance or hazard to health which may
exist or develop in or in consequence of or in connection with any such swimming pool
shall forthwith be abated and removed by the person in possession of such pool upon
receipt of notice from the Health Officer or other designated person so requiring.
§ 226-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof. Each day that such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
§ 226-11 SWIMMING POOLS AND HOT TUBS § 226-13
226:7

ARTICLE III
Commercial, Noncommercial and Public Hot Tubs and Swimming Pools
§ 226-14. Adoption of standards.
A code establishing a swimming pool code for commercial, noncommercial and public
hot tubs and swimming pools is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to
26:3-69.6 and 26:3-92 and 26:3-93. A copy of said code is annexed hereto and made a
part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein set forth.151
§ 226-15. License required.
No person shall operate commercial, noncommercial or public hot tubs and swimming
pools until a license shall have been issued by the Board of Health of the Borough of
Shrewsbury.
§ 226-16. License fee.
The licensing fee is hereby fixed as follows: license to operate commercial,
noncommercial or public hot tubs and/or swimming pools, $100 per year.
§ 226-17. Expiration of license; renewal applications.
The license for the operation of commercial, noncommercial or public hot tubs and/or
swimming pools shall expire on December 31 of each year and application for renewal
thereof shall be submitted, together with the required fee, prior to January 1 of each year.
§ 226-18. Denial or suspension of license.
A license to operate commercial, noncommercial or public hot tubs and/or swimming
pools required by this article may be denied or suspended by the Board of Health of the
Borough of Shrewsbury for failure to comply with the Swimming Pool Code. The Board
of Health shall afford the person whose license to operate has been denied or suspended
an opportunity to be heard in public hearing and, following this hearing, to be informed
of the decision of the Board of Health.
§ 226-19. Right of entry; enforcement.
A. The Borough of Shrewsbury and its agents or employees, including but not limited
to its Health Officer, shall have the right of entry, at any reasonable hour, into and
upon any public or private building or premises for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of such code and of this article, or determining whether such provisions
are being complied with and obeyed. No person shall oppose such entry or hinder
or interfere with the Borough of Shrewsbury or any of its agents or employees or
its Health Officer, all as aforesaid, in the performance of their duties.
B. This article shall be enforced by and in the name of the Borough of Shrewsbury by
proceedings instituted and prosecuted in the Municipal Court of the Borough of
Shrewsbury.
151.Editor's Note: A copy of said code is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 226-14 SWIMMING POOLS AND HOT TUBS § 226-20
226:9
§ 226-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof. Each day that such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
§ 226-20 SHREWSBURY CODE § 226-20
226:10
Chapter 231
TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hours of business — See Ch. 139. Licenses — See Ch. 152.
§ 231-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BODY PIERCER — One who engages in body piercing.
BODY PIERCING — Refers to the piercing of any portion of the human body for
placement of any type of jewelry or any other ornamentation, other than ear lobe
piercing.
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — Written approval from the Health Officer or his/
her authorized representative that said tattooing or body piercing establishment has been
inspected and meets all of the terms of this chapter.
ESTABLISHMENT — The premises wherein tattooing or body piercing is performed.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Shrewsbury Borough Health Officer or his/her authorized
representative.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, company, corporation or association that owns
or operates an establishment where tattooing or body piercing is performed and any
individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing on the person of another.
PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION — A document or other written or memorialized
instrument setting forth the presenter's true name, address, correct age or other
identifying data, examples of which include but are not limited to driver's license, credit
card issued by a national company, birth certificate, passport, employment identification
card or any instrument issued by a governmental agency setting forth the pertinent and
required information.
SANITIZE — A bacterial treatment of cleaned surfaces by a process which is effective
in reducing the number of microorganisms to a safe level.
SINGLE USE — Products or items that are disposed of after use on each client,
including, but not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or
plastic cups, gauze and sanitary covering, razors, needles, scalpel blades, stencils and ink
cups.
STERILIZATION — The destruction of all forms of microbiotic life, including spores,
through the use of a steam sterilizer or autoclave.
TATTOO ARTIST — One who engages in tattooing.
TATTOO, TATTOOED or TATTOOING — Refers to any method of placing designs,
letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any marks under the skin with ink or any other
§ 226-20 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 231-1
231:1
substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of needles or any other
instruments designed to puncture the skin.
§ 231-2. Licensing regulations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any operator to engage in the business of operating an
establishment where tattooing or body piercing is performed without first obtaining
a license from the Shrewsbury Health Department to engage in such business in
accordance with the provisions hereof.
B. An application for an initial license shall be made to the Health Department of the
Borough of Shrewsbury accompanied by a fee in the amount of $200.
(1) Application for licenses under this chapter shall be made to the Shrewsbury
Health Department, in writing, upon such printed forms as the Shrewsbury
Health Department shall prescribe and prepare. Such forms as the Board of
Health shall prescribe and prepare may be obtained from the Shrewsbury
Health Department and shall be signed by the applicant under oath and shall
contain the following information:
(a) If an individual, the full name, age, sex and residence address at the time
of application.
(b) If a corporation, the full corporate name, the date and the state of
incorporation, address of the place or places of business, the name and
address of the registered agent and the name, address and age of any
principal owning more than 10% of the stock.
(c) If a partnership, the information required by Subsection B(1)(a) above for
each partner and the name under which the business is being conducted.
(d) The apprenticeship, training and/or business experience of the applicant
in the business or occupation for which the license is sought.
(e) The length of time that the applicant has been engaged in such business
or occupation.
(f) Whether the applicant carries public liability insurance and, if so, the
amount of said coverage and the company providing such liability
insurance.
(g) Name, address and age of every tattoo artist and/or body piercer to be
initially employed to conduct the service. This shall be a continuing
obligation for licensees to update once a year the list of tattoo artists and/
or body piercers employed by the establishment.
(h) The date upon which the Construction Official has approved the location
for business.
C. No ownership rights in any license or renewal thereof granted under the provisions
of this chapter shall be assignable or transferable without the permission of the
Health Department whose permission shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any
change of ownership shall require a new application and license with payment of
§ 231-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 231-2
231:2
§ 231-3. General provisions.
fees.
D. The renewal license fee for engaging in the business of operating an establishment
subject to this chapter within the Borough of Shrewsbury shall be $100 per year.
All licenses shall expire on the last day of each calendar year. All applications for
renewal must be presented to the Health Department in writing on a form prescribed
by the Health Department within 30 days of the end of the calendar year.
E. All establishments existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter will be
considered renewal applications, provided that they apply for renewal of said
license within one month after the effective date of this chapter. Establishments
failing to apply within the specified time period will be considered new applicants
and will be subject to the provision of Subsection B of this section.
F. If renovations of the tattoo or body piercing establishment occur, plans must be
submitted to the Shrewsbury Health Department and the applicant will be required
to comply with § 231-4 herein, as well as all other applicable codes, regulations or
laws.
G. In the event that an applicant fails to qualify for a license under this chapter, the fee
herein shall not be refunded.
H. The license issued pursuant to this section shall be posted conspicuously in the
place of business or location named therein.
I. All establishments shall manage contaminated (body fluids) contact waste materials
as medical waste pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26-A.8. All establishments shall be
licensed with the State of New Jersey as a medical waste generator, pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 7:26-A.8, prior to approval from the Shrewsbury Health Department.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for anyone or any tattoo or body piercing
business to tattoo or body pierce any individual under 18 years of age without
authorization signed by the parent or legal guardian, witnessed and attested to by a
notary public. The operator shall be responsible for maintaining the original consent
form and copies of all consent information for a period of two years beyond the
recipient's 18th birthday. The operator shall obtain a copy of two forms of personal
identification of such individual being tattooed and/or pierced.
B. Each person wishing to receive a tattoo or body piercing must first sign a consent
form presented by the operator, the content of which has been approved by the
Shrewsbury Health Department. This form shall commence with the following
statement: "I swear, certify or affirm under the penalties of false swearing or perjury
the following information." The consent form shall contain language above the
applicant's signature which shall read, "I have read and understand the contents of
this form, and acknowledge that an operator of the above-named tattoo and/or body
piercing establishment has reviewed the same with me. I have presented to the
operator the following forms of identification which I represent, warrant and
guarantee are truthful and correct and are identification that relates to me. I further
represent that I am an adult over the age of 18, and am not currently intoxicated or
under the influence of any narcotic substance, and make this statement entirely of
§ 231-2 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 231-3
231:3
§ 231-4. Sanitary requirements; design and layout specifications.
my own free will and sound mind." The form shall also include a signature line for
the operator above which the following language shall appear: "I have reviewed the
language of this form with the applicant who has represented to me that he/she fully
understands the contents of same, and that the information provided is truthful; in
addition, I have reviewed the documentation presented by the applicant with respect
to his/her age." If the applicant appears to be visibly intoxicated or disoriented, the
operator must refuse the applicant.
C. All records regarding tattoos or body piercing are to be maintained for a minimum
of two years. Information required for each applicant referred to in Subsection B is
to include the name, age, date of birth, health history, including allergies and
medical conditions, home address and telephone numbers of the applicant as well
as the name of the person who did the tattoo or body piercing, the design, location
and the date of the tattoo or type of body piercing done.
A. Each tattoo or body piercing facility shall have a bathroom accessible to the public
and staff and a stainless steel sink in a separately designated sterilization room
which is to be used by staff only as required by Subsection I of this section. The
sink in the sterilization room shall be connected to hot and cold running water. Each
bathroom shall be equipped with a commode and a sink, with the sink being
connected to hot and cold running water. Soap and sanitary towels, or other
approved hand drying devices, shall be available at the sink in the bathroom(s) and
sterilization room at all times. Common towels are prohibited. Employee hand
washing signs shall be posted in each bathroom and sterilization room. There shall
be no door requiring the use of a tattoo artist/body piercer's hand in going from a
hand-washing area to a work area.
B. The chair or seat reserved for the person receiving the tattoo or body piercing shall
be a material that is smooth and easily cleanable and constructed of material that is
nonabsorbent. Any surface on the chair that becomes exposed to blood or body
fluids must be cleaned and sanitized prior to use by the next customer.
C. The worktable or counter used by the tattoo artist or body piercer shall be smooth
and easily cleanable and constructed of material that is nonabsorbent. There shall
be a nonpermeable juncture between a table/counter and a wall if the table/counter
is to be placed against a wall. This table/counter must be cleaned and sanitized
(utilizing a method approved by the Shrewsbury Health Department) between
customers.
D. The walls in the tattooing or body piercing area shall be smooth and easily cleanable
and constructed of a nonabsorbent material.
E. The floor in the tattooing or body piercing area shall be of durable material that is
nonabsorbent and is smooth and easily cleanable. Floors shall be kept clean.
F. Lighting within the tattoo or body piercing area shall be adequate so as to provide a
minimum of 100 footcandles in all areas. Such illumination shall be reasonably free
from glare and distributed to avoid shadows.
G. Each establishment must contain at least one enclosed privacy room so as to protect
§ 231-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 231-4
231:4
§ 231-5. Regulation of tattoo or body piercing parlors.
the confidentiality of the applicant and revelation of the service provided. The
privacy room must be used when tattooing or body piercing is to be performed on
either female breasts or the buttocks or groin areas of males or females. The privacy
room shall have a swinging-type door for ingress and egress and be separated
from other areas of the establishment by either walls or durable partitions, or other
materials able to be sanitized, extending at least six feet in height and so designed
to prevent visual observation of the customer and the tattoo artist from any other
area by any persons other than the customer and the tattoo artist or body piercer.
H. Any surfaces in the establishment that become exposed to blood or body fluids must
be cleaned and sanitized, utilizing a method approved by the Shrewsbury Health
Department.
I. Cleaning, disinfection and sterilization activities must be conducted in a physically
separate work area. This area should have a clearly defined work pattern from
soiled to clean in order to prevent cross-contamination. All sterile equipment must
be stored in enclosed cabinets outside of the processing room. All containers,
regardless of size, must be clearly marked with the name of the product.
J. Proper waste receptacles shall be provided, and waste shall be disposed of at
appropriate intervals.
K. The use of tobacco in any form in the establishment is prohibited.
L. The consumption of food or drink shall be prohibited in the tattoo/body piercing
work areas of the parlor.
M. Only articles considered necessary for the routine and customary operation and
maintenance of the tattoo/body piercing business shall be permitted in the tattoo or
body piercing establishment.
N. No live bird, turtle, snake, dog, cat or other animal shall be permitted in any area
used for the conduct of tattooing and/or body piercing operations or in the
immediate open, adjacent areas, including the main waiting area and the public
access to the toilet room, with the exception of animals utilized for the assistance of
the blind and/or deaf.
O. Effective measures shall be taken to protect the entrance into the parlor and the
breeding or presence on the premises of insects and rodents.
(1) Anyone using pesticides must be certified by the State of New Jersey for
application of same.
(2) The use of pesticides shall not result in the contamination of dyes, inks, ink
reservoirs, needles, jewelry or gloves or any equipment used in connection
with the operation.
P. Proper ventilation and exhaust will be provided.
A. Tattoo artist or body piercer/operator certificate.
§ 231-4 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 231-5
231:5
(1) No person shall practice the art of tattooing or body piercing within the
Borough of Shrewsbury without first obtaining a certificate from the
Department.
(2) All certificates shall automatically expire on December 31 annually.
(3) No certificate to practice the art of tattooing or body piercing shall be issued
unless:
(a) The applicant furnishes proof of having previously held such a certificate;
or
(b) The applicant furnishes proof of having practiced the art of tattooing or
body piercing as a full-time occupation, which may take the form of a
letter from a tattoo and/or body piercing establishment representing that
the applicant is/was employed by said establishment as a tattoo artist or
body piercer, or that the applicant presently operates or had in the past
operated a tattoo or body piercing establishment, or had in the past or
presently maintains an ownership interest in a business, partnership or
corporation which operates or operated a tattoo or body piercing
establishment; and
(c) The applicant furnishes proof of having attended bloodborne pathogen
training which includes principles of disinfection and sterilization.
Compliance with this subsection will be waived for guest tattoo artists
retained by the establishment so long as the customer upon whom the
guest tattoo artist is to provide the service is provided with prior written
notice that the guest tattoo artist has not attended bloodborne pathogen
training, including principles of disinfection and sterilization; and
(d) Proof of Hepatitis B preexposure vaccination or proof of immunity is
recommended for all tattoo artists or body piercers. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, all tattoo artists or body piercers shall provide the Shrewsbury
Health Department with one of the following:
[1] Proof of Hepatitis B preexposure vaccination or proof of immunity;
or
[2] A letter or statement from a physician certifying that the individual
does not have Hepatitis B and the vaccination is contraindicated; or
[3] A written statement or letter signed by the tattoo artist or body
piercer declining to provide the information sought in the
immediately preceding Subsection A(3)(d)[1] or [2].
(e) The operator shall develop operating guidelines, in accordance with the
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA), that will reduce the likelihood of accidental
needle sticks, and establish a monitoring system for those person(s)
accidentally stuck by a needle. The guidelines shall be submitted to the
Shrewsbury Health Department for approval prior to the issuance of a
license and subsequent renewals of license; and
§ 231-5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 231-5
231:6
(f) The applicant pays the initial and annual certificate fee of $25.
(4) Each application for a certificate shall set forth:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) A physical description of the premises where tattooing/body piercing is
to be done.
(c) Such other information as the Department may require.
(5) Certificates shall be issued unless the Shrewsbury Health Department
demonstrates that the tattoo/body piercing operator has failed to comply with
the provisions of this section after being afforded reasonable opportunity to
cure any deficiencies found in its application.
(6) All certificates shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the
provisions of this section as well as other applicable provisions.
(7) The certificate shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where it
may be readily observed by patrons.
(8) The operator of a tattoo/body piercing establishment shall submit a written
aftercare plan to the Shrewsbury Health Department. Body piercing
establishments will submit an aftercare plan specific to each body site intended
to pierce.
(9) Before working on each patron, each tattoo artist or body piercer shall scrub
and wash his/her hands thoroughly with hot water and antiseptic soap.
Fingernails shall be kept clean and short.
(10) Disposable vinyl or latex gloves shall be worn by the tattoo artist or body
piercer during tattoo preparation and application to prevent contact with blood
or body fluids. Universal precautions described by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) shall be followed. All materials shall be
disposed of in accordance with Subsection E of this section after contact with
each patron. Hands shall be washed immediately after removal of gloves. Any
skin surface that has contact with blood shall be washed immediately.
(11) Immediately after tattooing or body piercing a patron, the tattooist or body
piercer shall advise the patron on the care of the tattoo or body piercing in a
written form and shall instruct the patron to consult a physician at the first sign
of infection of the tattoo or body piercing. Printed instructions regarding these
points shall be given to each patron.
(12) All medically diagnosed infections resulting from the practice of tattooing or
body piercing which become known to the operator shall be promptly reported
to the Health Officer by the person owning or operating the tattoo or body
piercing establishment or by the tattoo artist or body piercer within 24 hours.
(13) Employee health.
(a) The establishment shall comply with all the current OSHA requirements
applicable to its operation.
§ 231-5 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 231-5
231:7
(b) No person affected with infected wounds, open and infected sores and
acute respiratory infection shall work in any area of a tattoo or body
piercing establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of
contaminating tattoo or body piercing equipment, supplies or work
surfaces.
B. Skin preparation.
(1) Tattooing or body piercing shall be done only on normal, healthy skin surface
that is free of moles or infection.
(2) Only safety razors with disposable blades shall be used for the skin
preparation. Blades shall be disposed of according to Subsection E of this
section after each use, and new blades shall be used for each patron.
(3) Following shaving, the area shall be thoroughly cleansed and scrubbed with
tincture of green soap or its equivalent and warm water. Before placing the
design or body piercing on the patron's skin, the area shall be treated with 70%
alcohol and allowed to air dry. Piercing of mucous membranes (i.e., oral,
nasal, vaginal, etc.) shall be treated with an industry appropriate and medically
indicated antiseptic solution prior to the procedure.
(4) Only petroleum jelly (United States of America or National Formulary) or
antiseptic ointment shall be applied to the tattoo area prior to tattooing or body
piercing. The ointment shall be applied in a sanitary manner, disposing of the
utensil after spreading. Collapsible tubes of ointment or jelly may also be used.
C. Tattooing or body piercing.
(1) The use of single-service hectographic stencils shall be required for applying
a tattoo outline to the skin. Multi-use stencils shall be prohibited.
(2) Only nontoxic dyes or pigments may be used. Premixed sterile materials are
preferred. Premixed dyes shall be used without adulteration of the
manufacturer's original formula. The operator shall represent to the
Shrewsbury Health Department, at the time of license application and renewal,
that to the best of his/her knowledge the dyes and pigments used in tattoo
applications are of nontoxic origins and shall submit supporting
documentation on same. The operator shall also present to the Shrewsbury
Health Department labels or manufacturer's data sheets relating to dyes and
pigments or such other written documentation as is applicable to the dyes and
pigments that they are nontoxic or nonhazardous to human health.
(3) Single-service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used for each
patron and the container disposed of immediately after completing work on
each patron.
(4) The completed tattoo shall be washed with sterile gauze or single-use paper
tissue and a solution of tincture of green soap or its equivalent, then disinfected
with 70% alcohol. The area shall be allowed to air dry and antiseptic ointment
shall be applied and spread with sterile gauze and sterile dressing attached.
(5) Upon completion of piercing of the mucous membranes, the area shall be
§ 231-5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 231-5
231:8
disinfected with the industry appropriate and medically indicated solutions.
D. Needles, instruments and dyes.
(1) Only single-service sterilized needles and needle bars shall be used for each
patron.
(2) If solder is used in manufacturing needles, needle bars or needle tubes, it must
be free of lead.
(3) Any needle that penetrates the skin of the tattoo artist or body piercer shall be
immediately disposed of in accordance with Subsection E of this section.
(4) Needle tubes shall be ultrasonically cleaned in a solution which is alconox or
its equivalent, then scrubbed with a clean brush, then rinsed clean. Needle
tubes shall be sterilized in accordance with Subsection D(5) of this section,
stored in sterile bags and maintained in a dry, closed area.
(5) Each item to be sterilized shall be individually wrapped using chemical
indicator bags or chemical indicator strips. Sterilization shall be by steam
sterilization/autoclave. The autoclave shall be well maintained with a tightfitting
gasket and clean interior. The manufacturer's operating instructions and
sterilization specifications shall be at hand. The sterilizer shall conform to the
manufacturer's specifications with regard to temperature, pressure and time of
sterilization cycle. Proper functioning of sterilization cycles shall be verified
by the monthly use of biologic indicators (i.e., spore tests). A record of these
monthly test results shall be available, and a test may be required to be done
during any inspections. Establishments are required to maintain an autoclave
on site, with a minimum interior chamber that is no less than seven inches in
diameter and 15 inches in depth.
(6) If the primary source of sterilization malfunctions, the Shrewsbury Health
Department shall be notified no later than four hours after the deficiency. In an
emergent situation, the Shrewsbury Health Department may approve alternate
sterilization techniques.
(7) Needles and bars shall not be bent or broken prior to disposal. Tattoo artists or
body piercers shall take precautions to prevent injuries from contaminated
needles or tubes.
(8) All dyes and inks shall be from a source of supply which complies with
applicable United States Food and Drug Administration regulations when
available. Dyes and inks are to be used in accordance with the manufacturer's
directions and are not to be adulterated with any substance not recommended
by the manufacturer.
(9) Immediately before applying a tattoo, the quantity of dye to be used for the
tattoo shall be transferred from the dye bottles and placed into sterile, singleuse
paper cups or plastic caps. Upon completion of the tattoo, these single-use
cups or caps and their contents shall be discarded.
(10) Excess dye or ink shall be removed from the skin with a single-service wiping
tissue or sterile gauze which shall be discarded after each use.
§ 231-5 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING § 231-5
231:9
§ 231-6. Temporary establishments prohibited.
Temporary tattoo/body piercing establishments are prohibited.
§ 231-7. Violations and penalties.
E. Disposal of waste. All used needles, needle bars or other disposable tools used in
the tattooing process, as well as gloves, gauze and other materials saturated with
blood or body fluids, shall be removed through the use of a licensed medical waste
hauler.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. Each day that the violation exists is
considered to be a separate offense.
B. After due notice and hearing, the Health Department may suspend or revoke any
license issued under this chapter for violation of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 231-5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 231-7
231:10
Chapter 236
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 90. Licenses — See Ch. 152.
§ 236-1. Definitions.
The following words and phrases and their derivatives, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meaning hereafter ascribed to them:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Shrewsbury, in the County of Monmouth and State of
New Jersey.
CRUISING — The practice of driving about the streets of the Borough with a taxicab
so as to solicit passengers or to bring the presence of the taxicab to the attention of
prospective passengers. A taxicab driving along the streets of this Borough for any
purpose other than while transporting a passenger, going to a definite destination by
the most direct route in response to a call for a taxicab by a prospective passenger, or
returning by the most direct route to the taxicab's home terminus after discharging a
passenger, or going to or from the said terminus to the driver's home by the most direct
route shall be prima facie evidence of cruising.
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab within this Borough.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section of this chapter,
unless otherwise stated in this chapter.
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB—Transporting in such taxicab one or more persons for
hire along any of the streets of this Borough. Accepting a passenger to be transported for
hire within this Borough or from a point within this Borough to a point outside of the
Borough limits, or discharging a passenger transported for hire from a point outside of
the Borough limits to a point within the Borough limits, shall be deemed to be operation
of a taxicab within the meaning thereof. The operation of a taxicab in any of the abovedescribed
manners by one other than the owner shall be deemed operation by the owner
thereof as well as by the person actually driving the same. The transportation of any
person other than the owner or driver in any motor vehicle bearing sign therein or
thereon using the words "taxi," "taxicab," "cab" or "hack" shall be prima facie evidence
of operation.
OWNER — Any person, corporation or association in whose name title to any taxicab
is registered with the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles, or who appears in such
records to be the conditional vendee or lessee thereof.
PERSON — Includes the plural as well as the singular, and artificial as well as natural
persons.
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motorcar, commonly called "taxi," engaged in the
business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out, announced or advertised to
§ 231-7 TAXICABS § 236-1
236:1
operate or run, or which is operated or run, over any of the streets within the Borough
of Shrewsbury, and which particularly accepts and discharges such persons as may offer
themselves for transportation from points or places to points or places within or without
the said Borough.
§ 236-2. Licenses required for taxicabs and drivers.
From and after the effective date of this chapter no person shall operate any taxicab
within this Borough unless both the taxicab and the driver thereof are licensed pursuant
to this chapter and conform to all the provisions hereof, provided that such taxicab
licenses as are now issued and outstanding shall remain effective until their respective
expiration dates and the taxicabs thereby licensed shall be deemed to be licensed
pursuant to the terms of this chapter, until such licenses are surrendered, suspended or
revoked or have expired; provided, nevertheless, that in all other particulars said taxicabs
and their owners shall be subject to all the provisions hereof.
§ 236-3. Classes of license.
There are hereby established two classes of taxicab licenses, to be known as "taxicab
driver's license" and "taxicab owner's license," respectively.
§ 236-4. Purpose of driver's license.
A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the person named therein to operate within this
Borough any taxicab duly licensed hereunder until the said license either expires or is
surrendered, suspended or revoked, and shall not be transferable.
§ 236-5. Purpose of owner's license.
A taxicab owner's license shall entitle the taxicab therein described to be operated in this
Borough by a driver duly licensed hereunder until the said license either expires or is
surrendered, suspended or revoked, and shall not be transferable.
§ 236-6. Expiration date of license.
Any license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall expire at 12:00 midnight of
the 31st day of December of the year in which it was issued, unless sooner surrendered,
suspended or revoked.
§ 236-7. Maximum number of licenses. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346;
4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 981]
The maximum number of taxicab owner’s licenses shall not exceed five at any time, and
the maximum number of taxicab driver’s licenses shall not exceed five per owner.
§ 236-8. Applications for licenses.
All applications for the issuance or renewal of any license of either class shall be made to
the Borough Council on forms adopted by said Council and obtained from the Borough
Clerk and designed to elicit information respecting the identification, responsibility and
law-abiding habits of the applicant.
§ 236-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § 236-9
236:2
§ 236-9. Application information; verification; submission of fee.
Each applicant for a license of any class shall supply the information requested on the
application in full and verify the correctness thereof by his oath or affirmation and
thereafter file the completed application with the Borough Clerk, together with the full
amount of the proper fee hereinafter fixed therefor.
§ 236-10. Photograph required of driver's license applicants.
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall file with his application two
photographs, each 3 1/2 inches by 3 1/2 inches in size, clearly depicting the facial
features of the applicant, both of which photographs shall thereupon become the property
of the Borough and be retained with the application form unless the license shall be
issued, in which event one of such photographs shall be permanently affixed to the
license card in a space provided therein.
§ 236-11. Fingerprints and personal driving record required of driver’s license
applicants. [Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 981]
§ 236-12. Owners to have registered business office and telephone.
Each applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall have a regularly registered business
office and shall therein have a telephone operating.
§ 236-13. Insurance policy or bond required of owners. [Amended 4-16-2012 by
Ord. No. 981]
Every applicant for a taxicab owner’s license shall submit the insurance policy or bond
required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 and 48:16-4, covering the taxicab to be licensed, and shall
execute and deliver to the Borough Clerk concurrently with the filing of the policy
A. Every applicant for a taxicab driver’s license shall submit to be fingerprinted by an
agency recognized by the Division of State Police. The applicant shall provide
written consent to the performance of a criminal history record background check.
The Chief of Police or his designee is authorized to receive the criminal history
background information results from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the
Division of State Police. The applicant shall bear the cost of the background check.
An applicant shall be disqualified for operating or driving a taxicab if the
applicant’s criminal history background check reveals a conviction of a crime. For
purposes of this section, a crime shall be an offense that is a violation of Title 2C of
the New Jersey Statutes.152 If the Police Department feels there are reasons to deny
the taxicab driver’s license, they shall notify the applicant within 10 days, and the
applicant may choose to appeal.
B. Driver’s license applicants must obtain a copy of their personal driving record from
the New Jersey State Department of Motor Vehicles. Applicants must be drivers in
good standing and must never have been found in violation of Title 39 of New
Jersey Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulation. Applicants applying for a Borough
taxicab driver’s license must be able to show a valid New Jersey driver’s license.
152.Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:1-1 et seq.
§ 236-9 TAXICABS § 236-13
236:3
or bond aforesaid, a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint
the Borough Chief Financial Officer his true and lawful attorney for the purpose of
acknowledging service of any process out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be
served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the insurance policy
or bond filed, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-5. Minimum liability insurance to be
provided by all taxicab owners shall be $1,500,000/ $3,000,000.
§ 236-14. Certificates of compliance; posting required.
The Borough Clerk, upon filing of the required insurance policy or bond, shall issue
a certificate in duplicate, showing that the owner of the taxicab has complied with
the terms of the statutes aforementioned, which certificate shall recite the name of
the insurance company, the number and date of expiration of the policy or bond, a
description of the taxicab insured thereunder, and the registration number of the same.
The duplicate certificate shall be filed with the Department of Motor Vehicles before any
such car is licensed as a taxicab. The original certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous
place within the taxicab.
§ 236-15. Annual fees for licenses. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346;
4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 981]
The annual fee for each taxicab driver’s license hereafter issued or any renewal thereof
shall be $50 for each year or portion of a year for which the license is issued or renewed,
and the annual fee for each taxicab owner’s license issued or renewed shall be $100 for
each taxicab for each year or portion of a year for which the license is issued or renewed,
and all of such licenses shall be under the charge and control of the person applying
therefor, and he shall be responsible for the operation of all cars so licensed to him. Such
fees shall not be prorated nor any part thereof refunded for any reason, except that upon
the denial of an application for issuance or renewal of license by the Borough Council,
90% of the fee deposited shall be returned to the applicant and 10% shall be retained by
the Borough as compensation for investigation of the application.
§ 236-16. Revocation or suspension of licenses. [Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No.
981]
The Borough Council may, in its discretion, refuse to issue or renew, or may, after notice
and hearing, revoke or suspend:
A. Any license of either class if the applicant or licensee has been once convicted of a
crime in this or any other jurisdiction, or convicted of being a disorderly person, or
of a violation of Title 39, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulation, of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey, or who violates any provision of this chapter, or has any
judgment unsatisfied of record against him arising out of an automobile accident,
or who has made false answers in his application for such license or any renewal
thereof, or who has failed or fails to render reasonably prompt, safe and adequate
taxicab and limousine services, or who has not complied fully with all requirements
of this chapter for such class of license; or, in addition
B. Any taxicab driver’s license if the licensee or applicant has in any degree
contributed to any injury to person or damage to property arising out of negligent
operation of a motor vehicle; or has any communicable or contagious disease; or
§ 236-13 SHREWSBURY CODE § 236-16
236:4
§ 236-17. Display of license card of drivers.
Each applicant granted a taxicab driver's license shall be issued a license card in evidence
thereof in a form approved by Borough Council and signed by the Borough Clerk in
its behalf. Such license card shall at all times be prominently displayed and adequately
protected in the interior of any taxicab operated by the licensee so that the face thereof
shall be at all times in full view of and plainly legible to any passenger seated on the rear
seat of such taxicab; the said license card shall at all times be and remain the property of
the Borough and, on direction of Borough Council, shall at once be surrendered to the
Borough Clerk.
§ 236-18. Display of license card of actual operator required.
No taxicab driver's license card other than that of the licensee actually operating the
taxicab at the time shall be displayed therein.
§ 236-19. Disposition of fees.
The Borough Clerk shall, at the time the Borough Council acts on any application, pay
the fees received therefor over to the Borough Chief Financial Officer.
§ 236-20. Method of fixing rates of fare. [Added 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346;
4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 981]
The Mayor and Council shall fix the rates of fare for taxicabs from time to time
by resolution, and the prices that may be charged by the owners or drivers for the
transportation of passengers for hire, or any of the baggage of such passengers, shall not
exceed such fixed rates of fare. All taxicabs must be equipped with and utilize a meter,
utilizing the rates posted on and in the taxicab.
§ 236-21. Display of complete list of fares required.
No taxicab shall hereafter be operated in this Borough unless and until there is
prominently displayed in the interior thereof, within the full view and access of any
passengers therein, a complete list of fares, charges or tariff rates charged for
transportation of passengers, which fares, charges or tariff rates so displayed, and no
other, shall be those to be charged any passenger so transported.
any other condition which may make the driver unfit to safely operate a taxicab; or
C. Any taxicab owner’s license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be licensed, by
reason of unsafe or unsanitary conditions, is dangerous to the safety or health of the
occupants or others, or if the policy of insurance or bond or power of attorney
required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-3, 48:16-4 and 48:16-5 aforementioned has not been
furnished or kept in force, or if said owners fail to comply with any terms or
conditions imposed by the Borough Council or any law of this state.
§ 236-16 TAXICABS § 236-22
236:5
§ 236-22. Maintenance of records. [Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 981153]
The owner of each taxicab shall keep or cause to be kept a written daily record of each
trip made by the taxicab showing the date, time and place the cab was engaged, the
place and time of the discharge of the passenger, the number of passengers carried, the
fare received, distance traveled and the driver’s license number of the persons driving
the cab on the trip. The records shall be kept in a place that is convenient for a proper
authorized representative of the Borough to inspect the same, and the owner shall give
his cooperation in expediting any inspection.
§ 236-23. Lost property. [Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 981]
Every driver of a taxicab, immediately after the termination of any hiring or employment
shall carefully search his taxicab for any property lost or left therein, and any property,
unless sooner claimed or delivered to the owner, must be reported, by the driver or owner
of the taxicab to the Police Department, with brief particulars and a description of the
property, within 24 hours after the finding.
§ 236-24. Markings on exterior of cabs. [Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 981]
Every taxicab, so licensed, shall have conspicuously located on the exterior thereof the
words "taxi," "cab" or "taxicab," which shall be illuminated during darkness and shall
be contained in a dome light or other similar device, the size, colors, wording, location
on the cab and other particulars of which may be subject to approval by the Borough
Administrator.
§ 236-25. Parking of taxicabs outside taxi stands prohibited.
No person shall park or rank any taxicab on any of the streets of this Borough at any time
except at such place or places as Borough Council may from time to time designate as
municipal taxi stands.
§ 236-26. Cruising of taxicabs prohibited.
No person shall cruise on the streets of this Borough with any taxicab at any time for the
purpose of soliciting passengers.
§ 236-27. Parking or soliciting near offices of competitors prohibited.
No taxicab or other vehicle for hire shall be parked or stopped, nor shall the drivers
thereof solicit, attempt to solicit or otherwise seek to engage a passenger, whether said
driver be in or out of said taxicab or other vehicle, within 50 feet of a regularly operated
taxicab office or terminus, except the owner or lessee of said taxicab office or terminus
and his licensed drivers.
§ 236-28. Refusal of local fares prohibited.
Every person so licensed as aforesaid shall not refuse to carry local fares or passengers.
153.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 236-22 through 236-28 as §§ 236-25
through 236-31.
§ 236-22 SHREWSBURY CODE § 236-29
236:6
§ 236-29. Operation of taxicabs licensed outside Borough.
Owners and drivers of taxicabs licensed out of the jurisdiction of this Borough may
be allowed to enter their taxicabs in this Borough, but on specific call only, whether
transporting a passenger within this Borough or from a point within this Borough to a
point outside the Borough limits or discharging a passenger transported from a point
outside of the Borough limits to a point within the Borough limits, and the name of
the passenger so calling shall be given by the owner or driver when requested by
the Borough police or other lawful persons. Such taxicabs shall not be parked in this
Borough nor shall the drivers thereof cruise on the streets of this Borough at any time for
the purpose of soliciting passengers, nor shall they, in the nighttime or other periods of
darkness, when in this Borough, permit any advertising lights on the taxicab to remain
lighted; provided, however, that the same or similar substantial reciprocal rights are
granted to owners and drivers of taxicabs licensed in this Borough by the municipalities
in which the aforesaid owners or drivers are licensed.
§ 236-30. Operation of other vehicles for hire.
Owners, operators or drivers of vehicles for hire other than taxicabs, commonly known
as "OH" cars, shall not display the word "taxi," "cab" or other sign thereon which would
tend to lead the public to believe the vehicle is a taxicab as herein defined, and if a "For
Hire" sign is or shall be used on each such vehicle, such sign or other device shall be
displayed only when said vehicle is actually engaged in transporting a passenger for hire.
§ 236-31. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,250, a term of
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days, or any combination thereof.
§ 236-29 TAXICABS § 236-31
236:7

Chapter 242
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 90.
§ 242-1. Title.
This chapter shall hereafter be known and cited as the "Borough of Shrewsbury Towing
Ordinance."
§ 242-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CRUISING — The driving of a wrecker along any Borough street for the purpose of
soliciting business within the Borough.154
FLATBED — A special wrecker for removal of special vehicles which could not be
lifted by a normal wrecker without causing undue damage.
GARAGE — A building in which motor vehicles can be sheltered, stored, repaired and
made ready for use. It is specifically intended not to include a gasoline service station
used primarily for furnishing gasoline, oil, lubrication service and minor service for
automobiles.
HEAVY-DUTY WRECKER — A wrecker with a minimum lifting capacity of 25 tons
on a tandem truck chassis.
NORMAL WORKING HOURS — Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.;
Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon; national holidays are exceptions.155
OPERATOR — The owner or agent of a serving garage.
PERSON — Individuals, partnerships, corporations, companies and any other similar
association of person or persons engaged in business.
TOWING — The removal of a vehicle by taking the same in tow or placing it on a
flatbed.
UPRIGHTING — The returning of a vehicle to its proper position on all four wheels or
undercarriage.
WINCHING — The use of cable and hooks, crane operation, lifting, dragging and
uprighting a vehicle.
WRECKER—A public vehicle employed for the purpose of towing, transportation and/
154.Editor's Note: The former definition of “dolly wreck,” which immediately followed this definition, was deleted at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
155.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 236-31 TOWING § 242-2
242:1
or conveying or removing vehicles which are unable to be and/or actually not operating
under their own power from the place where disabled to some other place, and a service
charge or fee is expected.
§ 242-3. License required.
No person shall operate a tow truck or conduct any towing service within the Borough
of Shrewsbury without first having obtained a license therefor.
§ 242-4. Application for license.156
§ 242-5. License fees.
§ 242-6. Suspension or revocation of license; hearing.
Any license granted hereunder may be suspended or revoked by the Mayor and Council,
after written notice and public hearing thereon, for:
A. The application for license as required by § 242-3 shall be made to the Chief of
Police, and shall accurately specify the following information, the truth of which
shall be sworn by the applicant:
(1) The year, make, type, weight, and registration of the tow truck(s) to be used.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the truck, if other than the applicant.
(3) The name and address of the applicant or applicants and, if a corporation, the
name and address of each officer and director thereof.
B. All licenses shall be for one year from the date of issuance and must be renewed by
April 30 of each year.
A. The following schedule of fees is hereby adopted for obtaining a towing operator's
license:
(1) Application fee: $50.
(2) License fee: $100.
B. All fees shall be turned in to the Borough Clerk within 30 days after receipt.
C. Fees paid pursuant to this section shall not be refundable for any reason.
A. Misstatement in the application.
B. Failure to maintain insurance in the amounts set forth in this chapter.
C. Violation of any other provision of this chapter.
D. Violation of any law or regulation of the State of New Jersey which might be
deemed grounds for cancellation or revocation by the Mayor and Council.
156.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 242-2 SHREWSBURY CODE § 242-7
242:2
§ 242-7. Expiration of license.157
§ 242-8. Issuance or denial of license.
Upon receipt of all reports as set forth in this chapter, the Chief of Police shall forward
the reports to the Mayor and Council, which shall grant or deny a license within 30 days
after receipt of said reports. Failure to act within 30 days shall constitute a denial. In
the event of a denial, the applicant shall be notified of the denial, and the applicant shall
have 10 days to make a written request to the Clerk for a hearing before the Mayor and
Council.
§ 242-9. Duty list.
The Police Department shall establish and publish a call list for all eligible licensees for
the purpose of towing services within the Borough. Each licensee deserving to be placed
on the list shall agree to the terms and conditions as may be set and approved by the
Chief of Police. The list shall be in alphabetical order and rotated as to be equal to all
applicants. Any licensee shall be removed from the list upon:
§ 242-10. License not transferable; display of license.
A license issued under this chapter shall not be transferable, nor shall the licensee be
permitted to subcontract. Each licensee shall display on all vehicles the identification
number, the Chief's signature and the inspection date of the vehicle.
§ 242-11. Insurance policy requirements.
No wrecker shall be licensed or authorized hereunder, nor shall any licensed wrecker be
operated within the Borough of Shrewsbury unless he has deposited with the Borough
Clerk the following insurance policies or certificates of insurance:
A. Any license issued hereunder may be renewed for additional periods of one year
upon:
(1) Submission to the Chief of Police of a renewal application containing the same
information previously required in § 242-4 prior to April 30.
(2) Presentation of renewal insurance certificate as required in § 242-11.
(3) A written endorsement of good standing to be prepared by the Chief of Police,
which is to be attached to the application prior to its presentation to the Mayor
and Council for final approval.
B. Any license shall not be transferable.
A. Written request from the licensee.
B. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions as prescribed by the Chief of
Police.
C. Revocation of towing license.
157.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 242-7 TOWING § 242-11
242:3
§ 242-12. Operating and response time. [Amended 2-17-2004 by Ord. No. 823]
No license will be issued to an applicant hereunder unless he or his employee shall be
available or on-call on a twenty-four-hour basis to tow. All towers must respond to a call
for service from the Police Department within a reasonable amount of time, preferably
20 minutes. During any license year, a tower must respond to a minimum of 75% of all
calls for service received from the Police Department.
§ 242-13. Storage areas. [Amended 2-17-2004 by Ord. No. 823]
§ 242-14. Towing and storage charges. [Amended 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 701]
A. Garage keeper's legal liability: an auto garage keeper's legal liability policy
covering fire, theft and explosion in the minimum amount of $100,000 and collision
coverage subject to maximum deductible of $500 with each accident deemed a
separate claim.
B. Garage operation policy, liability: combined limit bodily injury and/or property
damage, including broad forms products liability, personal injury, employees as
additional insureds, fire legal liability, premises and operation coverage, additional
injury and extended bodily injury: $1,000,000.
C. Business automobile policy liability: combined limit bodily injury and/or property
damage: $1,000,000, including a limit of $500,000 on uninsured/underinsured
motorists, nonowned coverage, hired car coverage, mandatory motor carrier
endorsement, pollution coverage and endorsement covering the vehicle in tow.
A. All towers must have safe and sufficient storage areas on their premises to store not
fewer than 20 vehicles and shall be available Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., and Saturday, 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon, for the release of towed vehicles.
The tower will also have to receive a vehicle impound request on notification from
the Police Department to release said vehicle to the claimant.
B. Towers will provide and have available a protected area for the storage of vehicles
involved in criminal cases, if the Shrewsbury Borough Garage does not have the
facilities. "Protected area" shall include inside storage or fenced-in storage of said
vehicle to deny access to such vehicle by unauthorized persons. The vehicle must
be covered if the same is stored outside. No license will be issued unless facilities
are within five miles distance of the Borough of Shrewsbury.
A. Charges for transporting, hauling or service of disabled vehicles involved in
accidents or which are disabled on roadways and on private or public property and
storage of said vehicles shall be according to the following: [Amended 6-7-1999
by Ord. No. 765; 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 871; 6-4-2007 by Ord. No. 898]
(1) The Mayor and Council, by resolution prior to April 30, will set a fee schedule
that no towing operator shall charge fees in excess thereof.
(2) Wrecker/Flatbed fee: $95.
(3) Storage: $20 per day.
§ 242-11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 242-14
242:4
§ 242-15. Towing procedures; record of towed vehicles. [Amended 2-17-2004 by
Ord. No. 823]
The Police Department shall supervise and govern the enforcement and provisions of
this chapter. No tower or employee shall respond to an accident or disabled vehicle
unless being requested by the Shrewsbury Police Department or by request of the driver
or owner. The Shrewsbury police have the option to call a duty wrecker if the driver's or
owner's service does not arrive in reasonable time. There will be no following of patrol
vehicles to the scene. The towing service shall be required to keep a log of all towed
vehicles, including the following:
(4) The contractor shall make appropriate accommodations for customer fees to
be payable by major credit cards and auto club memberships such as AAA, if
applicable.
(5) Special towing services. If special towing services are required, the towing and
storage contractor shall quote the vehicle owner or his authorized agent
directly. In the event that the owner is incapacitated, a written copy of the price
quote should be filed with the Police Department.
(6) No release fees may be charged for the release of vehicles.
B. A fee schedule conspicuously indicating the maximum rate for towing and storage
of a vehicle within the Borough of Shrewsbury or elsewhere shall be kept in the
possession of the drivers of the wreckers and presented to the driver/owner of any
vehicle prior to any vehicle being towed by a licensee. In addition, a copy of said
fee card shall be posted in the cab of the towing vehicle and in a conspicuous
location in the public area of the Police Department. An itemized bill list shall
further be supplied to each person towed, upon request. Any vehicle authorized and
controlled by the Police Department concerning a criminal investigation will be
charged as follows: The registered owner will not incur any storage fee while the
Police Department, at the direction of the Chief of Police, has control over the
impound storage for criminal investigation purposes. Once the investigation is
concluded and the owner is allowed to obtain control of said vehicle as notified by
the Police Department, then the storage fee shall be instituted. This release
notification to storage licensee will be at the direction of the Chief of Police, and all
incurred daily storage fees will be the responsibility of the vehicle owner.
A. The date and time of the report.
B. The name of the towing operator.
C. The address from where and to where the vehicle was towed.
D. The name of the towing operator.
E. Complete dates of storage, and if released, who received it, and if a vehicle report
was received to authorize release.
F. The make, model, year and registration.
G. The general condition of the vehicle's damaged areas.
§ 242-14 TOWING § 242-16
242:5
§ 242-16. Qualifications for drivers. [Amended 2-17-2004 by Ord. No. 823]
§ 242-17. Equipment on vehicles.
No licensee shall possess or exhibit flashing lights except as provided under N.J.S.A.
39:1-1 et seq.
A. No person shall drive a wrecker unless he/she holds a valid New Jersey driver's
license for driving the type of vehicle he/she is operating.
B. The driver shall also have a valid identification card issued by the police, with name
and driver's license number on the same, for periodic checks by police of the
license. If said driver's license becomes suspended or expired, he/she shall notify
the Shrewsbury Police Department immediately. Each driver will have a
background check by the Shrewsbury Police Department. If there is a finding of
any criminal conviction, the driver shall be disqualified unless waived for cause by
the Chief of Police.
A. A minimum of two flashing yellow lights pointed to the rear and so mounted as not
to be obstructed by any motor vehicle being towed by the licensee are required.
B. A minimum of two flashing yellow lights spaced at least four feet apart and so
constructed as to be mountable on the rear of any vehicle being towed are required.
C. A three-hundred-sixty-degree rotating amber beacon light shall be mounted over
the cab.
D. All lights shall be of such candlepower in intensity to be visible 1/4 of a mile away.
E. Dual rear wheels or equivalent are required.
F. All vehicles shall originate from a garage equipped with a portable car dolly.
G. A power-take-off-controlled winch with a minimum cable thickness of 3/8 of an
inch or equivalent is required.
H. Weight equal to the vehicles to be towed, with a minimum of 5,500 pounds, is
required.
I. A three-eighths-inch safety chain is required. The lift chain and the safety chain are
not to be attached in any manner whatsoever to the same part of the wrecker.
J. One shovel, one broom and one bucket for use in removing debris from the roadway
shall be on all vehicles.158
K. One twenty-pound dry-chemical fire extinguisher shall be on all vehicles.
L. One five-gallon bucket of sand or speedi-dri shall be in all vehicles.159
158.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
159.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 242-16 SHREWSBURY CODE § 242-18
242:6
§ 242-18. Removal of debris from the accident scene.
If the tower is requested to render services at an accident scene, the operator shall remove
from the street all broken glass, metal and other debris resulting from the accident.
§ 242-19. Preservation of evidence.
The tower shall take all reasonable precautions to protect evidence when required to by
the Shrewsbury Police Department. All vehicles which contain evidence shall be stored
as required above.
§ 242-20. Employee conduct; complaints.
A. The licensee shall be solely responsible for the conduct of his/her employees.
B. Any complaints received by the Borough of Shrewsbury regarding the licensee or
his/her employees involving excessive charging, damage to vehicles, theft from
vehicles, discrimination or failure to comply with local, state and federal laws
regarding workers' employment regulations shall be addressed to the Chief of
Police for his review.
§ 242-18 TOWING § 242-20
242:7

Chapter 246
TREES, SHRUBBERY AND LANDSCAPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 9, Art. II.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 94.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 183.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 220.
§ 246-1. Powers and authority of Commission generally.
In addition to the powers specifically enumerated in this chapter and in Chapter 94,
Zoning and Land Development, of the Code of the Borough of Shrewsbury, the Shade
Tree Commission shall have such powers as are authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 to
40:64-14, inclusive, and as amended and supplemented.
§ 246-2. Powers of Commission regarding care for shade and ornamental trees,
shrubbery and other plantings.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have the following powers:
A. Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, removal, planting,
placement, trimming, spraying and care of shade and ornamental trees, shrubbery
and other plantings now located or which may hereafter be planted in a utility rightof-
way, on construction sites, and in any public highway, right-of-way, park or
parkway, except such as are excluded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:64-1.
B. Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same, so far as may be
necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
C. Remove or require the removal of any tree or part thereof that is diseased or
dangerous to public safety, at the expense of the owner of such tree following
appropriate notice of its intention to remove or cause the removal of a tree or part
of a tree dangerous to public safety.
D. Administer treatment to or remove any tree situated upon private property which is
believed to harbor a disease or insects readily communicable to neighboring healthy
trees in the care of the municipality, and enter upon private property for that
purpose, with the consent of the owner thereof, provided that the suspected
condition is first confirmed by certificate issued by or on behalf of the Department
of Agriculture, Monmouth County Shade Tree Commission or a certified arborist.
E. Notices; costs to be lien; exceptions.
(1) Notices. The Commission shall give reasonable notice of its intention to
remove or cause the removal of a tree or part of a tree dangerous to public
safety, unless public safety requires immediate removal, in which case no
notice shall be necessary.
§ 242-20 TREES, SHRUBBERY AND LANDSCAPING § 246-2
246:1
§ 246-3. Prohibited acts to trees, shrubbery and other plantings controlled by
Commission.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture,
corporation, public utility or other entity to commit any of the following acts to shade or
ornamental trees, shrubbery and other plantings under the jurisdiction of the Shade Tree
Commission:
(2) Costs to be lien. The cost of removal of any tree dangerous to public safety
shall be a charge upon the owner of the property from which the diseased or
dangerous tree is removed. Such cost, unless paid directly to the Commission,
shall be certified by it to the Collector of Taxes of the Borough of Shrewsbury,
shall thereupon become a lien upon said real estate, and shall be included in
the next tax bill rendered to the owner or owners thereof and be collected in
the same manner as other taxes against that property.
(3) Exceptions. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to:
(a) A planting in connection with Arbor Day exercises or other educational
demonstration.
(b) A planting of a shade or ornamental tree by the Shade Tree Commission
on the street side of residential property for aesthetic purposes.
F. In every case where the property of an abutting owner shall be chargeable with the
cost of the planting of any shade tree or trees, the Commission shall give notice of
the meeting at which it is proposed to consider said planting, by publishing the
notice at least once, not less than 20 days before the meeting in a newspaper
circulating in the municipality, or by personal service of a copy of the notice upon
the abutting owner at least 10 days before the meeting. The notice shall specify the
street, streets or portions thereof on which such planting is proposed, and require all
persons who may object thereto to present their objections in writing at the office
of the Commission at or before the meeting.
G. No statute giving any person or state or municipal board, body or official power or
authority to lay any sidewalk along, or to open, construct, curb or pave, any street,
or to do any similar act, shall be construed to permit or authorize any interference
with or injury to a highway shade tree without the consent of the Shade Tree
Commission within whose jurisdiction such tree shall be located. In all cases, such
Commission shall reasonably cooperate with such person, board, body or official
for the general public good.
A. To remove, cut, break or injure any shade tree or part thereof approved by the Shade
Tree Commission.
B. To place any rope, wire, sign, poster or other fixture on a shade tree or tree guard
unless approved by the Shade Tree Commission.
C. To close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree or shrub to
permit the access of air, water or fertilizer to the roots of such tree or shrub,
including mulching material that shall not be placed against the tree bark.
§ 246-2 SHREWSBURY CODE § 246-3
246:2
D. To damage, misuse or remove any device placed to protect any shade tree.
E. To permit any animal to injure or destroy any shade tree.
F. To pour any saltwater or other chemical or other substance near or upon any shade
tree in such a manner as might cause damage to such tree or come into contact with
or otherwise cause damage or injury to the stem or roots of any tree or shrub upon
any street, highway, park or parkway in the Borough, or to permit any fire, tar
kettle, road roller or other engine to stand in such manner as to injure a shade tree.
G. To pile any building material or make any mortar or cement within six feet of a tree
or shrub.
H. To interfere or cause to authorize any interference with the Shade Tree Commission
or any of its employees or agents engaged in or about the planting, cultivating,
mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any shade tree.
I. To plant, set out, take down or remove any shade tree without first having obtained
from the Shade Tree Commission a written permit to do so, or without complying
in all respects with the conditions set forth in such written permit.
J. To plant material on the New Jersey Invasive Species List.
K. To excavate land or remove trees, shrubbery and other plantings, including ground
cover, from developed and undeveloped commercial land without the approval of
the Shade Tree Commission, except as specified hereinafter. Excluded from this
requirement are:
(1) The clearing, mowing or plowing of weeds, ground cover and small tree
growth (less than two inches in diameter as measured one foot from ground
level) in areas of property that have been previously maintained as open areas
or under cultivation.
(2) The removal of dead or diseased trees and ornamental shrubbery and the
planting or new trees and shrubbery.
L. To destroy natural features such as trees, slopes, hilltops and views, which shall be
preserved wherever possible.
M. To allow trees and shrubbery to obstruct public sidewalks, paths, walkways or
streets and to obstruct vision and/or passage of persons or vehicles using same.
Owners of properties shall prune trees in such a manner that branches will hang not
less than eight feet over sidewalks and walkways and 13 feet over roadways.
Shrubbery bordering sidewalks, paths or walkways shall be pruned a minimum of
three inches from sidewalks, paths or walkways and in such a manner to prevent
branches from obstructing, hindering or harming pedestrians using the walkways.
N. To park motor vehicles on landscaped sections, on grass, or against trees and
shrubbery in residential, business, professional, commercial and industrial zoning
districts.
O. For every person, firm or corporation owning or having control over any wire, cable
and appurtenances for the transmission of electric current along or over any street,
§ 246-3 TREES, SHRUBBERY AND LANDSCAPING § 246-3
246:3
§ 246-4. Permits; inspections.
highway, park or parkway within the Borough, to fail at any time to guard and
protect all trees, through, over or near which such wire, cable or appurtenance may
pass, from and against any injury or damage therefrom or from the electric current
carried by the same. The device or means used for the transmission of any electric
current and the methods used to guard and protect any such tree or trees shall be
subject to the approval of the Shade Tree Commission.
P. For any public utility or similar entity, except during periods of emergency, to
prune trees for line clearance or interfere with or endanger street trees during the
installation or repair of any utility related apparatus, without the prior written
approval of the Shade Tree Commission.
A. The Chairman of the Shade Tree Commission shall have the authority to issue
permits for work involving planting, trimming, removal and/or spraying of trees
and shrubbery within the Borough right-of-way, on Borough-owned property,
within a utility right-of-way, and on construction sites that do not require
subdivision and/or site plan approval by the Borough Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
B. Utility right-of-way; construction sites.
(1) Utility. The utility shall file an application for a permit with the Shade Tree
Commission at least 30 days prior to the scheduled occurrence activity and
shall pay a permit fee of $25 $50. The utility shall provide the following
information: the geographic location of the utility right-of-way; the trees and
shrubs proposed to be removed, pruned and/or cut down; and shall identify any
herbicide to be used. Following receipt of a permit, the utility shall notify the
property owner and occupants of the residence or structure on the property on
which the trees are to be pruned, cut down or removed and of any herbicide to
be used to remove tree stumps or used to control undesirable plant species.
(2) Construction site. Immediately following the issuance of a zoning permit for
construction of a new building, or reconstruction/addition to a residence or
structure that does not require subdivision or site plan approval or a variance,
the property owner or building contractor of the site on which construction is
planned shall file an application for a permit and a landscape plan with the
Shade Tree Commission and shall pay a permit fee of $25. The landscape plan
shall identify trees and shrubs to be removed, pruned and/or cut down, and
identify any herbicide to be used and shall also specify the location of planting
material to be retained and/or new planting material as required in § 246-5,
Landscaping requirements.
C. Trees; shrubbery. All work performed pursuant to permits issued by the Shade Tree
Commission shall be performed in accordance with current recommendations and
approved standards of the National Arborist Association, American National
Standards Institute (ANSI), ANSI-Z133 & 300A, and New Jersey Certified Tree
Experts Board.
D. Herbicides.
§ 246-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 246-4
246:4
§ 246-5. Landscaping requirements.
(1) All herbicide applications shall be performed in accordance with the pesticide
product Federal Registered Label and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection Pesticide Control Program and Pesticide Control
Regulations. If herbicides are to be used, the utility and/or building contractor
shall provide a safety data sheet upon request of the Commission.
(2) Notification required. Prior to spraying any herbicide, the utility or building
contractor shall notify property owners, occupants of residences or structures
on the property and adjacent property owners and/or occupants of residences
or structures on adjacent properties of the type of herbicide and the date(s)
when the herbicide is to be used. This includes, but is not limited to, the areawide
notification requirements and regulations regarding pesticide
applications adjacent to schools.
E. Inspections; enforcement. Borough supervisory inspections shall be provided by the
Borough Department of Public Works, utilizing employees trained in tree trimming.
Enforcement of the above requirements shall be the responsibility of the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Landscaping of new construction, reconstruction and additions.
(1) Applicants who have filed for a zoning permit for new construction or to
reconstruct and/or add to existing structures and have received a zoning permit
that does not require review by the Borough Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall submit seven copies of a landscaping plan to the Shade
Tree Commission showing the location of existing trees of three-inch caliper
or more and existing plantings and the trees and plantings that shall be
removed due to construction.
(2) The landscaping plan shall provide a minimum of 10% of the plan site to be
reserved for landscaping, which shall be reasonably distributed within the area
and shall include suitable shrubbery in a planting strip not less than four feet
wide on the front, rear and two sides of the structure. The landscape plan shall
specify the location of planting material, their minimum sizes, quantity,
variety and species (common and/or botanical names).
(3) Concrete curbing or belgian block shall be installed so that motor vehicles are
restricted from driving onto established landscaped sections.
(4) Bases of trees and other landscaped sections shall include ground cover or
mulching material to discourage the growth of weeds. Gravel, stone or
decorative stone shall not be permitted to be used as ground cover unless
specifically approved by the Shade Tree Commission.
(5) Bases of trees and landscaped areas shall be mulched to a depth not to exceed
four inches, placing mulch six inches from the tree trunk at ground level and
outward to the edge of the drip line of the tree to a maximum depth of four
inches.
(6) Shade trees. Shade trees shall be planted along all undedicated roads, drives
§ 246-4 TREES, SHRUBBERY AND LANDSCAPING § 246-5
246:5
§ 246-6. Tree planting requirements.
and parking areas in accordance with the specifications thereof. One tree is
required for each 40 feet of curbing, edge of pavement or designated area.
B. An applicant granted a permit for construction and/or reconstruction shall not
excavate land or remove trees, shrubs and other plant material from a proposed
building site until a landscaping plan has been approved by the Shade Tree
Commission. Existing trees and shrubs to be retained shall be protected by the
erection of storm fencing at the outermost drip line of the trees and shrubs during
construction.
C. Following the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy by the Construction
Official to the applicant or developer of any tract of land or site wherein the
landscaping requirements approved by the Shade Tree Commission have not been
met, the applicant or developer shall be required to post a performance bond to
cover the cost of landscaping which has not been completed. The amount of the
performance bond shall be set by the Shade Tree Commission and posted with the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Shrewsbury as an escrow deposit and shall
not be released until completion of the landscaping plan.
D. Landscaped areas and sections, including trees, shrubbery, fences and the grounds
in and surrounding these sections, shall be properly maintained in accordance with
the landscaping plan approved by the Shade Tree Commission. Shrubs or trees
shown on the original landscaping plan shall be replaced when they are dead or
have become unsightly, in the opinion of the Shade Tree Commission.
A. Regulations.
(1) Any owner, person, firm or corporation erecting and constructing any new
building or buildings in any zoning district within the Borough of Shrewsbury
and any person building any residence, dwelling or multiple-family house
within the Borough shall plant shade trees in front yard areas at least five feet
from the right-of-way, defined as a strip of land occupied or intended to be
occupied by a sidewalk, utility transmission lines, gas pipeline, water main,
and/or sanitary or storm sewer. One tree shall be planted every 40 feet of
frontage of said property, unless a waiver is granted by the Shade Tree
Commission.
(2) The Shade Tree Commission may grant a waiver if there are trees growing
along such right-of-way or on the abutting property near the street line which
are in compliance with the specifications of the Shade Tree Commission.
(3) Such new trees to be provided shall be of a kind and size approved by the
Shade Tree Commission and shall be planted in accordance with its
specifications for planting trees in such locations approved by the Shade Tree
Commission.
B. Specifications for shade trees.
(1) Shade tree size. Trees shall be not less than 1 3/4 to two inches caliper,
measured six inches above the ground, nor less than 12 feet high. Trees must
§ 246-5 SHREWSBURY CODE § 246-6
246:6
be well branched, the branches to start not less than six feet from the crown of
the root system.
(2) Flowering trees size. Where authorized for placement, flowering decorative
trees may be of smaller size than shade varieties. Those trees shall not be less
than 1 1/2 inches caliper, measured six inches above the ground, nor less than
eight feet high. They must be well branched, the branches to start not less than
five feet from the crown of the root system.
(3) Placement. All trees must be planted in the location approved by the Shade
Tree Commission. Large growing (timber type) trees shall be located not
closer than five feet from the edge of the existing or future sidewalks on the
property owner's side adjacent thereto, in a place which shall not interfere with
utilities. Ornamentals can be planted in the planting strip between the curb and
sidewalk if approved by the Shade Tree Commission. The planting strip shall
be not smaller than 30 inches wide. Trees are to be no less than 25 feet from
intercepting curbs at street corners and not more than 40 feet apart.
(4) Time for planting. Deciduous trees under the jurisdiction of the Commission
shall not be planted between May 15 and November 1 without specific
authorization.
(5) Soil excavations. Soil excavation must not be less than 18 inches deep and not
less than 30 inches in diameter. A seepage area shall be provided by loosening
the soil to a depth of one foot below the excavation. Planting soil shall be
composed of one part peat, one part humus and one part of parent soil (all
mixed thoroughly), to which shall be added and mixed in two pounds of
bonemeal or its equivalent.
(6) Planting; watering. At time of planting, burlap and wire surrounding the root
ball shall be loosened from around the tree trunk. Each tree shall be given an
adequate amount of water at the time of planting.
(7) Staking and guying. Stakes shall be white or red cedar, oak or locust treated
with an approved wood preservative and must be eight feet long and not less
than two inches in minimum diameter. Stakes must be driven securely into the
ground and preferably on the northwest side of the tree trunk. Trees shall be
guyed with rubber hose or plastic straps and must be watered adequately for a
minimum of one year after planting.
(8) Removal of all planting debris. Removal of debris is required. The property
shall be left in a neat and orderly condition in accordance with good and
accepted planting and nursery practice. Stakes shall be removed after a period
of one year.
(9) Planting notice. Notice must be given to a member of the Shade Tree
Commission three days prior to start of planting in order that the Commission
may inspect the stock for variety, condition, size and quantity. All work shall
be subject to the general supervision and approval of the Commission.
(10) Survival. All plantings which fail to survive for a period of one calendar year
following planting shall be replaced by the property owner or responsible
§ 246-6 TREES, SHRUBBERY AND LANDSCAPING § 246-6
246:7
§ 246-7. Violations and penalties.
The owner, contractor or other persons interested as lessee, tenant or otherwise of a
building or premises where a violation of any provision of these regulations shall have
building/landscape contractor at no cost or expense to the Borough or
Commission. Said replacement shall be made within 60 days following written
notice from the Commission for such replacement or within such more
extended period as may be specified by planting conditions. After one year,
said plantings which fail to survive shall be replaced at the expense of the
property owner.
C. Specifications for landscaping and screening.
(1) Approved varieties. The varieties or species selected for landscaping and
screening shall be subject to the approval of the Shade Tree Commission.
Evergreen plantings may be interspersed with or placed with appropriate
deciduous flowering shrubs. No plant material on the New Jersey Invasive
Species List shall be used. The use of native plants is encouraged.
(2) Placement. All plantings must be at least the maximum mature plant distance
from the foundation, wall or fence, but not less than two feet therefrom. One
evergreen is required for each five feet of the foundation, wall or fence,
including side surfaces of projecting porches or steps. Rear exposures may be
exempted under circumstances as determined by the Shade Tree Commission.
Varieties will be selected and specified as appropriate to sun and wind
exposures and will be suitable in mature size for the location to be planted.
(3) Soil. Excavations for each plant must be not less than 12 inches deep and not
less than 20 inches in diameter. A seepage area shall be provided by loosening
the soil to a depth of six inches at the bottom of the excavation. Planting soil
in the excavation shall be composed of one part peat or humus and four parts
of good soil free of debris (all mixed thoroughly), to which shall be added and
mixed one pound of bonemeal or its equivalent. There shall be no pieces or
chunks of plaster, mortar or other lime-containing material or loose lime
around foundation plantings and other planting areas.
(4) Mulching. Each evergreen and shrub planted shall be mulched with wood
chips, peat, buckwheat hulls, cocoa hulls or other approved material out to the
branch tips, not to exceed four inches in depth.
(5) Removal of planting debris. Removal of all planting debris is required. The
property must be left in a neat and orderly condition in accordance with good
and accepted planting practice.
(6) All plantings which fail to survive for a period of one calendar year following
planting shall be replaced by the contractor at no cost or expense to the
Borough or Commission. Said replacement shall be made within 30 days
following written demand for such replacement from the Commission or
within such more extended period as may be specified. After one year,
plantings which fail to survive shall be replaced at the expense of the property
owner.
§ 246-6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 246-7
246:8
been committed or shall exist shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. Each day that
a violation is permitted to exist following a ten-day written notice by the Shade Tree
Commission shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 246-7 TREES, SHRUBBERY AND LANDSCAPING § 246-7
246:9

Chapter 250
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 77.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 90.
Housing standards — See Ch. 145.
Nuisances — See Ch. 163.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 210, Art. I.
§ 250-1. Definitions. [Amended 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 808]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ABANDONED VEHICLE — One which is parked in any of the places mentioned in
§ 250-2 of this chapter and is any one of the following:
MOTOR VEHICLE, OMNIBUS, ROAD TRACTOR, TRAILER, TRUCK, TRUCK
TRACTOR and VEHICLES — Have the meanings stated and as defined in N.J.S.A.
39:1-1 et seq. of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 250-2. Abandonment prohibited; storage and repair regulated.
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor,
trailer, truck, truck tractor or vehicle on any public street or highway in the Borough
of Shrewsbury, on any municipally owned or operated parking lot, or any property
which is owned, leased or maintained by the Borough of Shrewsbury or Borough of
Shrewsbury Board of Education, or any private property in the Borough of Shrewsbury;
provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be determined to prohibit the
placing, keeping, storing or abandonment of any such motor vehicles in a garage or
other building in the Borough or on the lands and premises of a licensed new or used
automobile dealer or licensed service station operator. However, said licensed service
station operator cannot allow any motor vehicle or motor vehicles to be parked on
his land and premises without repairs having been completed and the vehicles being
removed for a period exceeding 30 days.
Parked without the current year's registration or identification markers as required
by law, or is not being used for transportation.
A.
So disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic, and the driver or person
owning or in charge thereof neglects or refuses to move the same to a place where
it will not obstruct traffic.
B.
C. Found to be mechanically inoperative.
D. Found without one or more tires.
§ 246-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-3
250:1
§ 250-3. Enforcement procedures.160
Whenever it shall appear to the Code Enforcement Official and/or any member of the
Police Department of the Borough of Shrewsbury (who shall hereinafter be referred to
as the "officer") that § 250-2 of this chapter is being violated:
§ 250-4. Method of removal.
If the vehicle causing the violation constitutes or may constitute a traffic hazard and it
cannot be moved to a nonhazardous location, or if the name and address of the owner
of the vehicle cannot be ascertained or if the violation be not abated within the time
required by the notice given under the foregoing, the officer shall:
§ 250-5. Disposal of unclaimed impounded vehicles.
If any vehicle impounded by the officer shall remain in his custody after 30 days after
notice of the impounding has been given to said owner, the owner's right to reclaim it by
paying the costs of removal and interim storage charges shall be deemed to have been
forfeited by the owner, and the governing body shall sell and dispose of it as provided in
N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1.
§ 250-6. Notice of impoundment and sale.
A. The officer shall determine whether the violation constitutes a traffic hazard; and,
if so, he shall forthwith move it or cause it to be moved to a nonhazardous location.
B. If the location of the vehicle does not create a traffic hazard or if the vehicle has
been removed by the direction of the officer to a nonhazardous location, the officer
shall first ascertain, if he can, who is the owner of the vehicle, and shall, in writing,
notify such owner to abate the violation forthwith and in all events within five days
after the service of the notice upon him, which notice shall be given as required
under § 250-6A for the service of notice, and if such violation shall be upon private
property, then the owner of the said private property shall be given notice in the
same manner.
A. Determine whether the vehicle has a value in excess of the cost of removing it and
storing it until time of sale, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1.
B. Unless the vehicle appears to have a value clearly in excess of such cost, he shall
arrange, if he can, for the removal of it by someone who will undertake that removal
without cost to the Borough, but otherwise he shall arrange for that removal at the
expense of the Borough to an authorized dump.
C. If the vehicle appears to have a value clearly in excess of said cost, he shall remove
it or cause it to be removed at the expense of the Borough to a storage area.
D. If the vehicle be removed, the officer shall, in the manner required by § 250-6A for
service of notice thereunder, give notice to the owner of the vehicle of the removal
and of the place to which the vehicle has been removed.
160.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 250-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § 250-6
250:2
§ 250-7. Reclaiming of impounded vehicles.
At any time prior to sale, the owner or other person entitled thereto may reclaim
possession of the vehicle upon payment of the reasonable cost of removal and storage of
the vehicle and any fine or penalty and court costs assessed against him for a violation
which gave rise to the seizing or taking possession of such vehicle, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:10A-2.
§ 250-8. Disposal of junk vehicles.161
If the Borough of Shrewsbury takes possession of a motor vehicle pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:10A-3, it shall, in its report thereof to the Director of Motor Vehicles, certify on an
application prescribed by him that such vehicle is incapable of being operated safely or
of being put in safe operational condition, except at a cost in excess of the value thereof,
and the Division of Motor Vehicles shall, without further certification or verification,
issue to the Borough, for a fee of $2, a junk title certificate thereto, with proper
assignment thereon, which shall be assigned and delivered to the purchaser of the vehicle
at public sale.
§ 250-9. Transfer of title to operable vehicles.
Upon the sale of any vehicle for which no junk title certificate shall have been issued,
the Borough of Shrewsbury shall execute and deliver to the purchaser an application for
certificate of ownership prescribed by the Director of Motor Vehicles in the same form
and manner as provided in N.J.S.A. 39:10-15, which shall also contain the name and
address, if known, of the former owner.
§ 250-10. Sale to bar all claims; disposition of proceeds.
Upon the sale of the vehicle pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, all claims
of interest therein shall be forever barred, and the proceeds realized therefrom after
payment of the expense of possession and sale shall be remitted to the Borough as its
sole property.
A. Notice required under § 250-3B shall be served upon such owner, if he resides in
the Borough, personally or by leaving it at his usual place of abode with some
member of his household over the age of 14 years; but if any such owner shall
reside outside the Borough or the state, the notice shall be served upon him by
registered mail, addressed to him at his usual residence, if ascertainable, otherwise
by notice published once in the legal newspaper of the Borough. The notice shall
be likewise served upon the holder of any security interest in the vehicle in the same
manner.
B. Notice to such owner and anyone claiming a security interest in said vehicle, filed
with the Director of Motor Vehicles, of a sale, pursuant to § 250-5, shall be as
provided in N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1.
161.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 250-6 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 250-11
250:3
§ 250-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-27-1973 by Ord. No. 346]
Anyone violating any provision of this chapter who, upon notice under the provisions
of this chapter, fails to abate such violation within five days of said notice, may, on the
complaint of the officer and subsequent conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 250-11 SHREWSBURY CODE § 250-11
250:4
Chapter 251
VEHICLES: ENGINE BRAKING
§ 251-1. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ENGINE BRAKING — The use or operation of any mechanical exhaust device
designed to aid in the braking, decompression or deceleration of any motor vehicle
which results in excessive, loud, unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle.
ENGINE COMPRESSION BRAKE — Any device that utilizes air compression and/
or rapid release of compressed air in the cylinders of engines to slow or retard vehicle
speed. Examples include, but are not limited to, Jacobs Engine Brake®, also known as
"Jake Brake®" engine retarder; Pacbrake® engine brake; TecBrake® engine break; DCelerator
® diesel exhaust brake; and similar devices that meet the definition.
PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE—Any vehicle operated by the Borough Fire Department
or the Borough Police Department, or any other emergency vehicle operated by a state,
county, and/or local agency.
§ 251-2. Prohibited activities.
The use of engine compression brakes or the act of engine braking, commonly known as
"Jake braking," shall at all times be prohibited on any roadway within the Borough.
§ 251-3. Signage.
The Borough shall, with the assistance of any requesting landowner or upon
recommendation of the Public Works Department, install appropriate signage advising
traffic that the use of engine compression brakes and the act of engine braking are
prohibited.
§ 251-4. Exclusions.
This chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
§ 251-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or company which shall violate this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
pay a fine not exceeding $2,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days for each offense. If the violation is
of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall constitute an additional,
separate, and distinct offense.
A. Public safety vehicles; and
B. A vehicle involved in an emergency wherein the operator of said vehicle reasonably
believes that the use of engine compression brakes or engine braking is necessary
to avoid and/or mitigate a collision or accident.
§ 250-11 VEHICLES: ENGINE BRAKING § 251-5
251:1

Part III, Board of Health Legislation
§ 251-5 VEHICLES: ENGINE BRAKING § 251-5
251:3

Chapter 270
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 251-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 251-5
270:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Board of Health Code
[Adopted 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 872]
§ 270-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the Board of Health ordinances of the Borough of
Shrewsbury of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Shrewsbury, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections
by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 270 through 281, are
hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as Part III of the "Code of the Borough
of Shrewsbury," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 270-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all general and permanent ordinances
enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter
expressly saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 270-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication according to
law.
§ 270-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the Borough Clerk
and shall remain there for use and examination by the public until final action is taken
on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to
by the Clerk of the Borough of Shrewsbury, as provided by law, and such certified copy
shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the Borough, to be made available to
persons desiring to examine the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 270-5. Amendments to Code.162
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to Part III of the Code, when passed
and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of Health to make them
a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into Part III of such Code so that
reference to the "Code of the Borough of Shrewsbury" shall be understood and intended
to include such additions and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or
supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments
and supplements thereto.
162.Editor's Note: The sections which were added, amended, adopted or deleted by this Adopting Ordinance are indicated
throughout Part III of the Code by a footnote referring to Chapter 270, General Provisions, Board of Health, Article I.
During routine supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the
following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 5-15-2006 by Ord. No. 872." Schedule A, which contains a complete
description of all changes, is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 270-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 270-6
270:3
§ 270-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Shrewsbury or the Secretary of the Board of Health,
pursuant to law, shall cause this Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner
required, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk or Secretary for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this
Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection by
the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 270-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or Secretary or someone authorized and directed by the
Clerk or Secretary to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All changes in said Code
and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this codification which
shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to
said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 270-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from the Clerk, or
an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to be set by the governing
body. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation of the
Code.
§ 270-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions or deletions,
any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of Shrewsbury to be misrepresented
thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance shall be subject, upon
conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $500.
§ 270-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of Part III of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof to be
unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the
validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 270-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of any section
or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 270-6 SHREWSBURY CODE § 270-12
270:4
§ 270-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted and
in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance which are inconsistent with any
provision in the Code are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency as of the
effective date of this Adopting Ordinance.
§ 270-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in § 270-12 of this
ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 9-27-1973.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any legislative
provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding
brought for the enforcement of such right or liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this ordinance in
violation of any legislative provision or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which
may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance, brought pursuant to
any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening, relocating,
straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name, improvement, acceptance or
vacation of any right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public
place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds, promising
or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and delivery of
any bond or other instruments or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property or any
lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval of the
municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of payment of
salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund for Board
of Health employees.
§ 270-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH § 270-13
270:5

Chapter 272
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 88.
Housing standards — See Ch. 145.
Nuisances — See Ch. 163.
Sewer connections — See Ch. 193.
Soil removal — See Ch. 206.
Sewerage Authority rules — See Ch. 276.
§ 272-1. Adoption of standards.
§ 272-2. Title of standards.164
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and commonly known
as the "Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems" (N.J.A.C. 7:9A).
§ 272-3. Copies on file.165
Three copies of the said Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems
(N.J.A.C. 7:9A) have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary, Clerk or other
similar officer of the Board of Health upon the introduction of this chapter and will
remain on file in said office for the use and examination of the public.
§ 272-4. Permit required; design and construction requirements.166
A. A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and method of
emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems, the issuance of permits
to locate, construct, empty or clean said systems, and fixing penalties for the
violation thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:9A. A copy of said code
is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof
herein.163
B. No privy or cesspool shall, after the effective date of this chapter, be constructed,
installed, used or maintained within the Borough of Shrewsbury.
C. There shall be and there is hereby exscinded from the above-mentioned code hereby
adopted so much of Sections 3 and 15 thereof as pertains to cesspools.
A. No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage disposal system
until a permit for the location, construction or alteration of said sewage disposal
system shall have been issued by the Board of Health.
163.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I).
164.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I).
165.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I).
166.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 270-13 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 272-4
272:1
§ 272-5. Certificates of completion required.
New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in operation, nor shall new
dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied which must rely on such
a system for sewage disposal, until the Board of Health shall have issued a certificate
indicating that said plumbing system and said disposal system have been located and
constructed, including the posting in a conspicuous place near the building sewer trap
of a diagram showing the exact location of septic tank, dry wells, laterals and their
B. No individual sewage disposal system or any part thereof shall be constructed
except in strict accordance with such plans and specifications and application as are
submitted to and approved by the Board of Health, and in accordance with the terms
and conditions of any permit issued thereunder and therefor.
C. No part of any individual sewage disposal system shall be located or constructed
closer than 15 feet to any dwelling, restaurant or other place of public assembly;
nor shall any part of such system be constructed in any place reserved to, used for
or subject to, without special permission from the Board of Health, the passage of
motor vehicles; nor shall any area in which any part of a sewage disposal system is
located be paved over with concrete, bituminous or other paving hard surface; nor
shall any part of such system be constructed in ground subject to surface flooding
or where groundwater may interfere with the satisfactory percolation of sewage;
nor shall any sanitary sewage or the flowing from any individual sewage disposal
system be discharged into any well upon the surface of the ground, upon any
thoroughfare, nor shall it be discharged into any watercourse.
D. The Board of Health may issue a permit if an application for the same is
accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice professional
engineering in New Jersey, stating that the design of the individual sewage disposal
system as proposed is in compliance with the code and said application has been
reviewed and approved by the local Board of Health.
E. Notwithstanding the provision of the said code pertaining to septic tanks, the
following higher requirements for single-family dwellings shall govern insofar as
the liquid capacity of the tank is concerned, and also requirements for commercial
institutions, offices or stores:
(1) Four bedrooms or less, single-family dwelling: not less than 1,500 gallons
capacity.
(2) Five or six bedrooms, single-family dwelling: not less than 1,750 gallons
capacity.
(3) For commercial institutions, offices or stores: a minimum of 1,500 gallons
capacity and a grease trap as required by the Plumbing Inspector.
F. Final grading of lots in the area and location of sewage disposal systems shall be
such that no more than 18 inches of soil covers the septic tank. Cover for disposal
pits and trenches shall conform to the drawings and be at final grade level.
G. No septic tank or dry well shall be left uncovered nor shall any septic tank or dry
well be abandoned without first obtaining approval from the Board of Health.
§ 272-4 SHREWSBURY CODE § 272-5
272:2
measurements thereon, in compliance with the terms of the permit issued and the
requirements of the aforesaid code. Issuance of such certificates shall not be required for
alteration to an existing individual sewage disposal system.167
§ 272-6. Refusal of permits; inspections by Board; stop-work orders.
§ 272-7. Alterations to existing systems; inspections by enforcing officers.169
No person shall alter, repair, renovate and construct any existing individual subsurface
sewage disposal system until a permit has been issued by the local Board of Health.
Application for a permit to alter, repair, renovate and construct any existing individual
sewage disposal system shall be made to the Board of Health and shall be accompanied
by three sets of plans and specifications. In addition to the foregoing, there shall be
included with the application a plot plan of the property showing the existing facilities
and proposed additions or changes thereto, including actual dimensions and locations of
A. The Board of Health may, in its discretion, refuse to issue any permit applied for
until the plans submitted with the application are amended if in the Board's opinion
the same do not suit or conform to the soil composition or if any other matters be
required which will tend to render the location not obnoxious and not a hazard or
danger to the public health or to the public safety. Percolation tests shall not be
acceptable to the Board of Health that have been taken in frozen ground or below
freezing temperatures and/or filled ground unless earth has been suitably compacted
or has been in place for six months. Wherever the grade has been changed more
than 24 inches, either fill or cut, a new percolation test shall be made in the new
location as directed by the Board. Percolation tests shall be performed by a licensed
professional engineer of the State of New Jersey and the resultant data tabulated on
a percolation test report with a certificate to the effect that the percolation tests were
made on the premises in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the
Department of Environmental Protection, State of New Jersey, and that the
engineer's seal be affixed and signed thereon.168
B. The Board of Health may, on its own motion and prior to the issuance of any permit
applied for, inspect the proposed site to determine soil composition, drainage
conditions or any other matters which it may deem advisable or necessary in order
to protect the public health and public safety.
C. The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual sewage
disposal system which is being erected or installed in violation of the code, to be
stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary to remedy such violation,
and, thereafter, the work continued without any violation of any of the provisions
of the code, and after issuance of any such order and the service of a copy thereof
upon any person connected with or working in and about the erection or installation
of any such disposal system or any part thereof, no further work shall be done
thereon except as aforesaid.
167.Editor's Note: Former § 116-5B, regarding certificates of completion; former § 116-6, License required for septic tank
cleaners; and former § 116-7, Hearing after denial of license or certification, which immediately followed this section,
were deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I).
168.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I).
169.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 272-5 SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL § 272-7
272:3
septic tanks, dry wells, seepage pits and/or laterals, and a statement to the effect that
the provisions of all applicable ordinances and codes adopted by the Board of Health,
Borough of Shrewsbury, will be fully complied with. The Health Officer or Sanitary
Inspector shall inspect the individual sewage disposal system prior to the covering up of
any portion of an individual sewage disposal system to determine whether there has been
complete compliance with this chapter and the code.
§ 272-8. Schedule of fees.170
Fees and charges are herewith established in conformance with the current schedule of
fees as adopted by the Monmouth County Regional Health Commission.
§ 272-9. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of or any
order promulgated under this chapter or the Standards for Individual Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Systems (N.J.A.C. 7:9A) made a part hereof shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $250 nor more than $500 for each
violation.171
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
170.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I).
171.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 272-7 SHREWSBURY CODE § 272-9
272:4
Chapter 276
SEWERAGE AUTHORITY RULES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer connections — See Ch. 193. Individual sewage disposal systems — See Ch. 272.
§ 272-9 SEWERAGE AUTHORITY RULES § 272-9
276:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 4-12-1971 (Ch. A131, Art. I, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 276-1. Adoption of Sewerage Authority rules.
There is hereby adopted by reference as more fully set forth herein rules and regulations
adopted by the Northeast Monmouth County Regional Sewerage Authority, August
1970, consisting of general information; Section I, Rules and Regulations; Sewer System
Standards; Section II, Standards for Individual Connections; Section III, Standards
for Acceptable Wastes; Section IV, Rates and Service Charge Schedules; Section V,
Application and Permit Forms. Wherever reference is made in the above rules and
regulations to "sewer contractor," it shall be interpreted in the Borough of Shrewsbury
and for the purposes of this article as a "licensed plumber," and no one other than a
licensed plumber shall perform those duties set forth in the rules and regulations as being
within the purview of the sewer contractor.
§ 276-2. Copy of rules on file.
Three copies of the aforesaid rules and regulations, adopted August 1970, have been
placed on file in the office of the Clerk of the Borough of Shrewsbury upon introduction
of this article, and will remain on file in such office for the use and examination of the
public.
§ 276-3. Inspections; cleanouts. [Amended 5-10-1971]
A. In addition to the above, the Plumbing Inspector of the Borough shall be responsible
only for inspections beginning at the connection of the new building sewer to the
existing building sewer, and continuing to the house and into the house. The fee
therefor shall be $10 for the first inspection. In the event reinspections are
necessary, the cost shall be $5 for each additional inspection. Fees shall be payable
to the Board of Health, Borough of Shrewsbury.
B. There shall be a cleanout installed in the vicinity of the curb or property line. Such
cleanout shall be of the ironbodied trapscrew type, caulked in a cast iron leg which
shall extend to a point not more than six inches below the surface of the ground.
Cleanouts in sewer lines shall be no more than 50 feet apart, and shall be no more
than six inches below the surface of the ground. There shall be one such cleanout
placed at the juncture of the house drain and building sewer.
§ 276-1 SEWERAGE AUTHORITY RULES § 276-3
276:3

ARTICLE II
Amendments to Rules
[Adopted 11-8-1971 (Ch. A131, Art. II, of the 1973 Code)]
§ 276-4. Use of medium-weight cast-iron pipe authorized. [Amended 9-27-1973 by
Ord. No. 346]
A. Section II of the Sewerage Authority Rules and Regulations is hereby amended as
follows:
II. STANDARDS FOR INDIVIDUAL CONNECTIONS
Detailed Requirements. Section 4.
B. Section 4 shall include the right to use medium-weight cast-iron pipe except under
driveways and areas of heavy traffic.
§ 276-4 SEWERAGE AUTHORITY RULES § 276-4
276:5

Chapter 281
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass, weeds and debris — See Ch. 77.
Housing standards — See Ch. 145.
Nuisances — See Ch. 163.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 210, Art. I.
Stormwater quality — See Ch. 215.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 250.
§ 281-1. Adoption of state code.172
A code regulating the manner in which refuse may be stored, collected and disposed
of; declaring and defining certain conditions as nuisances; and fixing the responsibilities
and duties of persons storing, collecting and/or disposing of refuse, is hereby established
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 188, P.L. 1950. A copy of said code is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 281-2. Title of code adopted; deletions.
The said code established and adopted by this chapter is described and commonly known
as the "Solid Waste Code of New Jersey (1959)," except that the following provisions of
said code are hereby deleted: Paragraphs 3.1, 3.2, 3.4 and 3.6 of Section 3.
§ 281-3. Copies on file.
Three copies of the said Solid Waste Code of New Jersey (1959) have been placed on file
in the office of the Borough Clerk, 766 Broad Street, and in the office of the Secretary
of this Board upon the introduction of this chapter and will remain on file there for the
use and examination of the public.173
§ 281-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under this chapter or
code established herein shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than
$50 nor more than $1,250, a term of imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. Each day a
particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
172.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I).
173.Editor's Note: Former § 121-4, Annual license required; fee; expiration date, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 270, General Provisions, Board of Health, Art. I).
§ 276-4 SOLID WASTE § 281-4
281:1

Appendix
§ 281-4 SOLID WASTE § 281-4
281:3

Chapter A288
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 220. Trees, shrubbery and landscaping — See Ch. 246.
§ A288-1. Purpose.
The Borough of Shrewsbury hereby grants to Comcast of Monmouth County, LLC,
renewal of its nonexclusive municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over
and under highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public places
in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other
television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and equipment as may be necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and
communication system.
§ A288-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or definition of terms is
supplemental to those definitions of the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC")
rules and regulations, 47 CFR Subsection 76.1 et seq.; and the Cable Communication
Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as amended; and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the
federal and state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of New
Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier, which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD or BPU — The Board of Public Utilities, State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this ordinance and known as "Comcast of
Monmouth County, LLC."
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Shrewsbury, County of Monmouth, State of New
Jersey.
OFFICE or OCTV — The Office of Cable Television of the Board.
§ A288-3. Statement of findings.
Public hearings conducted by the municipality, concerning the renewal of municipal
consent herein granted to the company, were held after proper public notice pursuant to
the terms and conditions of the Act and the regulations of the Board adopted pursuant
§ 281-4 CABLE TELEVISION § A288-3
A288:1
thereto. Said hearings having been fully open to the public, and the municipality having
received at said public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the
company to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications and that the company's operating and construction arrangements are
adequate and feasible.
§ A288-4. Duration of franchise.
§ A288-5. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during each year
of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the municipality 2% of the gross
revenues from all recurring charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers
for cable television reception service in the municipality or any higher amount permitted
by the Act or otherwise allowable by the law, whichever is greater.
§ A288-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to the renewal of the franchise shall apply to
the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently annexed hereto.
§ A288-7. Extension of service.
The company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or business along
any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as set forth in the company's
application, at tariffed rates for standard and nonstandard installations. Any extension of
plant beyond the primary service area shall be governed by the company's line extension
policy, as set forth in the company's application as described herein.
§ A288-8. Construction requirements.
A. The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15 years from the
date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval issued by the Board.
B. At the end of the first five years after issuance of a renewal certificate of approval,
a review shall be conducted by the municipality to determine whether the company
shall have substantially complied with all material obligations under this ordinance,
in which event the renewal of municipal consent granted hereunder shall continue
for the remaining period.
C. In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not substantially
complied with the material terms and conditions of this ordinance, the municipality
shall have the right to petition the OCTV, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for
appropriate action, including modification and/or termination of the certificate of
approval; provided, however, that the municipality shall first have given the
company written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance and an
opportunity to cure same within 90 days of that notification.
A. Restoration. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface in the natural topography, the
§ A288-3 SHREWSBURY CODE § A288-8
A288:2
§ A288-9. Customer service.
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with N.J.A.C. 14:18-1
et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and regulations. The company shall
strive to meet or exceed all voluntary company and industry standards in the delivery
of customer service and shall be prepared to report on it to the community upon written
request of the Borough Administrator or Clerk.
company shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such places or things so
disturbed in as good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. Relocation. If, at any time during the period of this consent, the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the company,
upon reasonable notice by the municipality, shall remove, re-lay or relocate its
equipment, at the expense of the company.
C. Temporary removal of cables. The company shall, upon request of the municipality
at the company's expense, temporarily raise, lower, or remove its lines in order to
facilitate the moving of buildings or machinery or in other like circumstances.
Whenever the request is made by, for, or on behalf of private parties, the cost will
be borne by those same parties.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under
this franchise, the company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and
overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places of the municipality so
as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and
cables of the company. Such trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to
maintain proper clearance of the company's wire and cables and the company shall
comply with the requirements of the BPU and Shrewsbury Shade Tree Commission
(see Chapter 246, § 246-3B).
A. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and federal
statutes and regulations regarding credits for outages, the reporting of same to
regulatory agencies and notification of same to customers.
B. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and federal
statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for the hearing
impaired and the notification of same to customers.
C. The company shall use every effort to meet or exceed voluntary standards for
telephone accessibility developed by the National Cable Television Association
(NCTA) and shall schedule service appointments within four-hour windows. Those
standards shall include, but not be limited to, the goal of answering 80% of
incoming telephone calls within 30 seconds.
D. The company shall provide credits for service disruptions of three hours or more
when requested by customers.
E. The company is permitted, but is not required, to charge a late fee consistent with
applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
F. The company shall send a second notice if they fail to disconnect a customer's
§ A288-8 CABLE TELEVISION § A288-9
A288:3
§ A288-10. Municipal complaint officer.
The Borough Administrator is hereby designated as the complaint officer for the
municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(a). All complaints shall be in writing, and
received and processed by the complaint officer. Upon receipt of such written complaint,
the complaint officer shall investigate the complaint without formal hearing and provide
a determination to all interested parties within 30 days of receipt of the complaint. The
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports pertaining to
the complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ A288-11. Local office.
§ A288-12. Performance bonds.
During the life of the franchise, the company shall give the municipality a bond in
the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of all
undertakings of the company as represented in its application for municipal consent
incorporated herein.
§ A288-13. Subscriber rates.
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by federal and state
law.
§ A288-14. Public, educational and governmental access.
service within 30 days of the first shutoff notice.
G. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the municipality to
express any comment with respect to telephone accessibility to the complaint
officer, or impair the right of the complaint officer to take any action that is
appropriate under law.
A. During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company shall
maintain a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving, investigating
and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment
malfunctions and similar matters. Such local business office shall be open during
normal business hours and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday. Telephone response for such purposes as mentioned herein will be
provided by the company's employees, representatives or agents 24 hours per day.
B. The telephone number and address of the local office shall be listed in applicable
telephone directories and in correspondence from the company to the customer. The
telephone number for the local office shall utilize an exchange that is a nontoll call
for municipality residents.
A. The company shall continue to provide residents with a system-wide public access
channel maintained by the company. Qualified individuals and organizations may
utilize public access for the purpose of cablecasting noncommercial access
programming in conformance with company's published public access rules.
B. The company shall continue to provide a system-wide leased access channel
§ A288-9 SHREWSBURY CODE § A288-14
A288:4
§ A288-15. Commitments by company.
§ A288-16. Two-way services and interconnection.
In the event that the municipality determines that it is necessary and feasible for it to
contract with the company for the purpose of providing two-way or interconnection
services, the company shall be required to apply to the BPU for approval to enter into
and establish the terms and conditions of such contract. All costs for such application to
the BPU shall be borne by the municipality.
§ A288-17. Emergency uses.
maintained by the company for the purpose of cablecasting commercial access
programming in conformance with the company's guideline and applicable state
and federal statutes and regulations.
C. The company shall take any steps that are necessary to ensure that the signals
originated on the access channels are carried without material degradation, and with
a signal whose quality is equal to that of the other standard channels that the
company transmits.
A. The company shall continue to provide free basic television service on one outlet in
each the Shrewsbury Borough Elementary School and school library, and on one
outlet each in the Municipal Building and Police Department, one outlet each in the
firehouse, first aid, the historical building and public works building that is located
or may be constructed within the municipality, provided the facility is located
within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant.
B. Within 12 months of issuance of a renewal certificate of approval (COA) by the
BPU, the company shall provide to the municipality a one-time grant for cable- and
technology-related needs in the amount of $12,000.
C. The company shall provide a one-time grant to the Red Bank Regional High School
for television production equipment in the name of the boroughs of Red Bank, Little
Silver, and Shrewsbury within 12 months of the issuance of a renewal certificate of
approval (COA) by the BPU to the third of the three named municipalities. The
amount of the grant shall be determined by the criteria outlined in Schedule A
(attached).174
D. Based on information distributed by the Division of the Ratepayer Advocate, cable
television late fees are regulated by the BPU. While the Board rules do not regulate
the amount a cable operator may charge for a late fee, the Board's rules require that
a cable television operator may not impose a late fee until the customer's account
balance is 30 or more days overdue and also requires the cable operators to clearly
specify the amount of a late fee on their bill.
E. The company shall provide additional services as outlined in the separate letter of
agreement.
A. The company shall be required to fully comply with all applicable federal and state
174.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A288-14 CABLE TELEVISION § A288-17
A288:5
§ A288-18. Liability insurance.
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability insurance
policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability for any death, personal
injury, property damage or other liability arising out of its construction and operation of
the cable television system, and an excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount
of $3,000,000.
§ A288-19. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the municipality by the company, except as modified
herein, are binding upon the company as terms and conditions of this municipal consent.
The application and any other relevant writings submitted by the company shall be
considered a part of this ordinance and made part hereof by reference as long as it does
not conflict with state or federal law. All ordinances or parts of ordinances or other
agreements are hereby declared invalid and superseded.
§ A288-20. Competitive equity.
Should the municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable
television system to any other person, corporation or entity on terms materially less
burdensome or more favorable than the terms contained herein, the company may
substitute such language that is more favorable or less burdensome for the comparable
provision of this ordinance subject to provision of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ A288-21. Separability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for
any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or federal or state agency of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision, and its validity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of the ordinance.
§ A288-22. Third-party beneficiaries.
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to confer thirdparty
beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce the terms of such
agreements or franchise.
§ A288-23. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal certificate of
statutes and regulations, and rules and regulations governing the implementation,
operation and testing of the emergency alert system (EAS).
B. The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason the
municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system as
contemplated herein.
§ A288-17 SHREWSBURY CODE § A288-23
A288:6
approval by the BPU.
§ A288-23 CABLE TELEVISION § A288-23
A288:7

Derivation Table
§ A288-23 CABLE TELEVISION § A288-23
A288:9

Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ A288-23 DERIVATION TABLE § A288-23
DT:1

Disposition List
§ A288-23 DERIVATION TABLE § A288-23
DT:3

Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
869 4-13-2006 Authorization to approve bond NCM
870 4-13-2006 Bond NCM
871 5-15-2006 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. III
872 5-15-2006 Adoption of Board of Health
Code
Ch. 270, Art. I
873 6-5-2006 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
874 6-19-2006 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
875 7-10-2006 Snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 202
876 Vehicles and traffic amendment Tabled
877 8-21-2006 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94 (footnote only)
878 Rescinded
879 8-21-2006 Alcoholic beverages amendment Ch. 63
880 8-21-2006 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 88
881 9-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 90
882 9-5-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 90
883 Tabled
884 10-16-2006 Massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy businesses amendment
Ch. 157
885 11-20-2006 Community Alliance for the
Prevention of Alcohol and Drug
Abuse
Ch. 9, Art. IV
886 11-20-2006 Firearms amendment Ch. 106
887 12-4-2006 Bond NCM
888 12-4-2006 Bond NCM
889 Not adopted
890 2-5-2007 Bond NCM
891 4-3-2007 Bond NCM
§ A288-23 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:1
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
892 Not adopted
893 4-16-2007 Ordinance to exceed budget NCM
894 5-7-2007 Capital ordinance NCM
895 5-21-2007 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
896 5-21-2007 Municipal Housing Liaison Ch. 5, Art. XIII
897 5-21-2007 Alcoholic beverages amendment Ch. 63
898 6-4-2007 Towing amendment Ch. 242
899 7-16-2007 Municipal Emergency
Management Coordinator
Ch. 5, Art. XIV
900 7-16-2007 Alcoholic beverages amendment Ch. 63
901 8-6-2007 Swimming pools and hot tubs Ch. 226
902 9-4-2007 Bond NCM
903 10-1-2007 Animals: dogs amendment Ch. 67, Art. I
904 11-5-2007 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
905 12-3-2007 Private sales; auctions
amendment
Ch. 188
906 2-18-2008 Bond NCM
907 3-3-2008 Alcoholic beverages amendment Ch. 63
908 Withdrawn
909 3-3-2008 Bond NCM
910 4-7-2008 Bond NCM
911 4-7-2008 Bond NCM
912 4-7-2008 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
913 6-2-2008 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
914 5-19-2008 Defense and indemnification Ch. 19
915 6-23-2008 Bond NCM
916 6-23-2008 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
917 7-7-2008 Bond NCM
918 9-2-2008 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
919 9-15-2008 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
§ DL-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § DL-1
DL:2
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
920 8-18-2008 Utility poles on public streets Ch. 220, Art. III
921 10-6-2008 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
922 9-2-2008 Retirement programs: Defined
Contribution Retirement Program
Ch. 43, Art. I
923 11-3-2008 Bond NCM
924 12-15-2008 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
925 12-15-2008 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
926 12-15-2008 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
927 12-15-2008 Purchase of development rights
and public access easement
NCM
928 Land use amendment Withdrawn
929 Land use amendment Withdrawn
930 5-18-2009 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
931 8-3-2009 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
932 9-8-2009 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
933 8-3-2009 Capital appropriation NCM
934 8-3-2009 Bond NCM
935 9-8-2009 Capital appropriation NCM
936 9-8-2009 Capital appropriation NCM
937 9-21-2009 Flood hazard areas: flood damage
prevention amendment
Ch. 122, Art. II
938 3-1-2010 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
939 2-16-2010 Recreation Committee
amendment
Ch. 9, Art. III
940 2-16-2010 Environmental Commission
amendment
Ch. 9, Art. I
941 4-5-2010 Bond NCM
942 5-17-2010 Licenses amendment Ch. 152
943 6-21-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
944 8-2-2010 Halloween curfews Ch. 130
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:3
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
945 9-7-2010 Bond NCM
946 9-7-2010 Bond NCM
947 9-7-2010 Bond NCM
948 9-7-2010 Firearms and weapons
amendment
Ch. 106
949 9-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 90
950 Parks and recreation facilities
amendment
Withdrawn 9-20-2010
951 10-18-2010 Property maintenance amendment Ch. 183
952 12-6-2010 Capital appropriation NCM
953 12-20-2010 Capital appropriation NCM
954 2-7-2011 Shade Tree Commission
amendment
Ch. 9, Art. II
955 2-7-2011 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 88
956 4-18-2011 Bond NCM
957 4-18-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 90
958 5-2-2011 Alcoholic beverages amendment Ch. 63
959 6-20-2011 Recreation Committee
amendment
Ch. 9, Art. III
960 8-15-2011 Bond NCM
961 8-15-2011 Capital appropriation NCM
962 8-15-2011 Capital appropriation NCM
963 8-15-2011 Capital appropriation NCM
964 8-15-2011 Capital appropriation NCM
965 8-15-2011 Capital appropriation NCM
966 9-6-2011 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
967 9-6-2011 Parks and recreation facilities
amendment
Ch. 170
968 9-6-2011 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
969 9-19-2011 Animals: kennels, pounds and
shelters amendment
Ch. 67, Art. III
970 9-19-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 90
971 9-19-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 90
972 11-21-2011 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § DL-1
DL:4
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
973 11-21-2011 Massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy businesses amendment
Ch. 157
974 12-5-2011 Administration of government:
Borough Clerk amendment
Ch. 5, Art. III
975 12-19-2011 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
976 2-6-2012 Recycling amendment Ch. 210, Art. II
977 3-5-2012 Limousines Ch. 154
978 3-5-2012 Emergency appropriation NCM
979 Vacation of alley Withdrawn
980 Exceed budget; cap bank Not introduced
981 4-16-2012 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 236
982 5-21-2012 Hawking, peddling and
canvassing amendment
Ch. 132
983 6-4-2012 Bond NCM
984 6-4-2012 Bond NCM
985 6-4-2012 Bond NCM
986 7-16-2012 Massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy businesses amendment
Ch. 157
987 7-16-2012 Rental property: registration of
rental units
Ch. 186, Art. I
988 8-20-2012 Vacation of alley NCM
989 10-1-2012 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
990 10-1-2012 Shrewsbury Community Garden Ch. 9, Art. V
991 2-19-2013 Appropriation NCM
992 Tabled
993 3-18-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
994 5-6-2013 Bond NCM
995 5-6-2013 Bond NCM
996 6-17-2013 Bond NCM
997 6-17-2013 Bond NCM
998 8-19-2013 Bond NCM
999 Tabled
1000 3-3-2014 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 90
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:5
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1001 3-3-2014 Parks and recreation facilities
amendment
Ch. 170
1002 4-7-2014 Stormwater quality amendment Ch. 215
1003 4-21-2014 Bond NCM
1004 6-16-2014 Bond NCM
1005 6-16-2014 Bond NCM
1006 6-16-2014 Bond NCM
1007 6-16-2014 Bond NCM
1008 11-3-2014 Bond NCM
1009 11-17-2014 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
1010 11-17-2017 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
1011 4-20-2015 Bond NCM
1012 6-1-2015 Bond NCM
1013 6-1-2015 Recreation Committee
amendment
Ch. 9, Art. III
1014 6-1-2015 Bond NCM
1015 6-1-2015 Appropriation NCM
1016 7-20-2015 Bond NCM
1017 8-18-2015 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 90
1018 9-8-2015 Bond NCM
1019 9-8-2015 Bond NCM
1020 9-8-2015 Police Department: establishment
amendment; Police Department:
fees amendment
Ch. 39, Art. I; Ch. 39,
Art. II
1021 Tabled
1022 11-2-2015 Bond NCM
1023 Tabled
1024 3-21-2016 Bond NCM
1025 4-4-2016 Nursing and assisted living
homes: transportation
requirements
Repealed by Ord. No.
1069
1026 5-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 90
1027 7-18-2016 Bond NCM
1028 7-18-2016 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § DL-1
DL:6
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1029 7-18-2016 Bond NCM
1030 8-15-2016 Bond NCM
1031 10-3-2016 Parks and recreation facilities
amendment
Ch. 170
1032 12-4-2017 Bond NCM
1033 5-15-2017 Bond NCM
1034 5-15-2017 Bond NCM
1035 5-15-2017 Bond NCM
1036 5-15-2017 Bond NCM
1037 5-15-2017 Bond NCM
1038 5-15-2017 Bond NCM
1039 8-21-2017 Online purchase exchange zone Ch. 168
1040 8-21-2017 Parks and recreation facilities
amendment
Ch. 170
1041 10-3-2017 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
1042 4-2-2018 Fire Prevention: Uniform Fire
Code Amendment
Ch. 118, Art. I
1043 5-21-2018 Bond NCM
1044 5-21-2018 Bond NCM
1045 5-21-2018 Bond NCM
1046 5-21-2018 Bond NCM
1047 5-21-2018 Bond NCM
1048 5-21-2018 Bond NCM
1049 5-21-2018 Bond NCM
1050 6-4-2018 Flood Hazard Areas: Flood
Damage Prevention Amendment
Ch. 122, Art. II
1051 10-15-2018 Bond NCM
1052 10-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 90
1053 10-15-2018 Alcoholic Beverages Amendment Ch. 63
1054 12-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 90
1055 12-17-2018 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
1056 12-17-2018 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
1057 3-18-2019 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 90
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:7
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1058 5-20-2019 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
1059 5-20-2019 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
1060 5-20-2019 Zoning and Land Development
Amendment
Ch. 94
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1061 6-17-2019 Bond NCM 23
1062 6-17-2019 Bond NCM 23
1063 6-17-2019 Bond NCM 23
1064 6-17-2019 Bond NCM 23
1065 7-15-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 90 23
1066 9-3-2019 Bond NCM 23
1067 4-20-2020 Salaries and Compensation
Amendment
Ch. 45 23
1068 6-15-2020 Bond NCM 23
1069 6-15-2020 Nursing and Assisted Living
Homes: Transportation
Requirements
Ch. 166, Art. I 23
1070 6-15-2020 Bond NCM 23
1071 7-6-2020 Landscaping, Landscaper
Licensing, Registration, and
Noise
Ch. 146 23
1072 7-20-2020 Appropriation NCM 23
1073 9-8-2020 Bond NCM 23
1074 9-8-2020 Bond NCM 23
1075 9-8-2020 Bond NCM 23
1076 10-5-2020 Codification of Zoning and
Land Development
Ch. 1, Art. IV 22
2020-1077 12-7-2020 Zoning and Land
Development Amendment
Ch. 94 24
2021-1078 4-19-2021 Zoning and Land
Development Amendment
(Stormwater)
Not Yet
Codified;
Pending
Revision
§ DL-1 SHREWSBURY CODE § DL-1
DL:8
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2021-1079 4-5-2021 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM 24
2021-1080 5-3-2021 Vehicles: Engine Braking Ch. 251 24
2021-1081 5-3-2021 Bond NCM 24
2021-1082 5-3-2021 Bond NCM 24
2021-1083 5-3-2021 Bond NCM 24
2021-1084 5-3-2021 Bond NCM 24
2021-1085 5-3-2021 Appropriation NCM 24
2021-1086 5-3-2021 Appropriation NCM 24
2021-1087 5-3-2021 Appropriation NCM 24
2021-1088 5-17-2021 Zoning and Land
Development Amendment
Ch. 94 24
2021-1089 9-7-2021 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Not Yet
Codified;
Pending DOT
Approval
2021-1090 10-18-2021 Zoning and Land
Development Amendment
Ch. 94 24
2021-1091 10-18-2021 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Not Yet
Codified;
Pending DOT
Approval
§ DL-1 DISPOSITION LIST § DL-1
DL:9

ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
[Adopted 5-11-1987 as part of Ord. No. 555; amended 6-8-1992 by Ord. No. 644; 3-14-1994 by Ord. No. 675; 11-13-1995 by Ord. No. 708
7-14-1997 by Ord. No. 737; 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 778; 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 837; 6-5-2006 by Ord. No. 873; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 924; 12-15-2008 by Ord. No. 925]
94 Attachment 14
Borough of Shrewsbury
Schedule of Zoning District Regulations

Zone District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width Front Yard Rear Yard Feet Side Yard Minimum Lot Depth Maximum Height Stories 
Minimum Living Area Minimum Gross Floor Area Maximum Lot Coverage Maximum Building Coverage Maximum Floor Area Ratio
R-1 Single-Family 45,000 150 50 50 20 30 N/A 35 2 1/2 1,800 2,000 2,000 2,200 N/A 20% 10% N/A
R-1A Single-Family Cluster 45,000 150 50 50 15 30 N/A 35 2 1/2 1,800 2,000 2,200 2,200 N/A 20% 10% N/A
R-1A Single-Family Cluster 22,500 150 50 50 15 25 N/A 35 2 1/2 1,500 1,600 1,650 1,800 N/A 20% 10% N/A
R-1B Single-Family Senior Citizen - 400 75 501 252 501 400 35 2 1/21 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 40% 20% 0.50
R-2 Single-Family 22,500 150 50 50 15 25 N/A 35 2 1/2 1,500 1,600 1,650 1,800 N/A 20% 10% N/A
R-3 Single-Family 15,000 100 35 35 10 15 N/A 35 2 1/2 1,200 1,300 1,300 1,400 N/A 20% 15% N/A
R-4 Single-Family 10,000 65 35 35 10 10 N/A 35 2 1/2 1,000 1,100 1,200 1,250 N/A 25% 20% N/A
R-4.5 Single-Family 8,000 60 30 35 10 9 N/A 35 2 1/2 900 1,100 1,200 1,250 N/A 25% 20% N/A
R-5 Single-Family 6,000 50 20 35 15 8 N/A 35 2 1/2 800 1,000 1,100 1,200 N/A 30% 25% N/A

NOTES:
1 Five feet for fireproof accessory buildings not exceeding 100 square feet.
2 Accessory buildings and freestanding garages shall not exceed 16 feet nor one story in height.
3 Combined front and rear yards shall not be less than 175 feet.
4 No building shall be constructed within 75 feet of any property zoned for residential use.
5 Total width of side yards: 100 feet.
6 On ground floor level.
94 Attachment 14:1 Supp 22, Oct 2020
XXXXX CODE
N/A = Not Applicable.
94 Attachment 14:2 00 - 00 - 0000