Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [1978 Code § 1-1; New]
This book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Sparta, 1999" and is herein referred to as
the "Revision" or "Code."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [1978 Code § 1-2; New]
For the purpose of this Revision and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
CHARTER — Shall mean the provisions of the Optional Municipal Charter
Law, L. 1950, c. 210, as amended (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.) applicable to
that form of government provided therein known as "Council-Manager Plan
B."
CLERK OR TOWNSHIP CLERK — Shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law.
COUNCIL — See Township Council.
COUNTY — Shall mean the County of Sussex.
GENERAL LAW — Shall mean any law or provision of law, not inconsistent
with the Optional Municipal Charter Law heretofore or hereafter enacted
which is by its terms applicable or available to all municipalities, and
the following additional laws whether or not such additional laws are so
applicable or available to all municipalities; legislation relating to taxation,
local courts, education, health, public authorities serving more than one
municipality, and municipalities in unsound financial condition.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Township Council of the Township
of Sparta elected pursuant to Council-Manager Plan B of the Optional
Municipal Charter Law, consisting of five elected Councilmen.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this Code.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
MUNICIPAL MANAGER, TOWNSHIP MANAGER OR MANAGER — Shall
mean the person appointed by the Township Council as Municipal Manager
of the Township pursuant to the Charter, or the person duly authorized
pursuant to the Charter to perform his duties during the temporary absence
or disability of the Manager.
1:1
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Township of Sparta in the County of
Sussex.
NEW JERSEY STATUTES OR N.J.S.A. — Shall mean that body of statutory
law containing revisions of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey and known
as the New Jersey Statutes, as amended and supplemented.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words swear and sworn
shall be construed to be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL — And the title of an officer or official shall be
construed as if the words of the Township of Sparta followed it.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this Code, so long as it shall have been
adopted by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so
long as it shall remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — When applied to a building or land shall include any part owner,
any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building
or land.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations, or
unincorporated groups, or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
of any kind or personal representatives of any kind thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARE, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC PLACES
— Shall mean any and every public ground, public square, public park
or other public place within the Township which is within the jurisdiction
and control of the Township, and which is or may be in general use by all
citizens, and in which all have an equal right of passage and repassage at
will.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any portion of a street or highway between the
curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE — Shall mean the State of New Jersey.
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, footpath and crosswalk,
and every class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the
general public.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — When applied to a building or land, shall
include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land,
whether alone or with others.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Sparta in the County of Sussex
and State of New Jersey.
§ 1-2 SPARTA CODE § 1-2
1:2
TOWNSHIP COUNCIL OR COUNCIL — Shall mean the local legislative
body of the Township constituted and elected pursuant to the Charter or
code and designated as the Municipal Council of the Township of Sparta.
WEEK — Shall mean seven days.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [1978 Code § 1-3; New]
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require, the
following information is provided. Technical words and phrases, and words
and phrases having a special or accepted meaning in the law, shall be
construed in accordance with such technical or special or accepted
meaning.
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter, and may refer to
firms, associations, bodies corporate, and other artificial persons.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
Preceding shall mean next before; following shall mean after.
Shall is mandatory and may is permissive.
The time within which an act is done shall be computed by excluding the
first and including the last day, and if the last day be a Sunday or a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Township are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
Writing and written shall include printing, typewriting and any other mode
of communication using paper or similar material which is in general use,
as well as legible handwriting.
And may be construed as meaning or, and or as and, if the sense requires
and indicates such meaning.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a Statute, law or ordinance contained in this Revision shall
be deemed to refer to such Statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether
or not such designation is included in the citation.
Chapter shall mean one of the major divisions of the revision identified by
an Arabic number and divided by subject matter.
Section shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
Subsection shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
Paragraph shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [1978 Code § 1-4; New]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Code.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [New; Ord. No. 06-12 § 1]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code or other ordinance
of the Township, where no specific penalty is provided regarding the section
violated, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by one or more of
the following: a fine not exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days or to a period of community service not exceeding 90
days at the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court. (N.J.S. 40:49-5)
§ 1-5.2. Separate Violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Township exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.3. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal
penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case of
violation.
§ 1-5.4. Minimum Penalty. [New]
The Township Council may prescribe that, for the violation of any particular
Code provision or ordinance, at least a minimum penalty shall be imposed
which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not exceeding
$100 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5).
§ 1-3 SPARTA CODE § 1-5.5
1:4
§ 1-5.5. Repeat Offenses. [New]
Any person who is convicted of violating an ordinance within one year of the
date of a previous violation of the same ordinance and who was fined for
the previous violation, shall be sentenced to an additional fine as a repeat
offender. The additional fine as imposed upon a person for repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine imposed for
a violation of the ordinance, but shall be calculated separately from the fine
imposed for the initial conviction of violating the ordinance.
§ 1-5.6. Default of Payment of Fine. [New]
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the court by which he was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in
the County jail or place of detention provided by the Township, for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-5.7. Violations Bureau Fine Schedule. [Ord. No. 03-13 § 1; Ord.
No. 04-15]
The following local supplemental Violations Bureau fine schedule is adopted
as follows:
TRAFFIC SECTION
DESIGNATED OFFENSE
Ordinance
Number Short Description Amount
7-7.2 Parking during state of emergency
(weather)
$28
7-7.3 Temporary parking prohibition for snow
plowing
$28
7-14.1 Parking prohibited certain hours $28
7-17 Trucks over 4 tons excluded from certain
streets
$63
7-35.1 Handicapped parking on street $278
7-35.2 Handicapped parking in municipal lots and
board of education properties
$278
7-35.3 Handicapped parking on private property
open to public (retail)
$278
7-35.4 Handicapped parking on all other private
property
$278
7-37.1 Illegal parking at Sparta High School $28
9-8 Illegal parking at Township Parks $28
§ 1-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5.7
1:5
TRAFFIC SECTION
DESIGNATED OFFENSE
Ordinance
Number Short Description Amount
16-2 Parking, stopping standing or obstructing
fire lanes
$28
NON-TRAFFIC SECTION
DESIGNATED OFFENSE
Ordinance
Number Short Description Amount
5-2.3 Unlicensed dog $40 — 1st offense
$105 — 2nd offense
$155 — 3rd offense
5-2.4 Removal of tag (dog) $15 — 1st offense
$30 — 2nd offense
$40 — 3rd offense
5-4.1 Disturbing the peace - barking,
crying (dog)
$55 — 1st offense
$105 — 2nd offense
$255 — 3rd offense
5-4.2 Running at large (dog) $55 — 1st offense
$105 — 2nd offense
$255 — 3rd offense
5-4.3 Dog control/leash $30 — 1st offense
$55 — 2nd offense
$105 — 3rd offense
5-5.2 Defecation on private property $55 — 1st offense
$105 — 2nd offense
$255 — 3rd offense
5-5.3 Defecation on public property $55 — 1st offense
$105 — 2nd offense
$255 — 3rd offense
§ 1-5.7 SPARTA CODE § 1-5.7
1:6
NON-TRAFFIC SECTION
DESIGNATED OFFENSE
Ordinance
Number Short Description Amount
5-5.4 Defecation on owner's property $52 — 1st offense
$102 — 2nd offense
$252 — 3rd offense
5-12.1 Unlicensed cat $37 — 1st offense
$52 — 2nd offense
$102 — 3rd offense
5-12.1 Failure to vaccinate cat $37 — 1st offense
$52 — 2nd offense
$102 — 3rd offense
5-12.2 Failure to display tag (cat) $12 — 1st offense
$27 — 2nd offense
$37 — 3rd offense
§ 1-6. MAINTENANCE AND SALE OF CODE.
§ 1-6.1. Code Book to Be Kept Up-to-Date. [New]
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk, or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Clerk for the
use of the public. All changes in the Code and all ordinances adopted
subsequent to the effective date of this codification, which shall be adopted
specifically as part of the Code, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to the Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-6.2. Sale of Code Book. [New]
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Municipal Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the
Township Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures
for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-5.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6.3
1:7
§ 1-6.3. Altering or Tampering With Code; Penalties for Violation.
[New]
It shall be unlawful to improperly change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with this
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
of Sparta to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Section
1-5, Penalty, of this chapter.
§ 1-7. OFFICIAL TOWNSHIP SEAL. [1978 Code § 1-5]
The Seal heretofore provided and used by and for the Township as its official
seal is hereby continued as the official seal of the Township.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
Editor's Note: For Statutes requiring the taking of oaths of office
and requiring bond of certain officers and employees, see Local
Fiscal Affairs Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:5-33 et seq. For salary grades and
ranges, wages, compensation and fees of all officers and employees
of the Township, see the salary ordinances of the Township. Such
ordinances are not included in these Revised General Ordinances,
but are saved from repeal. See the Adopting Ordinance.
§ 1-6.3 SPARTA CODE § 1-7
1:8
ARTICLE I
Form of Local Government
§ 2-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF COUNCIL-MANAGER PLAN B;
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
§ 2-1.1. Form of Local Government.
Effective as of July 1, 1960, the voters of the Township of Sparta, by
referendum held in 1959 and acting pursuant to the Optional Municipal
Charter Law (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.), commonly known as the Faulkner
Act, adopted Article 10, Council-Manager Plan B of that Statute as their
form of local government. Pursuant to this Plan, five Council members are
elected at large on a nonpartisan basis for overlapping terms of four years
(N.J.S.A. 40:69A-101; N.J.S.A. 40:69A-83). The Township Council elects one
of its members to serve as Mayor (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-86).
§ 2-1.2. Time for Regular Municipal Elections. [Ord. No. 10-24]
The Sparta Township municipal election under the Optional Municipal
Charter Law/Faulkner Act is changed from May to the November general
election day, the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:45-7.1.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1.2
1:9

ARTICLE II
Township Council
§ 2-2. THE COUNCIL.
§ 2-2.1. General Powers of Council. [1978 Code § 2-2.1]
All powers of the municipality and determination of all matters of policy
shall be vested in the Council except as otherwise provided by law or the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 2-2.2. Compensation of Members of Council. [1978 Code § 2-2.2]
The members of the Council shall serve with compensation as prescribed
by ordinance and shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred by reason of
Township business.
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2.2
1:11

ARTICLE III
Meetings of the Township Council
§ 2-3. TOWNSHIP COUNCIL MEETINGS.
§ 2-3.1. Annual Organization Meeting; Election of Mayor and
Deputy Mayor. [1978 Code § 2-2.3]
The Council shall meet annually for organization on the first day of January.
At each organization meeting, the Council shall elect a Mayor and a Deputy
Mayor.
§ 2-3.2. Regular Meetings. [1978 Code § 2-2.4; New]
The Council shall meet regularly in the Municipal Building or such other
public building as may be determined by Resolution, on the second and
fourth Tuesdays of each month at 8:00 p.m. prevailing time, except that
the Council may, by Resolution, dispense with one or more of the regular
meetings otherwise scheduled. When the time for any regular meeting of
the Council shall fall on a holiday, the meeting shall be held at the same
hour on the next succeeding day which is not a holiday.
Notice of meetings shall be given in accordance with the "Open Public
Meeting Act," N.J.S.A. 10:4-6.
§ 2-3.3. Special Meetings. [1978 Code § 2-2.5]
The Mayor may at any time, and upon the written request of any three
members of the Council, call a special meeting. Requests, if any, and the call
for such special meeting shall specify the purpose of the meeting and no
business shall be transacted at any special meeting other than that specified
unless all five members agree to consider business not specified in the call
of the meeting.
Any call for a special meeting shall be filed with the Township Clerk. Upon
filing the Clerk shall forthwith give notice thereof by telephone to each
member of the Council at such places as each member of the Council has
previously designated for that purpose. The Clerk shall also serve or cause
to be served a written copy of the call upon each Member of the Council by
delivery of a copy to him personally or by leaving a copy at his usual place
of residence. Upon written waiver of notice executed by all of the members
of the Council, a special meeting may be held without prior notice. Notice
shall be given as prescribed by law.
§ 2-3.4. Meetings Open to Public; Attendance by Township
Personnel. [1978 Code § 2-2.6]
All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public.
The Manager, Clerk, and such other municipal officers and employees as
may be required by special order of the Council shall attend regular or
special meetings of the Council.1
§ 2-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-3.5
1:13
§ 2-3.5. Conferences. [1978 Code § 2-2.7]
The Council may meet at any time at informal conferences to plan the
agenda of future meetings, for the preliminary consideration of any
Township business, or to confer with any officer or employee of the
Township or other persons on Township business. Notice of all meetings
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open Public
Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6.
§ 2-3.6. Quorum. [1978 Code § 2-2.8]
A majority of all of the members elected to the Council shall constitute a
quorum at any meeting of the Council. A lesser number may adjourn any
meeting 15 minutes after the appointed hour if a quorum is not present. If
no member of the Council is present 15 minutes after the appointed hour
for any meeting, the Clerk shall adjourn the meeting.
§ 2-3.7. Procedures Governing Rules at Meetings. [1978 Code
§ 2-2.9]
The order of business, agenda, conduct of meetings, procedures, and any
and all matters pertaining to actions of the Council shall be determined and
prescribed by Resolution of the Council.
Except as may be provided by the Charter, this chapter, or such Resolution,
the order and conduct of business shall be according to the latest revised
edition of Robert's Rules of Order.
No action may be taken by the Council except at a regular or special
meeting.
1. Editor's Note: The State Statutes provide that the Municipal Clerk served as Clerk of
Council, see N.J.S.A. 40:69A.38.
§ 2-3.5 SPARTA CODE § 2-3.7
1:14
ARTICLE IV
Organization of Government
§ 2-4. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION.
§ 2-4.1. Departments, Offices, Boards, Committees, Agencies and
Instrumentalities. [1978 Code § 2-4.1; amended 3-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-02]
The administrative functions, powers and duties, except such as are by law
reserved to the Council, shall be allocated among and within the following
departments, offices, boards, committees, agencies and instrumentalities.
a. Departments and Municipal Offices:
Court Administrator.
Township Manager.
Township Clerk.
Township Attorney.
Township Engineer.
Township Auditor.
Emergency Management.
Tax Assessor.
Construction Official - Zoning Officer.
Tax Collector.
Chief Financial Officer.
Water Superintendent.
Municipal Public Defender.
Police Department.
Health Department.
Department of Public Works.
Department of Parks and Recreation.
b. Boards, committees, agencies and instrumentalities which are not
allocated nor assigned to a Department:
Planning Board.
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 2-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4.1
1:15
§ 2-5. (RESERVED)
Public Library Board of Trustees.
The Council may create such additional advisory committees as it may
deem advisable.
c. Municipal Court:
Municipal Court of the Township of Sparta.
§ 2-4.1 SPARTA CODE § 2-5
1:16
ARTICLE V
Statutory Offices
§ 2-6. TOWNSHIP MANAGER.2
§ 2-6.1. Appointment and Compensation. [1978 Code § 2-5.1]
The Township Manager shall be appointed by the Council. The Township
Manager shall be appointed and may be removed in accordance with the
Charter. The Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be provided
by ordinance, payable as other municipal salaries are paid unless and until
otherwise provided by ordinance.
§ 2-6.2. Acting Manager. [1978 Code § 2-5.2]
Pending the appointment of a Manager who shall be fully qualified and
in permanent status subject to law, the Council may appoint an acting
Township Manager to serve until the permanent appointment of a Manager
is made or at the pleasure of the Council. All appointments made by the
acting Township Manager shall expire at his pleasure or in any event, when
his successor is appointed.
§ 2-6.3. Term; Procedure for Removal.3 [1978 Code § 2-5.3]
The Township Manager shall hold office for an indefinite term, and may be
removed by a majority vote of the council as provided by law.
§ 2-6.4. General Powers and Duties. [1978 Code § 2-5.4]
a. The Township Manager shall be vested with and possess all the powers
and perform all the duties prescribed;
1. In the Optional Municipal Charter Law; and
2. By ordinance and resolution of the Council not inconsistent with
said Optional Municipal Charter Law.
b. The Manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of
the Township and shall see that all ordinances, resolutions and policies
of the Council and all State laws which are subject to enforcement by
municipal action are faithfully enforced and executed. The Manager
shall:
2. Editor's Note: For statutory qualifications of a Municipal Manager including his required
residency in the Municipality during his tenure of office unless otherwise approved by the
Council, see N.J.S.A. 40:69A-92. For statutory powers and duties of the Manager, as set
forth in the Optional Municipal Charter Law, see N.J.S.A. 40:69A-95 to 40:69A-98
incorporated by reference in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81.
3. Editor's Note: For Statutory provisions relating to the term of office, see N.J.S.A.
40:69A-93.
§ 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-6.4
1:17
§ 2-6.5. Appointments and Promotions. [1978 Code § 2-5.5]
All employees, Officers and Department Heads of the Township shall be
appointed and promoted by the Township Manager except where the power
to appoint rests with the Mayor or the Council by this chapter or by statute.
§ 2-6.6. Personnel Officer. [1978 Code § 2-5.6]
The Manager shall serve as the Personnel Officer of the Township unless
and until the Council shall authorize the appointment of a separate
Personnel Officer. The Manager shall appoint and remove a Deputy
Manager, of and when one be authorized by the Council, all Department
Heads and all other Officers, subordinates, and assistants other than the
Township Clerk, Municipal Attorney, Planning Board, Board of Adjustment
and certain commissions and advisory boards for whose appointment other
provision is made by the Charter or Administrative Code. The Manager may
1. Represent the municipality and assert its proper interests in
relation to the State and other political subdivisions, and with
respect to municipal contracts and franchises.
2. Attend all meetings of the Township Council with the right to take
part in the discussions, but without the right to vote.
3. Keep the Council advised of the financial condition of the
municipality, make reports to the Council as requested by it, and at
least once a year make an annual report on the administration of
the municipal government for the benefit of the Council and the
public.
4. Study the governmental and administrative operations and needs
of the municipal government and prepare and recommend to the
Council necessary and desirable plans and programs to meet
present and foreseeable needs.
5. Investigate at any time the affairs of any Officer or Department of
the Township.
6. Receive inquiries and complaints concerning Township business,
provide information and assistance and remedy or cause to be
remedied the source of any just complaint.
7. Prepare the annual budget during the month of November in each
year. The Municipal Manager shall require all Department heads to
submit requests for appropriations for the ensuing budget year and
to appear before him at public hearings held during the month on
the various requests. On or before the 15th day of January the
Township Manager shall submit to the Council his recommended
budget in the form required by N.J.S.A. 40:69A-97.
8. Perform such other duties as may be required of him by law,
ordinance or resolution of the Township Council.
§ 2-6.4 SPARTA CODE § 2-6.6
1:18
delegate to the head of a Department the power to appoint and remove
subordinates in such Department, supervise and control his appointees, and
shall report all appointments or removals at the next meeting thereafter of
the Municipal Council.
§ 2-6.7. Purchasing. [1978 Code § 2-5.7]
All materials, supplies and equipment, work and labor under contract,
required by any Department, Office or agency of the Township shall be
purchased by or under the direction and supervision of the Manager subject
to the requirements of the Charter and General Law. Where the law requires
that purchases be made after public bidding such purchases shall be subject
to the approval of the Council.
§ 2-6.8. Administrative Rules and Regulations. [1978 Code § 2-5.8]
No rule or regulation made by the Manager, or by any Department, Officer,
agency or authority of the Township, except as relates to the organization
or internal management of the municipal government or a part thereof,
shall take effect until it is filed with the Township Clerk. The Clerk shall
maintain a current compilation of all such rules and regulations which shall
be available for public inspection in his office during business hours.
§ 2-6.9. Conflict of Interest. [1978 Code § 2-5.9]
No Officer or employee of the Township, either directly or indirectly,
through an agent, employee, partner, associate or otherwise shall undertake
to serve or represent the interest of any person who seeks to influence
the action of any official or officials of the Township, the action of the
Council, the Manager or any Department thereof, provided, however, that
the Council, upon request, which shall be noted in its minutes, shall
authorize any part-time Officer or employee to disqualify himself with
respect to a specific matter or subject, and upon such disqualification,
an agent, employee, associate or partner of such disqualified Officer or
employee may serve or represent such applicant. In such event, a
disqualified Officer or employee shall not take part in any discussion or vote
with reference to the subject matter involved.
§ 2-6.10. Supervision and Control. [1978 Code § 2-5.10]
a. All employees, Officers and Department Heads appointed by the
Township Manager shall be subject to the supervision and control of the
Manager and shall comply with his instructions and directions as to the
organization of their work and the completion of their assigned duties.
Complete authority for the method, manner and time of performing
Township work is vested in the Township Manager, to the end that the
maximum administrative control provided for by law shall be vested in
the Township Manager.
§ 2-6.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-6.10
1:19
§ 2-6.11. Absence or Disability of Manager. [1978 Code § 2-5.11]
The Township Manager may designate a qualified Administrative Officer
of the Township to perform his duties during his temporary absence or
disability. In the event of his failure to make such designation, the Council
may, by resolution, appoint an Officer of the Township to perform the duties
of the Manager during such absence or disability until he shall return or his
disability shall cease.4
§ 2-6.12. Rules and Regulations Filed with the Manager. [1978 Code
§ 2-5.12]
No rule or regulation made by any Department, Officer, agency or authority
of the Township shall take effect until it is filed with the Manager. Where
a rule or regulation affects the conduct of any Department or employee, a
written copy of such rule or regulation shall be delivered to the Department
or employee affected.
§ 2-6.13. Appeals From Rulings. [1978 Code § 2-5.13]
b. The Township Manager may designate a qualified member of any
Department to act in the absence or disability of the head of such
Department.
c. The Township Manager shall:
1. Direct and supervise the administration of all Departments of the
municipal government and be responsible for the maintenance of
sound personnel policies and administrative practices.
2. Approve all bills and vouchers for payment subject to pre-audit and
control as may be provided herein.
3. Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations,
work programs, and costs of municipal services.
4. Establish working, personnel, vacation and sick leave schedules
and appropriate records and reports.
5. Approve or prescribe the internal organization of each Department.
6. Assign and transfer administrative functions, powers and duties
among and within Departments, subject to the Charter and
Administrative Code.
7. Delegate to Department Heads and Officers such of his duties and
powers as he may deem necessary for efficient administration.
a. Whenever an appeal from the denial, suspension or revocation of a
license or permit is provided for elsewhere in any ordinance, or is
permitted from a ruling made by a subordinate Officer, such appeal
4. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-94.
§ 2-6.10 SPARTA CODE § 2-6.13
1:20
§ 2-7. TOWNSHIP CLERK.5
§ 2-7.1. Appointment; Powers and Duties. [1978 Code § 2-6.1]
§ 2-7.2. Qualifications. [New]
No person shall be appointed as Municipal Clerk unless that person shall
have a registered Municipal Clerk Certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133 et seq.
§ 2-7.3. Powers and Duties. [New; Ord. No. 07-14 § I]
The Township Clerk shall:
shall be made in writing to the Manager within 10 days from the date
of the action taken.
b. In cases where appeals are made to the Manager, he shall set a date for
the hearing within 14 days of receiving the written request and shall
render his decision within 10 days after completion of the hearing. The
Manager shall make his individual decision on all matters after notice
and hearing.
c. Pending the decision on such appeals, the ruling of the subordinate
Officer shall remain in effect, unless, in the opinion of the Manager, an
emergency situation otherwise requires.
a. There shall be a Municipal Clerk who may also be known as the
Township Clerk appointed by the Council. The Manager may be
appointed as Township Clerk.
b. The Township Clerk shall have all the powers and perform all the duties
vested in or required of the Office of the Township Clerk by law or
ordinance of the Township, and shall perform such other duties as the
Council may by ordinance or resolution require.6
a. Act as secretary of the municipal corporation and custodian of the
municipal seal and of all minutes, books, deeds, bonds, contracts, and
archival records of the municipal corporation. The Township Council
may, however, provide by ordinance that any other specific Officer shall
have custody of any specific other class of record;
b. Act as secretary to the Township Council, prepare meeting agendas at
the discretion of the Council, be present at all meetings of the Council,
keep a journal of the proceedings of every meeting, retain the original
copies of all ordinances and resolutions, and record the minutes of
every meeting;
5. Editor's Note: The Optional Municipal Charter Law, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-89 provides that the
Council shall appoint a Municipal Clerk.
6. Editor's Note: State Statutes provides that the Municipal Clerk serves as Clerk of Council,
see N.J.S.A. 40:69A-38.
§ 2-6.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-7.3
1:21
§ 2-7.4. Deputy Township Clerk. [1978 Code § 2-6.2]
The Manager may appoint a person to serve as Deputy Municipal Clerk who
shall be known as Deputy Township Clerk. The Deputy Township Clerk shall
perform all the duties of the Clerk when the Clerk is not available to perform
his duties for any reason.
§ 2-8. TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY.7
§ 2-8.1. Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation. [1978 Code
§ 2-7.1]
c. Serve as the Chief Administrative Officer in all elections held in the
Township subject to the requirements of Title 19 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated;
d. Serve as Chief Registrar of voters in the Township, subject to the
requirements of Title 19 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated;
e. Serve as the Administrative Officer responsible for the acceptance of
applications for licenses and permits and the issuance of licenses and
permits, except where statute or ordinance has delegated that
responsibility to some other Township Officer;
f. Serve as coordinator and records manager responsible for
implementing local archives and records retention programs as
mandated pursuant to Title 47 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated;
g. Perform such other duties as are now or hereafter imposed by statute,
regulation or by ordinance or regulation.
h. Serve as Registrar of Vital Statistics. Maintain and administer records
of vital statistics including births, deaths, marriages, domestic
partnership and civil unions in accordance with State law, and issue
marriage licenses pursuant to law.
i. Dog Control. The Manager shall appoint an Animal Control Officer as
authorized by the pay plan ordinance. The Animal Control Officer shall
serve under the immediate supervision of the Township Clerk and shall
be subject to the direction and control of the Township Manager.
a. There shall be a Township Attorney who shall be appointed by the
Council. The Township Attorney need not be a resident of the Township,
but shall be an attorney-at-law of the State of New Jersey.
b. The Township Attorney shall receive such fees as shall be deemed
reasonable by the Council.
7. Editor's Note: The Optional Municipal Charter Law, N.J.S.A. 69A-89, provides that the
Council may provide for the manner of appointment of a Municipal Attorney. See also
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, 40A:9-1; 40A:9-11.
§ 2-7.3 SPARTA CODE § 2-8.2
1:22
§ 2-8.2. Duties. [1978 Code § 2-7.2]
The duties of the Township Attorney shall be such as are prescribed by law
or ordinance and shall include attendance at meetings of the Council or
staff meetings as required by the Council or the Manager. In addition, the
Township Attorney shall render requested legal opinions to the Council or
the Manager. Any Department Head or board or body of the Township may
request such opinions through the Manager.
§ 2-9. TOWNSHIP ENGINEER.
§ 2-9.1. Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation. [1978 Code
§ 2-8.1]
§ 2-9.2. Duties. [1978 Code § 2-8.2]
The duties of the Township Engineer shall be such as are prescribed by law
or ordinance and shall include attendance at meetings of the Council or staff
meetings as required by the Council or Manager. The Township Engineer
shall render requested professional opinions to the Council or the Manager
and shall perform such other duties as may be requested by the Manager.
§ 2-10. TOWNSHIP AUDITOR.
§ 2-10.1. Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation. [1978 Code
§ 2-9.1]
§ 2-11. MUNICIPAL PUBLIC DEFENDER.
§ 2-11.1. Appointment; Compensation; Term. [1978 Code § 2-23.6;
Ord. No. 929; Ord. No. 972 § 2-23.6a]
A Municipal Public Defender shall be appointed by the Township Council
and shall receive a salary, in lieu of any and all other compensation by
a. The Office of Township Engineer is hereby created. The Township
Engineer shall be appointed by the Manager.
b. The Township Engineer shall be a licensed professional engineer of the
State of New Jersey and need not be a resident of the Township. The
Township Engineer shall receive such fees as shall be deemed
reasonable by the Council.
a. The Township Auditor, who need not be a resident, shall be appointed
by the Council. The Auditor may be an individual or a firm of auditors
but in either case the individual or the firm shall be Registered
Municipal Accountants of the State of New Jersey.
b. The Township Auditor shall receive reasonable fees as compensation for
his services, shall perform the duties prescribed by law and shall render
such assistance to the Manager as may be requested.
§ 2-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-11.1
1:23
the municipality as determined by the Township Council, to be paid in the
same manner as the salary of other municipal Officers and employees. The
Public Defender's salary shall be within the salary range contained in the
Township's Salary Ordinance. The Public Defender shall serve for a term of
one year and may be reappointed at the pleasure of the Township Council.
The Municipal Public Defender need not be a resident of the Township but
shall be an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey and in good standing
and must remain in good standing throughout the term of appointment. The
Municipal Public Defender position is not a tenured position.
§ 2-11.2. Lien for Services. [Ord. No. 972 § 2-23.6b]
The Township shall have a lien for any and all services provided by the
Municipal Public Defender to an indigent defendant in an amount equal
to the current rate assessed by the State office of the Public Defender.
The Municipal Attorney shall have full authority as provided by the State
statutes to file and enforce the lien with the approval of the Township
Council.
§ 2-11.3. Public Defender Nonrefundable Application Fee. [Ord. No.
972 § 2-23.6c]
Each applicant applying for the services of the Municipal Public Defender
shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of $200. The fee may be waived
or reduced, in part, as the Court determines based on the financial
circumstances of the applicant. The application fees collected pursuant to
this section shall be deposited in a dedicated fund administered by the
Township's Chief Financial Officer. The funds shall be used exclusively to
meet the costs incurred in providing the services of the Municipal Public
Defender including, when required, any expert or lay investigation and
testimony.
§ 2-12. BOARD OF HEALTH.
§ 2-12.1. Composition. [Ord. No. 07-14 § II]
There shall be a five member Board of Health. The membership of the Board
of Health shall be the five duly elected members of the Township Council.
§ 2-12.2. Terms. [Ord. No. 07-14 § II]
The terms of office of the Board of Health to be appointed under this section
shall coincide with their Township Council terms.
§ 2-12.3. Powers. [Ord. No. 07-14 § II]
The Board of Health shall have all the powers conferred upon local boards
of health by the statutes of the State of New Jersey and by local ordinance
and shall have the power to direct the Township Manager to administer the
duties and enforce the State and local health laws and ordinances. Health
services are to be provided by the Sussex County Health Department.
§ 2-11.1 SPARTA CODE § 2-13
1:24
§ 2-13. through § 2-16. (RESERVED)
§ 2-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-13
1:25

ARTICLE VI
Departments Created
§ 2-17. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.
§ 2-17.1. Creation of the Department; Finance Director; Chief
Financial Officer.8 [1978 Code § 2-11.1; Ord. No. 794 § 1]
§ 2-17.2. Chief Financial Officer. [New]
a. There is hereby created a Department of Finance which shall provide
for all tax collection and financial functions of the Township. The
Department of Finance shall consist of a Finance Director who shall be
Chief Financial Officer of the Township, the Township Treasurer, the
Division of Tax Assessment and the Division of Tax Collection.
b. The Officers and employees who shall serve the Department of Finance
shall be appointed by the Township Manager for such terms as may be
prescribed, subject however to the provisions of law governing Civil
Service employees and such other applicable laws.
c. The Finance Director shall direct the Department of Finance and shall
be responsible for its proper and efficient conduct and the discharge of
its activities, subject however to the supervision of the Township
Manager. The Finance Director may also serve as and perform the
duties of Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer.
a. Position Created; Appointment. There is hereby created the position of
Certified Municipal Financial Officer of the Township of Sparta in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1. The Chief Financial Officer shall
be appointed by the Governing Body for a four-year term commencing
January 1 of the year in which he/she is appointed.
b. Duties. The Chief Financial Officer shall:
1. Receive funds entrusted, received or under the control of any
Department and deposit all funds received by him/her in
depositories authorized by the Governing Body by resolution.
2. Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the Township
or in possession of the Township in a fiduciary capacity, except as
otherwise provided by law, and keep such funds and all moneys of
the Township not required for current operations safely invested or
deposited in interest bearing accounts.
3. Have the safekeeping of all bonds and notices of the Township and
the receipt and delivery of the Township's bonds and notes for
transfer, registration and exchange.
8. Editor's Note: For statutory powers and duties of a local financial officer, see N.J.S.A.
40A:5-1 et seq. By virtue of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1, the New Jersey Legislature mandated
that the Governing Body of each municipality must, by ordinance, create the position of
Chief Financial Officer.
§ 2-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17.2
1:27
§ 2-17.3. Township Treasurer; Appointment; Duties. [1978 Code
§ 2-11.2; Ord. No. 794 § 1]
§ 2-17.4. Division of Tax Assessment; Assessor; Appointment;
Duties. [1978 Code § 2-11.3; Ord. No. 794 § 3]
There is hereby established a Division of Tax Assessment which shall be
under the immediate supervision of the Tax Assessor. The Tax Assessor
shall be appointed by the Township Council and shall serve for the term
prescribed by law. The Tax Assessor shall perform and exercise all of the
duties and functions now or hereafter vested in the Tax Assessor by law or
ordinance of the Township. This Division shall consist of the Tax Assessor
and such other employees as may be authorized by the pay plan ordinance
of the Township and appointed by the Township Manager.
§ 2-17.5. Division of Tax Collection; Tax Collector; Appointment;
Duties. [1978 Code § 2-11.4; Ord. No. 794 § 1]
4. Keep a full account of all cash receipts and disbursements of the
Township and at least once each month, or more often if the
Governing Body requires, furnish the Governing Body with a
statement of all moneys received and expended by the Township.
a. The Office of Treasurer is hereby created. The Treasurer shall serve for
the term prescribed by law.
b. The Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer shall perform and exercise all of the
powers, duties and functions now or hereafter vested in the Treasurer
by law or ordinance and shall be subject to the jurisdiction and control
of the Manager.
c. The Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer shall collect for and on behalf of the
Township, all moneys due to it or to any and all of the various
Departments or Offices thereof including all taxes, fees, and costs
thereby consolidating in one department the receipt of all moneys being
paid to the Township.
d. The Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer shall establish and maintain within
the Department of Finance such procedures, methods of accounting,
books and records as are required by law.
e. All moneys so collected shall be placed on deposit in such financial
institutions as the Township Council may designate and withdrawals
being made therefrom as the Township Council may direct.
f. The provisions hereof shall not apply to the Police Department or to the
Municipal Court of the Township of Sparta, which shall keep and
maintain their own respective records and accounts as heretofore
established.
a. There is hereby established a Division of Tax Collection which shall be
under the immediate supervision of the Tax Collector.
§ 2-17.2 SPARTA CODE § 2-17.5
1:28
§ 2-18. POLICE DEPARTMENT.9
§ 2-18.1. Creation of Department; Composition; Appointment,
Supervision and Responsibility. [1978 Code § 2-14.1; Ord. No. 13-02;
Ord. No. 2017-04]
b. The Tax Collector shall perform and exercise all of the powers, duties
and functions now or hereafter vested in such office by law or ordinance
of the Township and shall be subject to the jurisdiction and control of
the Manager.
c. The Tax Collector shall bill for and collect sewer charges where
applicable within the Township.
d. A charge of $1 per line item shall be made by the Tax Collector when
required to give informal advice as to the status of taxes where
requested in writing by a person whose legitimate interest in such
information is apparent, such as an interest as a mortgagee. The
furnishing of such informal advice shall not have the effect of a tax
search and shall not include information concerning taxes except for
the year in which the request is made and one year prior thereto.
e. The Division shall consist of the Tax Collector and such other employees
as may be authorized by the pay plan ordinance of the Township and
appointed by the Township Manager.
a. There is hereby created a Department of Police also known as the Police
Department. The Police Department shall consist of the following
positions, in order of their rank within the department, and such other
employees as the Manager shall from time to time deem necessary and
proper:
1. One Chief of Police,
2. No more than three Lieutenants,
3. No more than six Sergeants, and
4. No more than 30 patrolmen or patrolwomen.
5. The authorized number of officers in the above ranks may be
increased and/or exceeded to permit the Appointing Authority in
his discretion to permanently appoint an officer to replace any
other officer no longer on active service on terminal leave pending
resignation or retirement; provided, however that said resigning/
retiring officer has provided written notice of the resignation/
retirement and its effective date, and same has been accepted by
the Appointing Authority.
9. Editor's Note: For State statutes affecting generally the establishment, maintenance and
government of a police department and the status and discipline of its regular and
permanent members, see N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7 et seq., as amended.
§ 2-17.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-18.1
1:29
§ 2-18.2. Duties of Department. [1978 Code § 2-14.2]
The Police Department shall have all of the powers and duties prescribed
by statutes for a municipal Police Department generally and by any of the
ordinances of the Township.
§ 2-18.3. Appropriate Authority. [1978 Code § 2-14.3; Ord. No. 903]
Whereas, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 requires that the Township pass an ordinance
to provide for a line of authority relating to the Police function and for
the adoption and promulgation by the Appropriate Authority of rules and
regulations for the governing of the Police Department and for the discipline
of its members, and:
Whereas, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-188 defines "Appropriate Authority" to mean
"Township Manager, or such other appropriate executive or administrative
officer,. . .," and;
Whereas, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 provides that "the municipal governing body
and individual members thereof shall act in all matters relating to the police
function in the municipality as a body or through the appropriate authority,"
and;
Whereas, the Township of Sparta desires to promulgate updated rules and
regulations for the governing of the Police Department and for the discipline
of its members, and;
Whereas, the Township of Sparta desires to designate an Appropriate
Authority in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
Now, therefore be it ordained by the Township Council of the Township
of Sparta that the Township Manager is designated as the Appropriate
Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 with all of the authority and
responsibility enumerated in said statute, including, but not limited to, the
promulgation of updated rules and regulations for the governing of the
Police Department and for the discipline of its members.
§ 2-18.4. Classifications of Applicants and Order of Appointment
Thereof. [1978 Code § 2-14.4; Ord. No. 894 § 1; Ord. No. 09-27]
b. The officers and members of the Police Department shall be appointed
by the Manager for indefinite terms subject to the provisions of the Civil
Service Law and other laws applicable to such appointments.
c. Subject to the direction and supervision of the Manager, the Chief of
Police shall be responsible for the proper efficient conduct of the
Department and the supervision of its activities.
a. The following classifications are hereby established for appointment of
all members of the Police Department of the Township of Sparta:
1. Residents of the Township of Sparta.
§ 2-18.1 SPARTA CODE § 2-18.4
1:30
§ 2-18.4.1. Order of Appointment. [Ord. No. 09-27]
2. Residents of other municipalities in the County of Sussex.
3. Residents of any other County than Sussex in the State of New
Jersey.
4. All other qualified persons.
b. Within each of the aforesaid classifications duly qualified applicants
who are veterans shall be accorded all veterans' privileges as are
provide by law. Persons discharged from the military service within six
months prior to making application for membership in the Police
Department in the Township of Sparta who fulfill the requirements of
New Jersey Statute 40A:14-123.1 and who, thereby, are entitled to
appointment notwithstanding their failure to meet the New Jersey
residency requirement at the time of their initial application, shall be
placed in Class 3.
c. All otherwise qualified applicants for an inter-municipal transfer are
exempt from the residency preference and shall be placed in Class 1.
d. The classes of qualified applicants as defined above shall be considered
as separate and successive lists of eligibles and the Department of
Personnel of the State of New Jersey shall be informed thereof so that
certifications from the said Department when requested shall be made
from said classes separately and successively.
e. All applicants to be classified within Class 1, except for intermunicipal
transfers, must be residents of the Township of Sparta as of the date of
application and must maintain continuous residency within the
Township of Sparta through the examination process, up to and
including the date of appointment.
f. The provisions of this Subsection 2-18.4 shall apply only to the initial
appointments and not to promotional appointments of persons already
members of the Police Department.
g. In making temporary appointments, the Township Manager may utilize
the classifications set forth in the Subsections of this section, and shall
classify accordingly all duly qualified applicants for the position to be
temporarily filled.
a. The Township Manager of the Township of Sparta shall first appoint to
membership in the Police Department of the Township of Sparta
persons qualifying in Class 1 provided in the preceding subsection
herein, and then those in each succeeding class in the order listed in
the said foregoing section, and shall appoint a person or persons in any
such class only to a vacancy or vacancies remaining after all qualified
applicants in the preceding class or classes have been appointed or
have declined an offer of appointment.
§ 2-18.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-18.4.1
1:31
§ 2-18.5. Outside Employment. [1978 Code § 2-14.5]
No Police Officer may hold any paying job other than his Township position
unless prior written approval to hold the job is received from the Township
Manager upon recommendation from the Chief of Police. However, they may
receive additional compensation for performance of Special Police duties,
subject to the specific approval of the Chief of Police or Captain of Police.
§ 2-18.6. Overtime Work; Emergencies. [1978 Code § 2-14.6]
§ 2-18.7. Special Law Enforcement Officers. [1978 Code § 2-14.7]
The Manager may appoint Special Law Enforcement Officers who shall
serve for a period of one year provided such appointees comply with the
requirements of statutes. (See § 2-19)
§ 2-18.8. Crossing Guards. [1978 Code § 2-14.8]
The Manager shall appoint such crossing guards as may be needed in his
discretion for the proper patrolling of approaches to schools during school
hours.
§ 2-18.9. Service Charges and Fees. [1978 Code § 2-14.9]
b. Any provisions of any ordinance or ordinances which are in conflict with
any of the provisions herein are hereby repealed.
c. This ordinance shall take effect upon adoption and publication as
provided by law.
a. The Chief of Police with the approval of the Manager may authorize
overtime work to provide additional operation of patrol cars or to man
the dispatch area but not for office work or desk duty. Employees shall
be designated for overtime work in this connection only on a volunteer
basis and overtime may only be claimed by the regular Police Officers
and the Sergeants and not by other Officers of the Police Department.
b. No person may volunteer for overtime work which would cause him to
work more than a total of 48 hours in any six-day period.
c. In an emergency not caused by a temporary shortage of personnel
available for patrol duty, overtime work may be authorized on a nonvoluntary
basis as it becomes absolutely necessary in order to handle
Police problems.
d. Overtime pay shall be paid to employees who work overtime at the
prevailing rate of the normal pay of such person, (computed on an
hourly basis by equating the employee's annual salary to an hourly rate
based on a work week of 40 hours).
§ 2-18.4.1 SPARTA CODE § 2-18.9
1:32
§ 2-18.10. Fees for Police Services. [1978 Code § 2-14.10; Ord. No.
608 § 1; Ord. No. 724 § 1; Ord. No. 789 § 1; Ord. No. 925 § 1; New;
Ord. No. 990 § 1; Ord. No. 01-06 § 1; Ord. No. 09-11 § 1; Ord. No.
2015-07]
§ 2-19. SPECIAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
§ 2-19.1. Short Title. [1978 Code § 2-27.1; Ord. No. 725 § 2]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Special Law
Enforcement Officers Regulations."
a. Rates. The fees and charges that are established for certain services
extended and material distributed by the Police Department are
contained in Article X, § 2-63 of this chapter.
b. Waiver. No searching fee will be charged if a report is not on file or if
formally requested by any local, County, State or Federal Law
Enforcement Agency.
c. Receipts; Transmittal of Money. A receipt will be issued for all money
received by the Police Department for services extended and material
distributed by the Police Department as hereinabove set forth. All fees
collected are to be transmitted monthly to the Township Treasurer.
d. Hours When Records Available. Reviewing of reports, photostats of
reports and viewing of accident photographs will be conducted at the
Police headquarters, municipal building, daily from Monday to Friday
from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
a. Whenever the Chief of Police authorizes the assignment of a Township
Police Officer, or Special Officer to quasi-public duty the fee for this
service shall be equal to the Senior Patrol Officer's overtime hourly rate
of prior years' pay with a minimum of four hours plus a 10%
administrative fee for all hours worked. A fee is to be charged should a
patrol vehicle be required for any such quasi-public duty, not to exceed
$50 per day.
b. Application for Service Required. Requests for quasi-public Police
services shall be made to the Sparta Township Department of Public
Safety on a form approved by the Chief of Police and will contain any
appropriate information which the Chief of Police may require.
c. Payment of Fees and Deposit. Fees must be paid when application is
made. All fees collected by the Chief of Police shall be turned over to the
Township Treasurer and deposited in a separate account as dedicated
revenue which shall be made available for expenditure by the Township
as and when received in cash during the fiscal year as per N.J.S.A.
40A:4-39.
§ 2-18.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-19.2
1:33
§ 2-19.2. Definitions. [1978 Code § 2-27.2; Ord. No. 725 § 2]
For the purposes of this section, the following words and their derivations
shall have the meaning herein given. Any word or term not defined herein
shall be defined by the unabridged edition of the Random House dictionary
of the English language. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the
singular, words in the singular include the plural, words in the masculine
gender include the feminine gender. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory. The word "may" is permissive. As used in this
section:
§ 2-19.3. Appointment; Classifications. [1978 Code § 2-27.3; Ord.
No. 725 § 3]
a. COMMISSION – Shall mean the Police Training Commission
established in the Department of Law and Public Safety pursuant to
Section 5 of P.L. 1961, c.56 (C.52:17b-70);
b. EMERGENCY – Shall mean any sudden, unexpected or unforeseeable
event requiring the immediate use or deployment of law enforcement
personnel as shall be determined by the Township Manager, or in the
absence of the Township Manager, the Chief of Police. Vacations,
shortages in Police personnel caused by vacancies unfilled by the
Township Manager for more than 60 days, or any other condition which
could reasonably have been anticipated or foreseen shall not constitute
an emergency for the purposes of this section; but an "emergency" may
continue for the purposes of this act when a vacancy remains unfilled
for more than 60 days, and when, on application of the Township
Manager, the County Prosecutor grants an extension for one or more
additional sixty-day period upon a showing by the Township Manager of
the diligent, good faith effort to fill the vacancy;
c. LOCAL UNIT – Shall mean any municipality having established a
regular Police Force pursuant to law;
d. POPULATION – Shall mean the population of the municipality shown in
the last Federal Decennial Census;
e. PUBLIC ENTITY – Shall mean the State and any County, municipality,
district, public authority, public agency and any other political
subdivision or public body in the State.
f. SPECIAL ENFORCEMENT OFFICER – Shall mean any person
appointed pursuant to this section to temporarily or intermittently
perform duties similar to those performed regularly by members of a
Police Force of a local unit, or to provide assistance to a Police Force
during unusual or emergency circumstances, or at individual times
during regular seasonal periods in this municipality.
g. APPOINTING AUTHORITY – Shall mean the Township Manager.
§ 2-19.2 SPARTA CODE § 2-19.3
1:34
a. Special Law Enforcement Officers will be appointed pursuant to two
classifications: Class II Officers and Class I Officers. The number of
Class II Officers appointed by this municipality will not exceed 25% of
the total number of regular Police Officers employed by this
municipality. However, the municipality shall not be required to reduce
the number of Class II Specials in the employ of the municipality as of
March 1, 1985. That number is nine. This municipality may, as it deems
necessary, appoint Special Law Enforcement Officers sufficient to
perform the duties and responsibilities permitted by this section
authorized by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and within the conditions and
limitations as may be established pursuant to this section.
b. No person may be appointed as a Special Law Enforcement Officer
unless the person:
1. Is a resident of this State during the term of appointment;
2. Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent;
3. Is sound in body and of good health;
4. Is of good moral character;
5. Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or
which would make him unfit to perform the duties of his office;
6. Has successfully undergone the same psychological testing that is
required of all full time Police Officers in this municipality.
c. Every applicant for the position of Special Law Enforcement Officer
appointed pursuant to this section shall have fingerprints taken, which
fingerprints shall be filed with the Division of State Police and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
d. No person shall be appointed to serve as a Special Law Enforcement
Officer in more than one local unit at the same time, nor shall any
permanent, regularly appointed full time Police Officer of any local unit
be appointed as a Special Law Enforcement Officer in this municipality.
No public official with responsibility for setting law Enforcement Policy
or exercising authority over the budget of the Police Department or
supervision of the Police Department shall be appointed as a Special
Law Enforcement Officer.
e. Before any Special Law Enforcement Officer is appointed pursuant to
this section, the Township Manager, or, in the absence of the Township
Manager, the Chief of Police, shall ascertain the eligibility and
qualifications of the applicant and report these determinations in
writing to the Appointing Authority.
f. Any person who at any time prior to his appointment had served as a
duly qualified, fully trained, full time Officer in any municipality of this
State and who was separated from that prior service in good standing,
§ 2-19.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-19.3
1:35
§ 2-19.4. Training Course; Classifications. [1978 Code § 2-27.4; Ord.
No. 725 § 4]
§ 2-19.5. Uniforms of Special Law Enforcement Officers. [1978 Code
§ 2-27.5; Ord. No. 725 § 5]
Every Special Law Enforcement Officer prior to the commencement of his
duties shall be furnished with a uniform which shall identify the Officer's
function. The uniform shall include, but not be limited to, a hat and
appropriate badges which shall bear an identification number or name tag
and the name of this municipality. The uniform shall also include an insignia
shall be eligible to serve as a Special Law Enforcement Officer
consistent with guidelines promulgated by the Commission. The
training requirements set forth in Subsection 2-19.4 may be waived by
the Commission with regard to any person eligible to be appointed as
a Special Law Enforcement Officer pursuant to the provisions of this
subsection.
a. No person may commence his duties as a Special Law Enforcement
Officer unless he has successfully completed a training course approved
by the Commission and no Special Law Enforcement Officer may be
issued a firearm unless he has successfully completed the basic
firearms course approved by the Commission for permanent, regularly
appointed Police and annual requalification examinations as required
by Subsection 2-19.7b. There shall be two classifications for Special
Law Enforcement Officers. The Commission shall prescribe by rule or
regulation the training standards to be established for each
qualification. Training may be in a Commission-approved academy or in
any other training program which the Commission may determine
appropriate. The classification shall be based upon the duties to be
performed by the Special Law Enforcement Officer as follows:
1. Class I. Officers of this class shall be authorized to perform routine
traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties. Class I Officers
do not have the authority to issue summonses. The use of a firearm
by an Officer of this Class is strictly prohibited and no Class I
Officer shall be assigned any duties which may require the carrying
or use of a firearm.
2. Class II. Officers of this Class shall be authorized to exercise full
powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly
appointed full time Police Officer. The use of a firearm by an Officer
of this Class may be authorized only after the Officer has been fully
certified and successfully completed training as prescribed by the
Commission.
b. All Special Law Enforcement Officers appointed and in service on the
effective date of this section may continue in service if within 24 months
of the effective date of this section they will have completed all training
and certification requirements of this section.
§ 2-19.3 SPARTA CODE § 2-19.5
1:36
issued by the Commission which clearly indicates the Officer's status as
a Special Law Enforcement Officer and the type of certification issued
pursuant to Subsection 2-19.4. All Special Law Enforcement Officers prior
to the commencement of duties shall be in uniform properly displaying the
appropriate insignia. Nothing in this section shall preclude the designation
of an insignia to read either "Special Police" or "Special Law Enforcement
Officer".
§ 2-19.6. Fee for Equipment and Uniforms. [1978 Code § 2-27.6;
Ord. No. 725 § 6]
The municipality may charge a reasonable fee as may be fixed by the
Township Manager for equipment and uniforms supplied pursuant to this
section. The cost of training and the issuing of the certificate of appointment
will be the responsibility of the municipality. The municipality shall not be
required to compensate a Special Law Enforcement Officer for time spent
in training.
§ 2-19.7. Term of Appointment. [1978 Code § 2-27.7; Ord. No. 725
§ 7]
a. Special Law Enforcement Officers are to be appointed by the Township
Manager for terms not to exceed one year, and the appointment may be
revoked by the municipality for cause after adequate hearing, unless
the appointment is for four months or less, in which event the
appointment may be revoked without cause or hearing. Nothing herein
shall be construed to require appointment upon the expiration of the
term. The Special Law Enforcement Officers so appointed shall not be
members of the Police Force of this municipality, and their powers and
duties as determined pursuant to this section shall cease at the
expiration of the term for which appointed.
b. No Special Law Enforcement Officer may carry a firearm except while
engaged in the actual performance of the Officer's official duties and
when specifically authorized by the Chief of Police, or, in absence of the
Chief of Police, the Township Manager, to carry a firearm and provided
that the Officer has satisfactorily completed the basic firearms course
required by the Commission for regular Police Officers and annual
reclassification examinations as required for permanent, regularly
appointed full time Officers in the municipality. A Special Law
Enforcement Officer shall be deemed to be on duty only while he is
performing the public safety functions on behalf of this municipality
pursuant to this section and when he is receiving compensation, if any,
from the municipality at the rates or stipends as shall be established by
the Township Manager. A Special Law Enforcement Officer shall not be
deemed to be on duty for purposes of this section while performing
private security duties for private employers which duties are not
assigned by the Chief of Police, or, in the absence of the Chief, the
Township Manager, or while receiving compensation for those duties
from a private employer. A Special Law Enforcement Officer may,
§ 2-19.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-19.7
1:37
§ 2-19.8. Powers and Authority. [1978 Code § 2-27.8; Ord. No. 725
§ 8]
The Chief of Police, or in the absence of the Chief, the Township Manager,
may authorize Special Law Enforcement Officers, when on duty, to exercise
the same powers and authority as permanent, regularly appointed Police
Officers of the local unit, including, but not limited to, the carrying of
firearms and the power of arrest, subject to the rules and regulations, not
inconsistent with the certification requirements of this act.
§ 2-19.9. Hours of Employment. [1978 Code § 2-27.9; Ord. No. 725
§ 9]
however, be assigned by the Chief of Police, or, in the absence of
the Chief, the Township Manager, to perform public safety functions
for a private entity if the Chief of Police or the Township Manager
supervises the performance of the public safety functions. If the Chief
of Police or Township Manager assigns the public safety duties and
supervises the performance of those duties then, notwithstanding that
the municipality is reimbursed for the cost of assigning a Special Law
Enforcement Officer at a private entity, the Special Law Enforcement
Officer shall be deemed to be on duty.
c. Any firearm utilized by a Special Law Enforcement Officer shall be
returned at the end of the Officer's work day to the Officer in charge of
the station house, unless the firearm is owned by the Special Law
Enforcement Officer and was acquired in compliance with the condition
of employment established by this municipality. Any Special Law
Enforcement Officer first appointed after the effective date of this act
shall only use a firearm supplied by this municipality.
d. A Special Law Enforcement Officer shall be under the supervision and
direction of the Chief of Police or, in the absence of the Chief, the
Township Manager, and shall perform his duties only in the municipality
unless in fresh pursuit of any person pursuant to Chapter 156 of Title
2A of the New Jersey Statutes.
e. The Officer shall comply with the rules and regulations applicable to the
conduct and decorum of the permanent, regularly appointed Police
Officers of the municipality, as well as any rules and regulations
applicable to the conduct and decorum of Special Law Enforcement
Officers.
a. Except as provided in Subsection c of this section, no Special Law
Enforcement Officer may be employed for more than 20 hours per week
by the municipality except that Special Law Enforcement Officers may
be employed by the municipality for those hours as the Governing Body
may determine necessary in accordance with the limits prescribed
below:
§ 2-19.7 SPARTA CODE § 2-19.9
1:38
§ 2-19.10. Residency Requirements. [1978 Code § 2-27.11; Ord. No.
725 § 11]
Special Law Enforcement Officers need not be residents of this municipality.
§ 2-20. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-20.1. Established. [1978 Code § 2-15.1]
There shall be established in the Township a Fire Department to be known
as the Sparta Township Fire Department.
§ 2-20.2. Members. [1978 Code § 2-15.2]
The Fire Department shall consist of the present Fire Department of the
Township together with such other members as shall hereafter be elected
by the Department.
§ 2-20.3. Rules and Regulations of the Department. [1978 Code
§ 2-15.3]
The Fire Department shall adopt such rules and regulations as required
by law, which shall be submitted to the Township Council for approval and
when approved shall govern the Department.
§ 2-20.4. Records and Reports. [1978 Code § 2-15.4]
The Fire Department shall keep such records and make such reports as
are required by law, and shall make reports to the Township Council when
requested to do so.
§ 2-21. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
1. Without limitation as to hours during periods of a declared
emergency;
2. In the municipality in addition to not more than 20 hours per week,
including duties assigned pursuant to the provisions of Subsection
2-19.7, a Special Law Enforcement Officer may be assigned for not
more than 20 hours per week to provide public safety and law
enforcement services to a public entity.
b. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, Special
Law Enforcement Officers may be employed only to assist the Police
Department, but may not be employed to replace or substitute for full
time, regular Police Officers or in any way diminish the number of full
time Officers employed by the municipality.
c. The municipality may designate one Special Law Enforcement Officer
to whom the limitations on hours employed set forth in Subsection a of
this section shall not be applicable.
§ 2-19.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-21.1
1:39
§ 2-21.1. Establishment of Department. [1978 Code § 2-17.1; Ord.
No. 673]
There is hereby established a Department of Public Works which shall
control and maintain the roads, landfill, and public buildings and grounds
of the Township of Sparta, the head of which shall be the Director of Public
Works. The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the Township
Manager for an indefinite term, subject to suspension or removal by the
Manager. The Director shall be qualified by training and experience for
the duties of this office. The Director shall be subject to the direction
and supervision of the Manager and shall be responsible for the proper
and efficient conduct of all public works personnel and functions in the
Township and shall supervise and direct the work of the Department,
including the supervision and/or maintenance of Departmental records, the
enforcement of standards and procedures for the control, use and care of all
Township-owned equipment, materials, and supplies in the custody of the
Department. The Director shall:
§ 2-22. DEPARTMENT OF MANAGEMENT INFORMATION
SYSTEMS.10
§ 2-22.1. Composition of Department. [Ord. No. 07-14 § III]
The head of the Management Information Systems shall be the Director of
Management Information Systems.
a. Maintain, repair, construct, and reconstruct public streets of the
Township.
b. Maintain, repair, and provide public works assistance to the
playgrounds of the Township.
c. Maintain Township streets in a clean and safe condition for passage,
free of obstructions or hazards, and remove snow and ice therefrom as
required.
d. Provide technical and mechanical services required by other
Departments or contracting governmental agency of the Township,
subject to the direction of the Manager.
e. Provide for the care, storage, use and disposition of motor vehicles and
motorized equipment of the Township, except as the Manager shall
otherwise direct.
f. Supervise the operations of the Township stormwater drainage system.
10.Editor's Note: Former § 2-22, Department of Health, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1978 Code §§ 2-16.1, 2-16.3 and 2-16.6 and Ordinance No. 611 was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 07-14. See § 2-12, Board of Health.
§ 2-21.1 SPARTA CODE § 2-22.2
1:40
§ 2-22.2. Management Information Systems: Functions;
Responsibilities; Duties. [Ord. No. 07-14 § III]
The Management Information Systems Department shall:
§ 2-23. DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION. [1978 Code
§ 2-13.1 through § 2-13.3; Ord. No. 687; Ord. No. 09-19 § 1;
amended 3-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-02]
§ 2-23.1. Creation of Department; Composition.
There shall be a Parks and Recreation Department consisting of an Advisory
Recreation Committee and a Recreation Director and such assistants as
shall be authorized.
a. Program, compute, process and store in an established area and order
such data and information pertinent and relative to the Township fiscal
operations that the Township Manager may prescribe for reasons of
efficiency and economy.
b. Program, compute, process and store other data and information
relative to other departments as may prove to be economically feasible.
c. Use and operate such accounting machinery, equipment and computer
and its peripheral equipment as may be made available for the purpose
of the Township.
d. Plan, organize and evaluate equipment requirements, systems,
programming, equipment installation and acceptance testing; and
determine priorities for system studies, designs, programming and
operations under the guidance of the Manager.
e. Establish work standards, schedules, priorities and necessary controls
for projects assigned to the center to assure an error-free management
information systems operation.
f. Develop and implement policies and procedures for all operational
aspects of system and network administration including, but not limited
to, daily operations, end user support, security, data backup, and
disaster recovery.
g. Provide for end users support and technology education pertinent to
Township applications and operations.
h. Implement, monitor and audit protocols to protect data integrity and
network security.
i. Provide limited off-hour support for mission critical systems.
j. Perform other such duties as may be requested by the Manager.
§ 2-22.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-23.2
1:41
§ 2-23.2. Advisory Recreation Committee.
There shall be an Advisory Recreation Committee consisting of 12 members
who shall be appointed by the Council for a term of three years. Said
terms shall be staggered so that no more than four terms shall expire
in any given year. This Committee shall recommend action to implement
a comprehensive recreation program in the Township and estimate and
recommend budget requirements therefor.
§ 2-23.3. Recreation Director.
§ 2-24. DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND
SERVICES. [Ord. No. 07-14 § IV]
a. The office of Parks and Recreation Director is hereby created. The
appointment shall be made by the Township Manager for an indefinite
term.
b. The Parks and Recreation Director shall supervise parks and recreation
activities as authorized by the Township Manager and under the
Township Manager's supervision and control.
a. The head of the Department of Community Development and Services
shall be the Director of Community Development and Services and shall
be responsible for:
1. Coordination of all review and permitting for commercial and
residential development. Insure that timely review enhances
permit issuance and compliance with all applicable State and
municipal regulations.
2. Maintain communications between all department divisions,
Township Manager and State offices.
3. Coordinate reviews and reports for all State mandated
development regulations.
4. Coordinate and expedite applications for Economic Development.
5. Supervise and coordinate the functions of the divisions designated
below.
b. The Department of Community Development and Services shall consist
of the following divisions:
1. Division of Engineering Review;
2. Division of Planning;
3. Division of Zoning/Code Enforcement;
4. Division of Uniform Construction Code;
5. Division of Health Services.
§ 2-23.2 SPARTA CODE § 2-24.1
1:42
§ 2-24.1. Division of Engineering Review. [Ord. No. 07-14 § IV]
There shall be within the Department of Community Development a Division
of Engineering Review. The Engineering Review Division is established in,
but not of the Department of Community Development.
§ 2-24.2. Division of Planning. [Ord. No. 07-24 § IV]
There shall be within the Department of Community Development and
Services a Division of Planning, the head of which shall be the Township
Planner appointed by the Manager for an indefinite term, subject to
suspension or removal by the Manager.
The Township Planner shall:
a. The Assistant Township Engineer shall conduct such reviews or
research as required by the Director of Community Development and
Services.
b. Review proposed preliminary and final subdivision plats for conformity
with the Municipal Subdivision Ordinance and other land use
requirements and advise the Planning Division as to such matters as
needed. The Division shall inspect and approve all installations made in
accordance with the requirements of the Planning Board prior to the
acceptance of any street or the release of any security related to a
subdivision approval. The Planning Board shall not act on any
subdivision application unless and until any findings and
recommendations of the Division of Engineering have been submitted
to the board and made a part of the public record. Maintain the Tax Map
for the Division of Assessments in a current status and promptly record
thereon all changes of ownership from information provided pursuant
to law.
a. Exercise initiative and professional judgment in providing the
community with guidance in planning the growth within the framework
of a Comprehensive Plan.
b. Prepare and maintain an Official Map of the Township.
c. Prepare agenda and reports for Planning Board meetings.
d. Attend all meetings of the Planning Board and meetings of the Council
and other boards or agencies as may be required for the proper
planning of the community.
e. Investigate and prepare reports on subdivision applications and all
other assignments as requested by the Planning Board.
f. Assist in updating the existing planning and zoning ordinances of the
Township.
g. Supervise GIS staff and coordinate function with Engineering, Water
Utilities and other Township services.
§ 2-24.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-24.3
1:43
§ 2-24.3. Division of Zoning/Code Enforcement. [Ord. No. 07-24
§ IV]
§ 2-24.4. Division of Uniform Construction Code. [Ord. No. 07-24
§ IV]
There shall be within the Department of Community Development and
Services a Division of Uniform Construction Code, the head of which shall
be the Construction Code Official. This Division seeks to control matters
relating to the structure, organization and procedures of municipal
enforcing agencies; their interrelationships; the structure, organization,
and procedures of boards of appeal; the approval of premanufactured
construction; private enforcing agencies; and the establishment of fees.
The Township will enforce N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq., and all amendments and
supplements thereto. The standards, rules and regulations set forth in the
code shall be and the same are hereby incorporated in this section by
reference.
§ 2-24.5. Division of Health Services. [Ord. No. 07-24 § IV]
There shall be within the Department of Community Development and
Services a Division of Health Services, the head of which shall be the
Director of Community Development. This Division shall serve as contact
point between Sussex County Health and the Township of Sparta. This
Division will monitor and coordinate County services as required by the
Township Manager.
a. There shall be within the Department of Community Development and
Services a Division of Zoning/Code Enforcement, the head of which
shall be the Zoning Officer.
b. The Zoning Officer is responsible for reviewing applications for zoning
permits and the granting or denying of such permits in accordance with
the zoning ordinances of the Township of Sparta.
c. The Code Enforcement Officer performs various types of field and office
work involved in ensuring that residences, places of business and
citizens comply with various municipal ordinances (other than the State
Sanitary Code or State Uniform Construction Code or any of its
subcodes). The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for the
enforcement of the regulatory ordinances of the Township, including
but not limited to land use and zoning, and shall make such inspections
of property and perform such investigations as may be necessary for
the enforcement thereof. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
authorized to issue a summons in the name of the Township for a
violation of any ordinance pertaining to land use, zoning or other
regulatory ordinances and shall testify on behalf of the Township in
litigated matters as requested by the Manager.
§ 2-24.3 SPARTA CODE § 2-25
1:44
§ 2-25. DEPARTMENT OF UTILITIES. [Ord. No. 09-29]
The Director of Department of Utilities shall be the Water/Sewer
Superintendent appointed by the Township Manager for an indefinite term,
subject to suspension or removal by the Township Manager. The Water/
Sewer Superintendent's responsibilities shall include:
§ 2-26. (RESERVED)
a. Exercise general supervision of the operation and maintenance of the
water/sewer system, including any and all lines now or hereafter
installed, any and all machinery, equipment, mains, pumps, pipes,
meters and all other mechanical features pertaining thereto.
b. Execute all orders of the Township Manager pertaining to the Water/
Sewer Superintendent's duties and to the general management of the
Utilities Department.
c. Report all work performed in the Department, including all materials
purchased and sold, all sewer service, collection lines installed,
laterals, manholes, meters and connections made and other pertinent
data and keep a complete record thereof.
d. Be responsible for making analysis reports when required under the
rules of the New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection
and of any and all State agencies having jurisdiction over water and
sewer matters, and shall file such reports with such State agencies as
shall be required.
e. Be responsible for and supervise all extensions, repairs or additions.
f. Have the power to issue requisitions for the purchase of materials and
supplies in accordance with instructions from the Township Manager
and ordinances of the Township.
g. Keep a permanent record of the location of all mains, collection lines
and all other facilities and equipment pertaining to the water and sewer
collection system.
§ 2-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-26
1:45

ARTICLE VII
Additional Officers and Employees
§ 2-27. OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
§ 2-27.1. Creation. [1978 Code § 2-28]
The Office of Emergency Management is hereby created, in compliance
with Chapter 438, Public Law 1953, Statute A:9-41, and Emergency
Management Planning and Community Right to Know Act of 1986.
§ 2-27.2. Emergency Management Coordinator. [1978 Code
§ 2-28.1; Ord. No. 764 § 1]
The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be appointed by the
Township Manager for a period of three years and shall perform the duties
of the office as prescribed by law. The Coordinator must be a Sparta
Township resident.
§ 2-28. MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON.11
§ 2-28.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 07-24 § IV]
The purpose of this section is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of Sparta's responsibility to assist in the provision
of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.
§ 2-28.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 07-14 § IV]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — Shall mean the entity responsible for
administering the affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable
housing program for Sparta Township to ensure that the restricted units
under administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as
applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — Shall mean the employee charged by
the Governing Body with the responsibility for oversight and administration
of the affordable housing program for Sparta Township.
§ 2-28.3. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison Position,
Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 07-14 § VI]
a. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for Sparta
Township.
11.Editor's Note: Former § 2-28, Construction Official, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1978 Code §§ 2-12.1 and 2-12.2 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 07-14.
§ 2-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-28.3
1:47
b. Subject to approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), the
Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the Township Manager
and may be a full or part time municipal employee.
c. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Sparta Township,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out, exclusive of Subsection c6 which may be contracted out:
1. Serving as Sparta's primary point of contact for all inquiries from
the State, affordable housing providers, Administrative Agents, and
interested households;
2. Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Sparta's Fair Share
Plan;
3. Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
4. Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as applicable;
5. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
6. If applicable, serving as the Administrative Agent for some or all of
the restricted units in Sparta as described in Subsection f below.
d. Subject to approval by COAH, Sparta Township may contract with or
authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged by
the Governing Body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of Sparta Township,
except for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out
pursuant to Subsection c above. If Sparta Township contracts with
another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable housing
program, including the affordability controls and Affirmative Marketing
Plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting
Administrative Agent.
e. Administrative Powers and Duties Assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
1. Affirmative Marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of Sparta Township and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
§ 2-28.3 SPARTA CODE § 2-28.3
1:48
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
2. Household Certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or ineligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of Sparta Township when referring
households for certification to affordable units.
3. Affordability Controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate County's Register of Deeds or
County Clerk's Office after the termination of the affordability
controls for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of Continuing Certificates of Occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
4. Resale and Rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
§ 2-28.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-28.3
1:49
Administrative Agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental.
5. Processing Request from Unit Owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
6. Enforcement.
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the Administrative Agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the Administrative
Agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirement as
outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
§ 2-28.3 SPARTA CODE § 2-28.3
1:50
§ 2-29. through § 2-34. (RESERVED)
(g) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
7. The Administrative Agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 2-28.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-29
1:51

ARTICLE VIII
Municipal Court
§ 2-35. MUNICIPAL COURT OF THE TOWNSHIP OF SPARTA.12
§ 2-35.1. Establishment; Seal. [1978 Code § 2-23.1]
The Municipal Court of the Township of Sparta is hereby established. The
Court shall have an official seal bearing the impress of the name of the
Court.
§ 2-35.2. Judge of the Municipal Court; Appointment and
Jurisdiction. [1978 Code § 2-23.2]
§ 2-35.3. Municipal Court Administrator. [1978 Code § 2-23.3]
There shall be a Municipal Court Administrator who shall serve for an
indefinite term and perform the duties prescribed by law and the rules of
Court. The Clerk shall be assigned to the Municipal Court of the Township
of Sparta and shall be appointed by the Township Manager.
§ 2-35.4. Deputy Violations Clerk. [1978 Code § 2-23.4]
The Manager may appoint a Deputy Violations Clerk who shall perform the
duties of the Clerk in his absence and shall perform other duties prescribed
by law, the rules of Court or the Manager.
§ 2-35.5. Municipal Prosecutor; Appointment; Qualifications;
Compensation. [1978 Code § 2-23.5]
a. The Council shall appoint a Judge of the Municipal Court who shall be
an attorney at law of New Jersey, need not be a resident, and who shall
serve for a term of three years.
b. The Judge shall have the jurisdiction, powers, and duties prescribed by
law and the rules of the Court.
a. There shall be a Municipal Prosecutor, appointed by the Council. The
Municipal Prosecutor need not be a resident of the Township, but shall
be an attorney-at-law of New Jersey.
b. The Municipal Prosecutor shall receive such fees as shall be deemed
reasonable by the Council.
c. The Municipal Prosecutor shall have the jurisdiction, powers and duties
prescribed by law and the rules of Court.
12.Editor's Note: For State Statutes governing Municipal Courts, Judges of the Municipal
Court and their jurisdiction. Municipal Court Administrator and personnel, see N.J.S.A.
2A:8-1 et seq.
§ 2-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.5
1:53

ARTICLE IX
Committees; Boards; Commissions13
§ 2-36. GENERAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING APPOINTMENTS,
COMPENSATION, VACANCIES AND TERMS. [1978 Code § 2-1.3]
Unless otherwise specified by law, this Code, or the pay plan ordinance, all
persons appointed under the terms of the administrative code shall:
§ 2-37. (RESERVED)
§ 2-38. PUBLIC LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES.14
§ 2-38.1. Creation. [1978 Code § 2-19.1]
The free Public Library of the Township under the management of a Board
of Trustees is hereby created.
§ 2-38.2. Appointment, Composition and Term of Trustees. [1978
Code § 2-19.2]
The Board of Library Trustees shall consist of seven members; one of whom
shall be the Mayor; one, the Local Superintendent of Schools; and five
citizens appointed by the Mayor. The appointments shall be for terms as
prescribed by general law.
§ 2-38.3. Powers of the Board of Trustees. [1978 Code § 2-19.3]
The Board of Library Trustees shall have such powers and perform such
duties as shall be prescribed by law and in addition shall adopt proper rules
and regulations for the government of the library. They shall have the power
to appoint a Director and such staff as may be required and shall have the
power to exclude from the use of the library and the reading room any and
a. Be residents or nonresidents;
b. Serve without compensation;
c. Be appointed by the Township Manager; and
d. Serve for a period of one year beginning July 1 of each year or until
their successors are appointed and qualified.
Unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance, any vacancy in office (where a
term of office is provided) shall be filled for the unexpired term of the individual
replaced.
13.Editor's Note: See the Comprehensive Land Management Code for the establishment of
the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment.
14.Editor's Note: For statutory law relating to the establishment of a free public library and
its management and operation by a Board of Trustees, see N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq., as
amended.
§ 2-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-38.3
1:55
all persons who shall willfully violate the rules and regulations. The Board
shall fix the compensation of Directors and other personnel.
§ 2-38.4. Annual Report of Trustees. [1978 Code § 2-19.4]
The Board of Trustees shall annually make a report of its transactions and
accounts and report the condition of the library to the Council.
§ 2-39. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-39.1. Establishment; Function; Title. [1978 Code § 2-22.1]
§ 2-39.2. Membership; Terms. [1978 Code § 2-22.2; Ord. No. 03-09
§ 1]
a. There is hereby established an Environmental Commission for the
protection, development and use of natural resources, with the
exception of those duties relating to water resources, which are
presently under the jurisdiction of the Board of Health. The Commission
shall be known as the Environmental Commission of the Township of
Sparta.
a. The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor,
one of whom shall also be a member of the Planning Board, and all of
whom shall be residents of the Township of Sparta.
b. The members shall serve without compensation except as hereinafter
provided.
c. The Mayor shall appoint one of the members to serve as Chairman and
presiding officer of the Commission.
d. The terms of office of the first Commissioners shall be for one, two, or
three years, to be designated by the Mayor in making the appointments,
and their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years and
until the appointment and qualification of their successors.
e. Alternate Members. The Mayor may also appoint not more than two
alternate members to the Environmental Commission, who shall be
designated at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2".
1. Alternate members shall have the same qualifications as regular
members.
2. The term of the alternate members shall be for two years, except
that the term for those initially appointed as Alternate No. 1 shall
be for one year.
3. Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of the term
shall be filled by Mayoral appointment for the unexpired term only.
§ 2-38.3 SPARTA CODE § 2-39.2
1:56
§ 2-39.3. Vacancies; Removal. [1978 Code § 2-22.3; Ord. No. 03-09
§ 2]
A vacancy occurring otherwise than by an expiration of a term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only. The Mayor or the Township Council
may remove any member of the Commission for cause, on written charges
served upon the member and after hearing thereon at which the Members
shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel.
§ 2-39.4. Organization of Commission; Records; Meetings; Annual
Report. [1978 Code § 2-22.4; Ord. No. 03-09 § 3]
§ 2-39.5. Duties of the Commission. [1978 Code § 2-22.5]
The duties of the Commission are as follows:
4. Alternate member may be removed for cause by the Township
Council, but shall be entitled to a public hearing beforehand upon
request.
5. Alternate members shall be permitted to participate in Commission
discussions but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member, and voting shall not be
delayed so that a regular member might vote instead of the
alternate member.
a. The Commission shall meet on the 2nd and 4th Thursday of each month
at 8:00 p.m., or at such times as requested by the Township Council.
b. The Commission shall keep records of all of its meetings and activities
and shall make an annual written report to the Township Council no
later than July 1st of each year.
a. To conduct research into the use and possible use of the open land
areas of the Township.
b. To study and make recommendations concerning open space
preservation, water resources management, air pollution control, solid
waste management, noise control, soil and landscape protection,
environmental appearance, marine resources, and protection of flora
and fauna.
c. Coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes.
d. To advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans
and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary for its
purpose, within the limits of funds appropriated to the Commission.
e. To keep an index of all open areas, publicly and privately owned,
including open marsh lands, and to obtain information on the proper
use of such area.
§ 2-39.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-39.5
1:57
§ 2-39.6. Acquisitions. [1978 Code § 2-22.6]
Subject to the prior approval of the Planning Board and Township Council,
the Environmental Commission may acquire property both real and
personal in name of the Township, by gifts, pledges, grants, bequests,
devises or lease, for any of the purposes of the Commission and it shall
administer the same for such purposes, subject to the terms of such
conveyance or gift. The interest so acquired may be the fee or any lesser
interest, development right, easement (including conservation easements),
covenant or other contractual right, as may be necessary to acquire,
maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of, or otherwise conserve
and properly utilize open spaces and other land and water areas in the
Township.
§ 2-39.7. Appropriation. [Ord. No. 03-09 § 4]
The Township Council at its sole discretion may appropriate funds for the
expenses incurred by the Environmental Commission. The Commission may
appoint a secretary or clerk. Salaries for such positions shall be fixed and
determined by the Township Council and shall be within the limits of the
funds appropriated to the Commission.
§ 2-40. ASSESSMENT COMMISSION.
§ 2-40.1. Creation. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
Pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56-21,
et seq., there is hereby created the Township of Sparta Assessment
Commission, the members of which shall be appointed by the Township
Council.
§ 2-40.2. Membership; Term of Office; Vacancies; Alternate
Commissioners. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
f. To recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs for
development and use of such areas for inclusion in the master plan of
the Township.
g. To serve as a liaison between local conservation needs and regional,
State and Federal agencies ministering to those needs as authorized by
the Township Council.
h. To do such other acts and things as are reasonably related to and
designed to carry out the purposes and objectives of the Commission.
a. The Assessment Commission shall consist of three members, all of
whom are residents of the Township, who shall be designated
Commissioners.
b. The Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of three years. There
shall also be two Alternate Commissioners appointed for a term of three
§ 2-39.5 SPARTA CODE § 2-40.2
1:58
§ 2-40.3. Conflict of Interest. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
In the event that any Commissioner shall be in any way interested in any
local improvement, such Commission shall be disqualified from exercising
the powers hereinabove conferred with respect to that improvement; and
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Township Council, shall
appoint an Alternate Commissioner or, if the Alternate Commissioner shall
not qualify, some other qualified person or persons to act in their place with
respect to that improvement only.
§ 2-40.4. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
The Assessment Commission shall be and hereby is charged with the duty
of making assessments for benefits for local improvements within the
Township of Sparta in accordance with the duties imposed upon it by virtue
of N.J.S.A. 40:56-21 et seq., inclusive, and shall, in addition, have and
exercise all of the powers authorized by the aforesaid statutes.
§ 2-40.5. Procedures and Guidelines. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
years. All terms shall be computed from July 1 of the year of
appointment. The Commissioners and Alternate Commissioners shall
serve until their successors are appointed and shall qualify.
c. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
d. Alternate Commissioners shall serve as Commissioners in those cases
where a Commissioner is unable to serve in connection with a specific
project or projects.
a. The Commissioners shall be required to:
1. Examine the subject property after completion of the improvement.
2. Schedule a time, date and location for a hearing to be held in
connection with assessment and shall notify all owners of all real
estate affected directly by mail and by publication in the
appropriate newspaper, all pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-25.
3. Conduct a hearing with a quorum of at least two Commissioners, all
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56-26.
4. Determine what, if any, incidental damages to the property
owner(s) should go toward reducing the amount of the assessment.
5. Certify the amount of the assessment to the Mayor and Council by a
written report duly signed and accompanied by a map showing the
subject real estate.
b. The Assessment Commission shall report to the Mayor and Council as
to its determination, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-30, within 45 days of the
Commission being notified that assessments are required. The
Commission shall conduct a hearing before issuing its report, and the
§ 2-40.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-40.5
1:59
§ 2-41. through § 2-55. (RESERVED)
property owners who may be assessed shall have the opportunity to
address the Assessment Commission at the hearing.
c. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-30, the report may be considered by the
Mayor and Council at any meeting after receipt, provided that the
Township Clerk gives at least two weeks' prior notice, which notice
shall have been posted in five public places in the Township; or
published in a newspaper circulating in the Township, once in each
week for two weeks prior to the meeting; and by mailing a copy of the
notice to the owner or owners named in the report, directed to the last
known post-office address of said owner or owners. The affidavit of the
Township Clerk shall be conclusive to evidence such mailing. The notice
shall briefly state the object of the meeting with reference to the
assessment. At that or any subsequent meeting, the Mayor and Council,
after considering the report and map, may adopt and confirm the report
with or without alteration, as may seem proper, and/or may refer the
matter to any committee of the Council or to the Commission for
revision or correction before taking final action.
§ 2-40.5 SPARTA CODE § 2-41
1:60
ARTICLE X
Contracts and Agreements
§ 2-56. COOPERATIVE PRICING AGREEMENT.
§ 2-56.1. Short Title. [1978 Code § 2-29.1; Ord. No. 767 § 1]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the Cooperative Pricing
Ordinance of the Township of Sparta.
§ 2-56.2. Authority. [1978 Code § 2-29.2; Ord. No. 767 § 2; Ord. No.
02-16 § 1]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Mayor is hereby
authorized to enter into a Cooperative Pricing Agreement with the Lead
Agency created therein, to be known as the Sparta Township Cooperative
Pricing Council, or any other contracting unit within the County of Sussex
or adjoining Counties for the purchase of work, materials and supplies.
§ 2-56.3. Representation. [1978 Code § 2-29.3; Ord. No. 767 § 3;
Ord. No. 02-16 § 2]
The Township Manager shall be designated as the representative of the
Township of Sparta to the Sparta Township Cooperative Pricing Council and
shall be authorized to accept subsequent request for participation in the
Agreement on its behalf.
§ 2-56.4. Contracting Unit. [1978 Code § 2-29.4; Ord. No. 767 § 4]
The Lead Agency created in the Agreement and the party to the Agreement
designated by the Lead Agency to perform administrative services on its
behalf shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the Local
Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and all other provisions of
the New Jersey Statutes.
§ 2-56.5. Fees. [Ord. No. 04-15]
The fee for participating in the Sparta Township Cooperative Pricing
Council shall be $300 per year payable by March 31st.
§ 2-57. through § 2-60. (RESERVED)
§ 2-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-57
1:61

ARTICLE XI
Taxation and Revenue
§ 2-61. OPEN SPACE, RECREATION, AND FARMLAND AND
HISTORIC PRESERVATION TRUST FUND.
§ 2-61.1. Open Space Acquisition Determination. [Ord. No. 00-08
§ I]
The Township Council shall determine which properties shall be acquired
for open space, recreation, and farmland and historic preservation
purposes.
§ 2-61.2. Fund for Open Space Acquisition. [Ord. No. 00-08 § II]
There is hereby established an account to be known and designated as the
Municipal Open Space, Recreation, and Farmland and Historic Preservation
Trust Fund (the Trust Fund) pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7, et seq., which
shall be maintained in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 and N.J.S.A.
40A:5-1. Funds from the Trust Fund may, as directed by the Township
Council, be utilized to acquire or develop vacant land, as well as land
which has improvements upon it at the time of acquisition, or to acquire
development rights, where the principal purpose of the acquisition is open
space preservation, farmland preservation, historic preservation and/or
creation of recreation facilities.
§ 2-61.3. Funding of the Open Space Dedicated Trust Fund. [Ord.
No. 00-08 § III]
§ 2-61.4. Sale of Property. [Ord. No. 00-08 § IV]
a. The Trust Fund shall be funded through the dedication of an amount not
to exceed $0.02 per $100 of assessed valuation of each annual tax levy
commencing with the year 2001. The Trust Fund shall also be permitted
to accept donations and testamentary bequests.
b. The funds accumulated within the Trust Fund may be utilized for any of
the purposes set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7. Any and all interest that
accrues shall remain in the Trust Fund and may be utilized for the
above-described purposes.
c. The Township Council shall determine the amount of the tax levy each
year by Resolution.
d. The Township Council may, after conducting at least one public hearing,
determine how to subdivide the amount of the tax levy among the
various purposes set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7 and this section.
a. Property acquired with funds from the Trust Fund may not be leased or
sold, until and unless the sale or lease has been authorized by the
Township Council in the manner prescribed by law.
§ 2-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-61.4
1:63
§ 2-61.5. Review. [Ord. No. 00-08 § V]
In the event that no property is acquired under this section for a period of
five consecutive years, then the Township Council shall issue a report with
recommendations and conclusions concerning the Trust Fund.
§ 2-62. (RESERVED)
b. The Township Council, after at least one public hearing, and upon a
finding that the purposes of this section will be better served, or that
any land acquired by the Township pursuant to this section is required
for another public use, may by section convey, through sale, exchange,
transfer or other disposition, title to or a lesser interest in that land,
provided that the Township shall replace any land conveyed under this
section with land of at least equal fair market value and reasonably
equivalent usefulness, size, quality and location. Any money derived
from the conveyance shall be deposited into the Trust Fund.
c. Any conveyance made pursuant to this section shall be made in strict
accordance with the "Local Lands and Buildings Law" (N.J.S.A.
40A:12-1 et seq.). In the event of conveyance by exchange, the land or
improvements thereon to be transferred to the Trust shall be at least
equal in fair market value and of reasonably equivalent usefulness, size,
quality and location to the land or improvements transferred from the
Trust.
§ 2-61.4 SPARTA CODE § 2-62
1:64
ARTICLE XII
Administrative Policies and Procedures
§ 2-63. FEES CHARGED FOR MUNICIPAL SERVICES.
§ 2-63.1. Fees Charged by the Office of the Township Clerk. [Ord.
No. 02-18 § 1; Ord. No. 04-15; Ord. No. 09-28; Ord. No. 10-21; Ord.
No. 13-14 § 3]
a. Requests for copies of government records under the Open Public
Records Act, N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
1. Photostatic copies of any government record that can be
photocopied with municipal facilities - $0.05 per letter size page or
smaller and $0.07 per legal size page or larger.
2. In the event that the actual cost for duplication of a government
record exceeds the foregoing rate, the charge shall be the actual
cost of duplicating the government records requested. The actual
cost shall be the cost of materials and supplies used to make a copy
of the record, but shall not include the cost of labor or other
overhead expenses associated with making the copy except as
provided in Subsection 5 hereof.
3. For any government record copied onto a non-paper medium, the
actual cost of the non-paper medium.
4. For any copy of a government record for which the Township is
unable to duplicate with its own facilities and requires the services
of an outside vendor, the actual cost to the Township from the
outside vendor.
5. Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation or volume of a
record embodied in the form of printed matter to be inspected,
examined or copied is such that the record cannot be reproduced
by ordinary document copying equipment in ordinary business size
or involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to
accommodate the request, the charge for the record shall be the
actual cost to the Township, together with a service charge of $12
per hour for each hour required to duplicate the record. The
requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object to the
charge prior to it being incurred.
6. In the event that the Township does not maintain the record
requested in the medium requested, the Township shall either
convert the record to the medium requested or provide a copy in
some other meaningful medium. If a request is for a record in a
medium not routinely used by the Township, not routinely
developed or maintained by the Township or requiring a substantial
amount of manipulation or programming of information technology,
the cost for the record shall be the actual cost of duplication
§ 2-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-63.1
1:65
§ 2-63.2. Fees Charged by the Office of the Tax Collector. [1978
Code § 8-3a; Ord. No. 650 § 1; Ord. No. 861 § 1; New]
§ 2-63.3. Fees Charged by the Police Department. [1978 Code § 8-3;
Ord. No. 650 § 1; Ord. No. 861 § 1; Ord. No. 04-15; Ord. No. 10-21]
together with a special charge that shall be reasonable and shall
be based upon the cost for any extensive use of information
technology, or for the labor cost of personnel providing the service,
that is actually incurred by the Township or attributable to the
Township for the programming, clerical and supervisory assistance
required, or both.
7. Access to electronic records and nonprinted materials shall be
provided free of charge, provided however, that the Township may
charge for the actual costs of any needed supplies, such as
computer disks.
FEES FOR MAPS
b. Additional Fees.
Road map color plot $5
Zoning map $5
Tax map $7
3' x 4' paper $10
Aerial photo (36" x 48" grid) $7
Planemetric (36" x 48" grid) $7
Planemetric color plot (36" x 48" grid) $10
Specialty color combination plot (36" x 48" grid) $25
Bingo/raffle license, per game $10
Peddlers/solicitor permit (for profit)
Monthly $100
Yearly $500
Peddler/solicitor permit for charitable/religious
organizations and veterans
No charge
a. Informal tax status advice;
Per line item $1.
b. Assessment search $10.
c. Two hundred feet list $10.
a. Copies of All Police Reports:
§ 2-63.1 SPARTA CODE § 2-63.3
1:66
§ 2-63.4. Fees Charged by Planning/Zoning Department. [Ord. No.
02-18 § 1]
Master plan $25
Housing element $30
Open space element $35
Town Center plan $25
Land Management Code $35
Zoning map $5
§ 2-64. PAYMENT OF TAXES OR ASSESSMENTS REQUIRED PRIOR
TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSES OR PERMITS. [1978 Code § 8-21; Ord.
No. 791]
1. Photostatic copies of any police report that can be photocopied
with municipal facilities - $0.05 per letter size page or smaller and
$0.07 per legal size or larger.
2. Police Motor Vehicle Accident Reports not requested in person and
not part of municipal court discovery, an additional administrative
fee of $5 shall be charged.
b. Clearance visa and letters of good conduct (except to bona fide
charitable or religious organizations for which there is no charge) $15.
c. Fingerprints: for bartender permit, applicants for peddlers, canvassers,
or wherever required $5.
d. Duplicate copies of fingerprints, per copy $3.
e. For any police record, including photographs, copied onto a non-paper
medium, the actual cost of the non-paper medium.
f. For any copy of a police record for which the Township is unable to
duplicate with its own facilities and requires the services of an outside
vendor, the actual cost to the Township from the outside vendor.
a. As a condition for the issuance or renewal of any license or permit, the
applicant, if he is the owner thereof, shall pay any delinquent property
taxes or assessments on the property wherein the business or activity
for which the license or permit is sought or wherein the business or
activity is to be conducted.
b. When any licensee or permittee who is an owner of the property upon
which the licensed business or activity is conducted has failed to pay
the taxes or assessments due on the property for at least three
consecutive quarters, the license or permit shall be revoked or
suspended.
§ 2-63.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-64
1:67
§ 2-65. LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM.
§ 2-65.1. Creation of Program. [Ord. No. 09-30]
A Length of Service Awards Program ("LOSAP") is hereby created in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183, et seq. in order to reward members of
volunteer first aid squads for their loyal, diligent and devoted service to the
residents of the Township of Sparta.
§ 2-65.2. Annual Contributions. [Ord. No. 09-30]
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth in this
section. The contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that shall
be established by the Township of Sparta and the plan shall be administered
in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, the United States
Internal Revenue Code, and this section.
§ 2-65.3. Criteria for Eligible Members, Amount of Contribution and
Cost of Program. [Ord. No. 09-30]
§ 2-65.4. Volunteer Credit. [Ord. No. 09-30; Ord. No. 13-10]
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the first aid squad in accordance with the following
schedule:
c. Upon payment of the delinquent taxes or assessment, the license or
permit shall be restored.
d. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or include any alcoholic
beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the "Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act," N.J.S.A. 33:1-1, et seq.
a. The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible
member that meets the following criteria:
1. One hundred points are required each calendar year for a member
to be eligible for an annual contribution.
2. Five years of service after the adoption of this section15 are
required for vesting.
b. The maximum annual contribution shall be $500 per eligible member
for the year 2010; $800 per eligible member for the year 2011; and
$1,150 per eligible member of the year 2012.
c. The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
$40,000 for the year 2010; $64,000 for the year 2011; and $92,000 for
the year 2012.
15.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 09-30 was adopted November 3, 2009.
§ 2-64 SPARTA CODE § 2-65.4
1:68
Length of Service Awards Program
Point Schedule
Emergency Calls: 100 Points Maximum
Each percentage point will be equal to two LOSAP points.
Schools/Training: 25 Points Maximum
One point applied for each verified two hours of instruction/training.
Drills: 12 Points Maximum
One point applied for each verified two hours of drill attended.
Meetings: 12 Points Maximum
One point per Squad monthly meeting or Squad special meeting.
Miscellaneous Activities: 12 Points Maximum
One point per Squad function. Functions include, but not limited to:
funeral services, official ceremonies, parades, Sparta Day, annual picnic,
work nights and other functions authorized by the Ambulance Captain.
Stand-by or Sleep-In: 100 Points Maximum
One point for each twelve hour shift.
Elected/Appointed Positions: 15 Points Maximum
Completion of one-year term in an elected or appointed position. The
points will be calculated as follows:
Sparta Ambulance Squad Allotted Points
Capt./CEO/CFO SVAS 15 Points
1st/2nd Lt./CEO/CFO/SGT. SVAS 10 Points
Trustee SVAS 5 Points
Training Officer SVAS 5 Points
Secretary SVAS 5 Points
Treasurer SVAS 5 Points
Delegate SVAS 5 Points
Service Time: 100 Points Maximum
One point per year of service, includes all past years served.
For the year 2010, the contribution shall be made as follows:
$500 (maximum contribution) annual contribution per responder for
earning 100 points
$400 (80% of maximum contribution) annual contribution per responder
for earning 80 points
$300 (60% of maximum contribution) annual contribution per responder
for earning 60 points
§ 2-65.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-65.4
1:69
Committees: 12 Points Maximum
Building & Grounds
Building Rental
Equipment and Supplies
Statistics
LOSAP
Quality Assurance
Rig Maintenance & Repair
Training
One point applied for each verified two hours of Committee activity.
Special Events: 12 Points Maximum
Trade Shows
Memorial Services
Township Meetings
Out Reach Services
Special Conferences
NJ First Aid Council 12th District Meetings
Community Services
One point per special event attended.
§ 2-66. DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM.
§ 2-66.1. Eligible Positions. [Ord. No. 13-11]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
a. Township Council.
b. Municipal Attorney.
c. Municipal Prosecutor.
d. Municipal Court Judge.
e. Township Manager.
f. Township Engineer.
§ 2-65.4 SPARTA CODE § 2-66.2
1:70
§ 2-66.2. Exempt Positions. [Ord. No. 13-11]
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 2-66.3. Implementation of Program. [Ord. No. 13-11]
This section shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
a. Tax Collector.
b. Chief Financial Officer.
c. Construction Code Official.
d. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
e. Tax Assessor.
f. Municipal Planner.
g. Registered Municipal Clerk.
h. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
i. Principal Public Works Manager.
§ 2-66.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-66.3
1:71
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1. NOISE.
§ 3-1.1. Findings and Declaration. [1978 Code § 3-4.1]
It is hereby found and declared that:
§ 3-1.2. Definitions. [1978 Code § 3-4.2]
As used in this section, all acoustical words and terms shall have the
meanings set forth in the publication of the United States of America
Standards Institute, New York, New York, entitled "Acoustical Terminology,"
USASI SI. 1-1960; all equipment used in making acoustical measurements
shall meet or exceed the requirements set forth in the publication of the
Institute entitled "Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters,"
USASI SI. 4-1961 and all such measurements so made shall be made in full
accordance with the methods and procedures set forth in USASI S1. 2-1962
entitled "Methods for the Physical Measurement of Sound."
§ 3-1.3. Prohibited Sound Levels. [1978 Code § 3-4.3]
a. The occurrence of loud noises in the Township constitutes a detriment
to public health, comfort, safety, and welfare of the residents of Sparta;
b. As a matter of legislative determination and public policy, the
provisions, regulations, and prohibitions of this section are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare and the peace and
quiet of the Township and its inhabitants.
a. No person shall cause to be made, directly or indirectly, by any means
whatsoever except vehicles whether mechanical or not, any sound that
either:
1. Exceeds the following measurements on the A weighing scale of the
sound level meter when measured at any point on the
complainant's property;
(a) Sixty decibels (dBA) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.
(b) Fifty decibels (dBA) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
2. Exceeds the following measurements on the A weighing scale of the
sound level meter when measured in the center of the room where
the complaint originates;
§ 2-66.3 SPARTA CODE § 3-1.3
1:72
§ 3-1.4. Specific Noise Prohibitions. [1978 Code § 3-4.4; Ord. No.
06-06 § 1]
(a) Fifty decibels (dBA) between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.
(b) Forty decibels (dBA) between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.
b. A noise measured or registered from a vehicle within Township limits at
a distance of at least 25 feet from the noise source located within the
public right-of-way shall not exceed 88 decibels (dBA) on the A
weighing scale.
a. Unless exempted under the provisions of this section, no person shall
cause to be made, directly or indirectly, any loud noise which disturbs,
injures, or endangers the health, comfort, safety, or welfare of others
within the Township.
b. The following specific acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
1. Horns, Signaling Devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, truck, or
other vehicle on any street, or public place, except as a warning
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:3-69; whistle or other
device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such
signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
2. Radio and Television Sets, Phonographs, etc. The use of radio or
television receiving sets, musical instrument, phonograph, or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in
such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants or at any time with volume louder than is
necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the
room or vehicle in which such machine or device is operated and
who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set,
instrument phonograph, machine, or device between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible
at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in
which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section.
3. Loud Speakers, Amplifiers for Advertising. The use of any radio,
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound
amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the
purpose of commercial advertising.
§ 3-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-1.4
1:73
4. Animals, Birds, Etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by
causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort
or repose of persons residing in the vicinity.16
5. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
internal combustion engine except through an adequate muffler or
other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
therefrom. This includes by way of example and not by way of
limitation, internal combustion engines power mowing motor
vehicles, lawnmowers and chain saws.
6. Loading and Unloading. The creation of a loud and excessive noise
in connection with loading and unloading any vehicle or the
opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
7. Construction or Repairing of Buildings. The excavation, grading,
paving, erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any premises,
street, building or structure at any time on Sundays or legal
holidays, or other than between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on Saturdays or between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
on all other days.
Exceptions are granted only when permission is obtained in
advance from the proper authority. The Township Manager grants
permission Monday through Friday. On Saturday, Sunday and
holidays permission is granted by the Sparta Police Department.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to interior or
exterior repairs or to the interior alterations, the work for which
is actually performed by a homeowner or occupant, personally,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. upon residential
premises that are owned by such homeowner or occupied by such
occupant, provided the work is done without undue noise or
disturbance of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
8. Blowers, Fans, Pumps. The use of any blower, fan or pump or
engine or motor in connection therewith, including by way of
example and not by way of limitation, air conditioning systems,
compression devices, and pool filter systems, if such use creates
loud, penetrating, or continuous noises that disturb the comfort or
repose of persons residing in the vicinity.
9. Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals. The creation of any excessive
noise adjacent to any school, institution of learning, house of
worship, or judicial court while the same are in use, or adjacent to
any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the workings of
such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the
hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed on the adjacent
16.Editor's Note: For regulations regarding barking and crying dogs, see Chapter 5,
subsection 5-4.1.
§ 3-1.4 SPARTA CODE § 3-1.4
1:74
§ 3-1.5. Exceptions. [1978 Code § 3-4.5]
§ 3-2. ANTI-LITTERING REGULATIONS.
streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, church or
court street.
10. Hawkers, Peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers
and venders which disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.
11. Drums, Bells, and the Like. The use of any drum, bell, horn,
loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of
attracting attention to any performance, show, or sale, or display of
merchandise by any creation of noise or sound.
12. Mobile Loudspeakers. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or
amplifiers on vehicles or aircraft for commercial advertising
purposes.
13. Yelling, Shouting, and the Like. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling
or singing on the public streets at any time or place so as to annoy
or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office,
dwelling, hotel, motel, or other type of residence or of any persons
in the vicinity.
c. If any person who is not exempted under the provisions of this section
shall cause to be made any of the noises prohibited under this section,
and if the noises shall be proven to be in violation of the sound levels
prescribed under subsection 3-1.3, the proof shall be sufficient to prove
a violation under this section.
a. The prohibitions contained in this section shall not apply to persons:
1. Who are engaged in the performance of any public or governmental
function such as the sounding of a church or school bell, or a police,
fire, ambulance, air raid, or like disaster warning, alert, or alarm,
whether such alarm be for an actual emergency purpose or for
practice or drilling purposes;
2. Who are engaged in a religious, charitable, recreational, civic, or
political activity by means of a sound truck or other amplifying
device, for nonprofit purposes, provided that such persons shall
have first filed with the Township Council an application for a
permit setting forth the sponsorship, date, hours, and routes of
such activity and the Council shall have issued a permit after
having ascertained that such activity is not in conflict of hours,
route, traffic volume and like factors, with any other previously
scheduled activity;
3. Who are engaged in any activity specifically permitted or required
by any ordinance, resolution, Statute, or governmental regulation.
§ 3-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2.1
1:75
§ 3-2.1. Definitions. [1978 Code § 17-7.1; Ord. No. 613 § 1]
As used in this section:
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — Shall mean a litter storage and
collection receptacle provided by the owner or occupier of private premises
for his or her own use.
FILLING STATION — Shall mean a place where gasoline, oil and services for
automobiles and other motor vehicles are sold either at wholesale or retail
prices.
GARBAGE — Shall mean and include putrescible animal and vegetable
wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption
of food.
LITTER — Shall mean garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined in this section
and all other waste material which if thrown, deposited or stored as
prohibited in this section, tends to create a danger to public health, safety
and welfare.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Shall mean any dwelling, house, building or other
structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited
or vacant and includes any yard, ground, walk, driveway, porch, steps or
vestibules belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any street, sidewalk, alley or other public way
and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
PUBLIC STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — Shall mean any structure or
building owned or operated by the Federal, County or State government or
any governmental agency.
REFUSE — Shall mean all putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes)
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, dismantled automobiles and parts thereof, scrap
metal, junk, machinery and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery, building materials and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person
or property is or may be transferred or drawn upon a highway, including
devices used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
§ 3-2.2. Litter in Public Places. [1978 Code § 17-7.2; Ord. No. 613
§ 2]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, road, sidewalk
or other public place within the Township, except in public receptacles or
authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 3-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 3-2.3
1:76
§ 3-2.3. Litter in Receptacles to Prevent Scattering. [1978 Code
§ 17-7.3; Ord. No. 613 § 3]
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, road, alley or other
public place or upon private property.
§ 3-2.4. Depositing Litter in Gutters, Driveways or Streets
Prohibited. [1978 Code § 17-7.4; Ord. No. 613 § 4]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or public place
within the Township the accumulation of litter from any building or lawn
or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep any sidewalk in front of their premises free
of litter.
§ 3-2.5. Litter in Bodies of Water. [1978 Code § 17-7.5; Ord. No. 613
§ 5]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream
or any other body of water within the Township.
§ 3-2.6. Litter on Private Premises. [1978 Code § 17-7.6; Ord. No.
613 § 6]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any private premises within the
Township whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or
person or persons in control of private premises may maintain authorized
private receptacle for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk, or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 3-2.7. Transportation from Outside Township. [1978 Code
§ 17-7.7; Ord. No. 613 § 7]
No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from
outside the Township and bring it into the Township for the purpose of
dumping or disposing thereof. No truck or other vehicle containing litter in
the Township shall be parked or allowed to remain standing on any street in
the Township or on any public or private property.
§ 3-2.8. Handbills. [1978 Code § 17-7.8; Ord. No. 613 § 8]
Advertisements, handbills, circulars and papers may be distributed in the
Township only if they are securely placed at each dwelling, or handed
to such person willing to accept them, so that they will not be scattered
or carried about by the elements; otherwise no person shall place any
advertisement, handbill, circular or paper on or in any public street,
sidewalk, utility poles, trees, building or vehicle within the Township.
§ 3-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2.9
1:77
§ 3-2.9. Maintenance of Private Premises. [1978 Code § 17-7.9; Ord.
No. 613 § 9]
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter, provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 3-2.10. Maintenance of Sidewalks by Merchants; Public
Receptacles. [1978 Code § 17-7.10; Ord. No. 613 § 10]
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Township any
litter, waste materials or rubbish, but such person shall keep the sidewalk
in front of his business premises free of litter. All persons operating filling
stations or other mercantile establishments where commodities are sold
between any curb area of the Township and the office building or equipment
from which such commodities are dispensed shall maintain at all times
receptacles into which all waste materials and rubbish may be deposited by
customers, employees or other persons.
§ 3-2.11. Tampering With Receptacles or Removing Contents. [1978
Code § 17-7.11; Ord. No. 613 § 11]
No person shall tamper with or take or remove any of the contents from
any public or private receptacle containing garbage, refuse, rubbish, junk
or any other waste material which has been placed or deposited along any
public highway, street, land or alleyway for collection by the Township or
any of its agents or servants and any person who violates the purpose and
intent of this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth herein.
§ 3-2.12. Vehicles Depositing Litter. [1978 Code § 17-7.12; Ord. No.
613 § 12]
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Township unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load or contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any street,
alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle
or truck within the Township, the wheels or tires of which carry or deposit
in any street, alley or other public place any mud, dirt, sticky substance or
foreign matter of any kind.
§ 3-2.13. Throwing Litter From Vehicles. [1978 Code § 17-7.13; Ord.
No. 613 § 13]
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Township.
§ 3-2.9 SPARTA CODE § 3-2.14
1:78
§ 3-2.14. Throwing Litter From Aircraft. [1978 Code § 17-7.14; Ord.
No. 613 § 14]
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the
Township any litter, handbill or any other object.
§ 3-2.15. Clearing of Litter From Open Private Property; Notice;
Action by Township. [1978 Code § 17-7.15; Ord. No. 613 § 15; Ord.
No. 07-14 § VII]
§ 3-2.16. Enforcement. [1978 Code § 17-7.16; Ord. No. 613 § 16;
Ord. No. 07-14 § VII]
The provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by
licensed inspectors of the Sussex County Health Department and all
members of the Police Department and the officials are specifically charged
with the duty to enforce this section, and, to that end, to make and sign
complaints for violations in the Municipal Court of the Township.
a. Notice to Remove. The Director of Community Development of the
Township is authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open
or vacant private property, or the tenant or agent or such owner to
dispose properly of litter located on such owner's property which is
dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Notice shall be by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the
owner or his agent or tenant at his last known address or served
personally upon the owner, tenant or agent.
b. Action upon Noncompliance. Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner, tenant or agent so notified, to dispose properly of the litter
within 10 days after receipt of written notice specified in paragraph a
above, or within 10 days after the date of such notice in the event it is
returned to the Township by the Post Office Department because of
inability to make delivery thereof, provided the notice was properly
addressed to the last known address of the owner, tenant or agent, the
Health Officer or his duly designated agent is authorized and
empowered to dispose of such litter, and the cost thereof shall be
certified to the Township Council.
c. Action by Township Council. If the Township Council, after examining
the certificate finds the cost to be correct, it shall cause the cost to be
charged against the land as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14. Such
charge shall become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and
become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and
shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as taxes.
§ 3-2.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2.17
1:79
§ 3-2.17. Penalty. [1978 Code § 17-7.17; Ord. No. 613 § 17; New]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 3-3. (RESERVED)
§ 3-4. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC
PLACES.
§ 3-4.1. Consumption Prohibited in Public Places. [1978 Code
§ 3-9.1]
No person shall consume or offer to another for consumption alcoholic
beverages in, on or upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, playground
or in, on or upon any land or building owned or occupied by any Federal,
State, County or municipal government.
§ 3-4.2. Consumption in Places Where Public is Invited Prohibited.
[1978 Code § 3-9.2]
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or offer to another for
consumption any alcoholic beverage in, on or upon any place to which the
public at large is invited, provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages within
the licensed premises of a plenary retail consumption liquor licensee.
§ 3-4.3. Possession of Alcoholic Beverages in Unsealed Containers
in Public Places Prohibited. [1978 Code § 3-9.3]
No person shall have in his possession or possess an alcoholic beverage
in, on or upon any public street, road, alley, sidewalk, park, playground
or in, on or upon any land or building owned or occupied by any Federal,
State, County or municipal government unless the same is contained within
a closed or sealed container.
§ 3-4.4. Possession of Alcoholic Beverages in Places Where Public is
Invited Prohibited. [1978 Code § 3-9.4]
No person shall have in his possession or possess an alcoholic beverage in,
on or upon any place to which the public at large is invited unless the same
is contained within a closed or sealed container, provided, however, that
nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the possession of alcoholic
beverages within the licensed premises of a plenary retail consumption
liquor licensee.
§ 3-2.17 SPARTA CODE § 3-4.5
1:80
§ 3-4.5. Issuance of Special Permit.17 [1978 Code § 3-9.5; Ord. No.
646]
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in subsections 3-4.1, 3-4.2, 3-4.3
and 3-4.4, a special permit may be issued by the Police Department of
the Township for the possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages
at a family picnic within the Sparta Glen. Any other special permit for the
possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages at a picnic, in a park or
glen, at a specific event, or observance or other activity sponsored by an
individual, a group, non-profit corporation or organizations or corporation
or organization for profit, may be issued by the Township Council upon
application duly made to the Municipal Clerk.
§ 3-5. through § 3-7. (RESERVED)
§ 3-8. JUVENILE PARTIES.
§ 3-8.1. Declaration of Purpose. [1978 Code § 3-7.1]
The Township Council hereby declares that frequently when juvenile parties
are held without adult supervision, problems involving: possible
consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors; obstruction of roads by
parked vehicles; and loud and unnecessary noises disturbing neighbors,
may be involved.
§ 3-8.2. Definitions. [1978 Code § 3-7.2]
As used in this section:
PARTY — Shall mean a social gathering in a private residence of persons
under the age of 21 years where more than 10 such persons are present.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT — Shall mean a partner or legally appointed
guardian of one of the persons attending the party or any person over age
25 designated by a parent or guardian owning or residing in the house
where the party is held.
§ 3-8.3. Presence of Adult Required. [1978 Code § 3-7.3]
No person shall hold or attend a party unless a responsible adult is present
on the premises at all times during the time when such party is in progress.
§ 3-8.4. Responsibility of Owner or Occupant. [1978 Code § 3-7.4]
No owner, tenant or other occupant of a private residence shall permit the
use of his premises for such a party unless a responsible adult is present as
required hereby.
17.Editor's Note: For regulations concerning parks and recreational areas, see Chapter 9.
§ 3-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-8.5
1:81
§ 3-8.5. Exempt Parties. [1978 Code § 3-7.5]
Nothing herein shall be construed to apply to parties held in public or semipublic
places or to parties held under the sponsorship of churches or other
bona fide charitable, civic, educational or religious organizations.
§ 3-9. CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY BY PERSONS UNDER THE
LEGAL AGE.
§ 3-9.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 04-16]
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underage person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean the underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling, or any person related by blood or affinity.
§ 3-9.2. Consumption or Possession Prohibited on Private Property.
[Ord. No. 04-16]
The consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages of any type on private
property by a person who is under the legal age and without legal authority
is prohibited.
§ 3-9.3. Nonapplicability. [Ord. No. 04-16]
§ 3-9.4. Violation and Penalty. [Ord. No. 04-16]
a. The provisions of this section shall not apply to an underage person who
consumes or possesses an alcoholic beverage in connection with a
religious observance, ceremony, rite, or consumes or possesses an
alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a
parent, guardian, or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase
and consume alcoholic beverages.
b. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any such person while
actually engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is
licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or while actively
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or
hotel management program at a county vocations school or post
secondary educational institution.
1. This section shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a
penalty under section R.S. 33:1-81, or any other section of law
against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage
activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
a. Any person who shall violate any section of this ordinance shall be
subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense, and $350 for any
subsequent offense.
§ 3-8.5 SPARTA CODE § 3-9.4
1:82
§ 3-10. RESISTING ARREST PROHIBITED.
§ 3-10.1. Failure to Obey Lawful Command. [1978 Code § 3-11.1]
No person shall disobey a lawful command by the Chief of Police, or any
Police Officer, or any member of the Police Department, or any special
Police Officer or School Crossing Guard while acting in the discharge of his/
her duty as such Officer or Guard.
§ 3-10.2. Resistance to Arrest. [1978 Code § 3-11.2]
No person shall resist arrest by the Chief of Police, or any Police Officer,
or any member of the Police Department or Special Police Officer or any
b. The court may, in addition to the fine, suspend or postpone for six
months the driving privilege of the defendant. Upon the conviction of
any person and the suspension or postponement of that person's
driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the Motor Vehicle
Commission stating the first and last day of the suspension or
postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to this section. If a
person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years
of age, the period of license postponement, including suspension or
postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall
commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period
of six months after the person reaches the age of 17 years.
If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this State, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Commission along with the report. If
for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in
the report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color and sex
of the person, as well as the first and last day of the license suspension
period imposed by the court.
The court shall also inform the person orally and in writing that if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of
license suspension or postponement, that person shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in R.S. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of R.S. 39:3-40.
If the person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Commission the required report. The court shall not
collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this section. Upon
receipt of a report by the court, the Commission shall notify the
appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or
postponement.
§ 3-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-10.2
1:83
School Crossing Guard, while such Officer or Guard is acting in the
discharge of his/her duty.
§ 3-10.3. Attempt to Escape. [1978 Code § 3-11.3]
No person shall attempt to escape arrest nor shall any person assist any
person under arrest, to escape or attempt to escape from such custody.
§ 3-10.4. Power to Arrest. [1978 Code § 3-11.4]
For the purposes of this section, the Chief of Police, or any Police Officer, or
any member of the Police Department or any special Police Officer, whether
in uniform or not in uniform, shall have the power of arrest, however,
the person under arrest may request identification if such officer is not
in uniform. Further, for the purposes of this section all regular full time
Police Officers shall be considered "on duty" on a twenty-four hour basis
throughout the year.
§ 3-11. WORTHLESS CHECKS.
§ 3-11.1. Definitions. [1978 Code § 3-6.1]
As used in this section:
CREDIT — Shall mean an arrangement or understanding with the bank or
depository for the payment of the check, draft or order.
§ 3-11.2. Overdrawing Credit or Checking Account. [1978 Code
§ 3-6.2]
No person shall, either for himself or his agent or representative of another
person, or as an officer or agent of any corporation, or as a member of a
partnership, with intent to defraud, make, draw, utter, or deliver any check,
draft or order for the payment of money in the sum not in excess of $200
upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of so doing that the
maker, or drawer, has no funds or insufficient funds in or credit with, such
bank or other depository for the payment in full of such instrument upon
its presentation although no express representation is made in reference
thereto.
§ 3-11.3. Evidence of Intent to Defraud. [1978 Code § 3-6.3]
The making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order
as stated in subsection 3-11.2 shall be prima facie evidence of intent to
defraud, and the certificate of protest of nonpayment of same shall be
presumptive evidence that there were no funds or insufficient funds in or
credit with such bank or other depository and that the person making,
drawing, uttering or delivering the instrument knew that there were no
funds or insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository.
§ 3-10.2 SPARTA CODE § 3-11.4
1:84
§ 3-11.4. Deposit for Costs. [1978 Code § 3-6.4]
When a complaint is filed under the provisions of this section, the person
filing such complaint shall deposit the sum of $25 to cover court costs
with the Clerk of the Municipal Court at the time when the complaint is
made. If the complaint is subsequently withdrawn by the complainant, or if
for any other reason there is no conviction of the defendant named in the
complaint, the sum of $25 shall be retained to cover the costs of making
out the complaint and service of the same. In the event the defendant is
convicted, he shall be required to pay the costs and in this event the $25
deposit shall be returned to the complainant.
§ 3-12. (RESERVED)
§ 3-13. GAMES OF CHANCE.
§ 3-13.1. Issuing Authority.18 [Ord. No. 12-21]
The issuing authority for the Township of Sparta responsible for approving
bingo and raffle licenses shall be the Municipal Clerk. The issuing authority
shall approve or deny all applications for bingo or raffle licenses with due
expedition after the filing of the application. Applications must be filed with
the Municipal Clerk, together with the required fees pursuant to N.J.A.C.
13:47-4.9. The applicant must demonstrate in writing compliance with the
provisions of all applicable laws and regulations.
§ 3-13.2. Games of Chance Permitted on Sunday. [1978 Code
§ 3-10.1, 3-10.2, 3-10.3; Ord. No. 900]
a. The "Raffles Licensing Law," L. 1954, C.5. and the "Bingo Licensing
Law," L. 1954, C.6, have been duly adopted by the Legislature and the
Township Council, in accordance with the provisions of these Acts, have
licensed or may license various charitable, religious and volunteer
organizations to conduct raffles and bingo in the Township and each of
the Statutes (N.J.S.A. 5:8-31 and 5:8-58) provide that games of bingo
and raffles known as games of chance shall not be conducted on Sunday
unless the municipality adopts an ordinance authorizing the conduct of
such games on the first day of the week. There have been requests by
religious and other eligible organizations to conduct these games on
the first day of the week.
b. Games of chance commonly known as bingo and raffles, as provided by
the laws of the State of New Jersey, 1954, Chapters 5 and 6, may be
conducted in the Township on the first day of the week commonly
known and designated as Sunday, provided the applicant for the license
to conduct such game otherwise qualifies under the provisions of the
aforementioned Statutes of the State of New Jersey and the Rules and
Regulations of the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission
18.Editor's Note: Former subsection 3-13.1, Organizations Exempt from Township Licensing
Fees was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 12-21.
§ 3-11.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-13.2
1:85
§ 3-14. (RESERVED)
§ 3-15. LOITERING.
§ 3-15.1. Definitions. [1978 Code § 3-2.1]
As used in this section:
LOITERING — Shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and
shall include the concepts of spending time idly loafing or walking about
aimlessly. Where loitering is prohibited in public places, private rights-ofway,
or any public or quasi-public grounds, parks or buildings.
§ 3-15.2. Prohibition. [1978 Code § 3-2.2]
No person shall loiter in the places mentioned in such manner as to:
§ 3-15.3. Refusal to Obey the Order of a Police Officer. [1978 Code
§ 3-2.3]
Whenever any Police Officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any place as defined in subsection
3-15.1 is causing or is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in
subsection 3-15.2, he may, if he deems it necessary for the preservation
of the public peace and safety, order that person to leave that place. Any
and, specifically, providing that the organization conducting fire
company or first aid organization, or other type of organization
specifically qualifying under the provisions of the aforementioned
Statutes.
c. Compliance with Ordinances and Laws Required. The Township Council
or the persons duly authorized by the Township Council shall be
permitted to issue a license for the holding, operating and conducting
of games of chance on the first day of the week commonly known as
Sunday. The requirements for the issuance of the license and for the
manner of holding, operating or conducting such games of chance shall
meet all the requirements of any Federal, State, County or municipal
Statutes, ordinances or regulations.
a. Create or cause to be created a danger to the breach of the peace.
b. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort or repose of any person.
c. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
d. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any such place
as defined in subsection 3-15.1. The conduct prohibited shall include
the making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or
insulting nature of which are calculated to annoy, disturb or frighten
the person to, or in whose hearing, they are made.
§ 3-13.2 SPARTA CODE § 3-15.3
1:86
person who shall refuse to leave or having left, shall immediately return to
the place after being ordered to leave by a Police Officer, shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.
§ 3-15.4. Loitering or Idling by Minors; Subsequent Violations after
Notification. [1978 Code § 3-2.4]
§ 3-16. DRUG FREE PUBLIC HOUSING FACILITIES, PARKS AND
BUILDINGS.
§ 3-16.1. Maps Adopted. [Ord. No. 960]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 2C:35-5 of the New Jersey Statutes the
Township Engineer has prepared maps which identify the areas in or within
500 feet of Township parks and in or within 500 feet of a public library, said
maps being dated April 23, 1998 and including therein a facilities list that
identifies the areas as follows:
a. No parent, guardian or other adult having the care or custody of any
minor under the age of 18 years, shall knowingly permit such minor to
violate the provisions of this section.
b. Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is apprehended for
violating any portion of this section, the Chief of Police or his
designated representative shall notify the parents, guardian or other
person having custody of such minor of such apprehension.
c. If it be established that any minor under the age of 18 years committed
a violation of any of the provisions of this section between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, then it shall be presumed,
in the absence of proof to the contrary, that the parent, guardian or
other adult person having the care or custody of such minor knowingly
permitted such minor to do so.
d. If it be established that the parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care or custody of any minor under the age of 18 years who
was duly notified pursuant to paragraph b above that such minor was
apprehended for a violation of this section and if it be further
established that such minor subsequently committed a violation of any
of the provisions of this section, then it shall be presumed, in absence of
proof to the contrary, that such parent, guardian or adult person
knowingly permitted such subsequent violation.
a. Sparta Glen (Block 7, Lot 57) - Sheet 1.
b. Station Park (Block 19, Lot 39) - Sheet 1.
c. White Lake Beach and Camp Sacajawea (Block 19, Lots 46 and 47) -
Sheet 1.
d. White Lake Athletic fields (Block 31, Lots 5 and 6) - Sheet 1.
§ 3-15.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-16.1
1:87
§ 3-16.2. Official Findings. [Ord. No. 960]
The above areas are the official findings and record of the locations and
boundaries of the areas to be covered by the terms of the statute, a copy
of which is on file in the offices of the Township Clerk, Township Engineer,
Police Department and the Sussex County Prosecutor's Office.
§ 3-17. USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC
PROPERTY.
§ 3-17.1. Definition of "Smoking." [Ord. No. 12-08 § 2]
SMOKING — Shall mean the burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke
from, or the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other
matter or substance which contains tobacco or any other matter than can
be smoked.
§ 3-17.2. Prohibition. [Ord. No. 12-08 § 3]
No person shall engage in smoking or the use of tobacco or tobaccorelated
products and/or discarding of those products, in any area designed
as "tobacco-free" and/or beyond any point which is otherwise marked as
"no smoking beyond this point" or similar language, or on any Townshipowned,
leased or utilized property open to the public or to which the public
is invited, including, but not limited to, the Municipal Building and its
grounds, the Department of Public Works Building and its grounds and all
public parks, trails and any other public recreational facility or area.
§ 3-17.3. Violations and Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the following penalties:
e. Edison Park (Block 1, Lot 3.01) - Sheet 2.
f. Tyler Park (Block 155, Lots 37 and 38) - Sheet 2.
g. Sparta Library/Ungerman Field/Dykstra Concert Park/Mini Park (Block
39.01, Lots 4 — 6, 13 and 15) - Sheet 2.
a. A fine of not less than $50 but not exceeding $100 for the first offense;
b. A fine of not less than $100 but not exceeding $200 for the second
offense;
c. A fine of not less than $200 but not exceeding $500 for the third and
subsequent offense.
§ 3-16.1 SPARTA CODE § 3-17.3
1:88
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
Editor's Note: See also Chapter 23, Quarrying.
§ 4-1. PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS.
§ 4-1.1. Definitions. [New]
As used in this section:
PEDDLER — Shall mean a person who goes from place to place by traveling
on foot or by any type of conveyance on the streets, or from house to house,
carrying, transporting or conveying goods, wares, merchandise, foods, farm
products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale or making
sales and deliveries to purchasers, or who solicits orders and as a separate
transaction makes deliveries to purchasers. The word "peddler" shall
include the words "hawker" and "huckster."
PERSON — Shall mean and include the singular and the plural and shall
also include and mean any individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
voluntary association, incorporated association, club, society or other
organization and any officer, employee or agent thereof.
SOLICITOR AND/OR CANVASSER — Shall mean and include persons who
shall go on foot or by any type of conveyance from door to door or house to
house selling, causing to be sold, offering for sale or causing to be offered
for sale or taking orders for present or future delivery of goods, wares,
merchandise, foods, farm products or provisions; and shall further include
persons going, as aforesaid, from door to door or from house to house for
the purpose of obtaining alms, orders, subscriptions or making canvasses
or surveys or other solicitations; also, any person who uses or occupies any
building, part thereof or any other place within the Township for the sole
purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
§ 4-1.2. Purpose. [New; amended 9-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-16]
The purpose of this section is to prevent dishonest business practices by
providing for the registration and regulation of the conduct of peddlers and
solicitors, and of soliciting and canvassing.
§ 4-1.3. License Required. [New]
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to sell or dispose of, or
to offer to sell or dispose of, any goods, wares or merchandise within the
Township or to solicit or act as a solicitor from door to door within the
Township without first registering with the Township Clerk as provided in
this section, and obtaining the license prescribed.
§ 3-17.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.4
1:89
§ 4-1.4. Exemption. [New]
The requirements of this ordinance as to the payment of a license fee (but
not as to registration) shall be held not to include the following persons,
who are expressly exempt from its application:
§ 4-1.5. Application for License. [New]
Any person desiring a license under this section shall first register with
the Township Clerk and shall file with the Clerk an application in writing
containing the following information:
a. Any person honorably discharged from the United States Army, Navy,
Air Force or Marine Corps, or other components of the military forces of
the United States.
b. Any person who conducts a judicial sale under the authority of the State
or National laws.
c. Any person who resides in the Township who solicits for charitable or
educational purposes.
d. Persons engaged in delivering merchandise of any nature whatsoever
on regular scheduled routes to regular customers, including
specifically, but not limited to, persons delivering dairy products, bread
and other merchandise over such routes; and with respect to persons
mentioned in this subsection they shall be exempt from all
requirements of this section relating to the payment of the license fee
or license fees, terms and conditions.
a. Name of applicant.
b. Permanent home residence.
c. Name, address and telephone number of the person from whom goods
making up the stock, if any, were or are to be purchased.
d. Three bona fide business references.
e. The place or places of residence of the applicant for the next preceding
three years.
f. Two recent photographs of applicant, approximately 2 1/2 inches by
2 1/2 inches in size. [Amended 9-24-2019 by Ord. No. 19-16]
g. A description of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold and offered
for sale, and/or the purpose of his proposed canvassing or solicitation.
h. Details of any arrests or convictions for misdemeanors and crimes,
including the nature of the offense for which arrested or convicted, the
day of conviction and the place where the conviction was had.
§ 4-1.4 SPARTA CODE § 4-1.5
1:90
§ 4-1.6. Granting of License. [New; amended 9-24-2019 by Ord. No.
19-16]
Following the filing of the application, the Municipal Clerk shall make or
cause to be made such investigation as she deems necessary to verify the
information set forth therein; the Clerk shall thereupon signify her approval
or rejection on the reverse side of the application within 10 business days,
and if approved, shall issue the license to such applicant. To such license
shall be affixed one photograph of the applicant, identified by applicant's
signature, which shall, in part, cover the photograph.
§ 4-1.7. Licenses in Possession. [New]
Every person holding a license under this section shall be required to carry
the license with him.
§ 4-1.8. Regulations in Respect of Licensees. [New]
The following regulations shall apply to all persons licensed under the
provisions of this section:
i. To the application, and as part thereof, there shall be attached a letter
from the firm or corporation for which applicant works, authorizing
applicant to act as its representative.
a. No license or badge issued under the provisions of this section shall be
used or worn by any person other than the one to whom it was issued,
nor shall it be transferred in any way or manner.
b. No peddler, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, make any outcry,
blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any
loudspeaking radio or sound-amplifying system, upon any of the streets,
alleys, parks or other public places of the Township, or upon any private
premises in the Township where sound of sufficient volume is emitted
or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the
streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of
attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such
licensee proposes to sell.
c. No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location, nor be
permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might
impede or inconvenience the public.
d. Peddlers are required to exhibit their licenses at the request of any
citizen.
e. No person shall be permitted to peddle, solicit or canvass before 8:30
a.m. on any day or after 9:00 p.m. on any day. No one shall be permitted
to peddle, solicit or canvass on Sunday. [Amended 9-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-16]
§ 4-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.8
1:91
§ 4-1.9. Revocation and Suspension of License. [New]
A license may be revoked by the Manager or Township Clerk by reason
of violation of the terms of the license, the violation of any Township
ordinance or State or Federal statute or falsification or fraud in applying
for the license. The licensed person may, upon making application to the
Township Clerk in writing, request a hearing by the Township Council upon
the revocation or suspension of the aforesaid license. A license may be
suspended for not more than four weeks by the issuing officer without a
hearing.
§ 4-1.10. Solicitation for Religious, Charitable or Political Purposes.
[New; Ord. No. 07-17 § 1]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons who distribute
religious literature or who solicit contributions for religious, charitable or
political purposes or similar noncommercial purposes.
f. It shall be the duty of any Police Officer of the Township to require any
person peddling and who is not known by such Officer to be duly
licensed, to produce his peddler's license, and to enforce the provisions
of this section against any person found to be violating the same.
a. Registration Required; Information to be Included. Peddlers, solicitors
and/or canvassers of religious, charitable or political literature or
persons who solicit contributions for religious, charitable, political or
other noncommercial purposes within the Township are required to
first register with the Township Clerk on a written form to be provided
by the Clerk, which form shall contain the following information:
1. Name, age and physical description of registrant.
2. Complete permanent home and local address of registrant.
3. Name and address of the organization or person for whom
distribution or solicitation is being made.
4. The make, model, year, color and license plate number of
automobiles used by the registrant during the period of solicitation
within the Township and the number of the driver's license and
State of issuance and name, address and policy number of
automobile insurance coverage.
5. Description of the nature of the solicitation or activity to be
conducted within the Township and time period such registration
shall cover.
6. Attached written authorization from the firm or corporation for
which the registrant works authorizing the registrant to act as its
representative.
§ 4-1.8 SPARTA CODE § 4-1.10
1:92
§ 4-1.11. Charitable Solicitation on Roadways Within the Township
of Sparta. [Ord. No. 07-09 § I]
b. Issuance of License. Following the filing of the registration form,
pursuant to Subsection a above, the Township Clerk shall issue to the
registrant a license to peddle, solicit and/or canvass for religious,
charitable, political or other noncommercial purposes.
c. Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all persons
registering under the provisions of this subsection:
1. No license or registration certificate issued under the provisions of
this section shall be used by any person other than the one to whom
it was issued, nor shall it be transferred in any way or manner.
2. No person shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or
use any sound device, including any loud-speaking radio or soundamplifying
system, upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other
public places of the Township or upon any private premises in the
Township where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced
therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets,
alleys, parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting
attention to any solicitation to which such registration applies.
3. Every person registering under this subsection shall produce proof
of such registration at the request of any resident from whom
solicitation is made.
4. No person shall be permitted to solicit or canvass before 8:30 a.m.
or after 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. No one shall be
permitted to solicit or canvass on Sunday.
d. No Solicitations. Residents and private companies of the Township may
post a sign at their residence containing the words "no solicitations."
Anyone registered to solicit or canvass pursuant to this section is
hereby prohibited from canvassing or soliciting at any residence posted
with a sign indicating "no solicitations."
e. Violations and Penalties. Any person required by this section to procure
a license who violates its terms or who violates any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalties as set forth
in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
a. The following regulations shall apply to all persons desiring to solicit on
roadways within the Township:
1. No organization may solicit within the Township more than one day
per year.
2. Organizations must request to the Sparta Police Department, in
writing, at least one month prior to the soliciting time requested.
Such request must include a certificate of insurance and proof of all
§ 4-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.11
1:93
§ 4-2. MECHANICAL, ELECTRONIC AND COMPUTER-OPERATED
DEVICES AND GAMES.
§ 4-2.1. Definitions. [1978 Code § 4-3.1]
As used in this section:
MECHANICAL, ELECTRONIC AND COMPUTER-OPERATED DEVICES AND
GAMES — Shall mean any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug,
token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use as
a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score.
It shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill
ball, mechanical grab machines, and all games, operations, or transactions
similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated.
PERSON — Shall mean and include any person, within the definition as
stated in Chapter 1 of this code who owns any amusement device; the
person in whose place of business any such machine is placed for use by the
public; the person having control over such machine.
§ 4-2.2. License Required. [1978 Code § 4-3.2]
Any person displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any
amusement device shall be required to obtain a license issued by the
Municipal Clerk as provided herein.
§ 4-2.3. Application. [1978 Code § 4-3.3]
Application for a license shall be made to the Municipal Clerk upon a form
to be supplied by the Township. The application shall contain the following
information:
completed application forms as required by the County and/or
State.
3. The schedule for solicitation of various organizations is on a first
come basis.
4. All solicitors must abide by the requirements of N.J.A.C. 16:40-4.2
— 16:40-6 respectively.
b. The Sparta Township Police Department will be responsible for
supervising the solicitation and enforcing the terms of the charitable
solicitation permit.
a. Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth;
b. Place where the machine or device is to be displayed or operated and
the business conducted at that place;
c. Description of the machine to be covered by the license; its mechanical
features, name of manufacturer, serial number.
§ 4-1.11 SPARTA CODE § 4-2.4
1:94
§ 4-2.4. Investigation by Chief of Police; Issuance; Disqualifications.
[1978 Code § 4-3.4]
§ 4-2.5. Fee; Term. [1978 Code § 4-3.5; § 8-7; Ord. No. 521]
§ 4-2.6. Transfer of License. [1978 Code § 4-3.6]
§ 4-2.7. Display. [1978 Code § 4-3.7]
Each license shall be posted permanently and conspicuously on the licensed
machine.
§ 4-2.8. Gambling Devices Prohibited. [1978 Code § 4-3.9]
Nothing in this section shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or
permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
or is judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary
to law.
§ 4-3. DEER HUNTING ON TOWNSHIP-OWNED PROPERTIES.19
a. The application shall be referred by the Municipal Clerk to the Chief of
Police. He shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed to
operate such machine, ascertain if the applicant is a person of good
moral character, and either approve or disapprove the application. No
license shall be issued by the Municipal Clerk to any applicant unless
approved by the Chief of Police.
b. No license shall be issued under this section to any person who shall
have been convicted of any crime or offense involving moral turpitude
or who shall have been convicted of the violation of any State law or
municipal ordinance involving gambling.
a. The annual license fee for operating or maintaining each amusement
device shall be $10 per year or any part thereof for each device and
payable to the Municipal Clerk at the time of the filing of the
application.
b. All licenses issued under this section shall expire on December 31 of the
year of its issuance.
a. A license shall not be transferable from person to person nor place to
place, and shall be usable only at the place and by the person
designated in the license.
b. A license may be transferred from one machine or device to another
similar machine on application therefor to the Municipal Clerk and the
giving of a description and serial number of the new machine or device.
19.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 08-20)
§ 4-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.1
1:95
§ 4-3.1. Hunting Prohibited; Controlled Hunts. [Ord. No. 2015-01]
No hunting of any type shall be permitted on any Township-owned
properties, except in the event that the Township Council determines that
deer hunting is necessary to control the deer population. In the event such
a determination is made the Council shall adopt a resolution setting forth
the applicable permit fees, the process for obtaining permits and the rules
and regulations for such hunt.
§ 4-4. through § 4-6. (RESERVED)
§ 4-7. TOURIST HOMES AND MOTELS.
§ 4-7.1. Definition. [1978 Code § 4-4.1]
As used in this section.
TOURIST HOME OR MOTEL — Shall mean and include the terms tourist
lodge, tourist cabin, motor lodge, motor court, motor inn and all similar
designations, but are not intended to include boarding houses as defined in
and regulated by the Housing Code of the Township.
§ 4-7.2. License Required. [1978 Code § 4-4.2]
No person shall engage in the business of conducting a tourist home or
motel containing more than 10 rooms for rental purposes without first
having applied for and obtained a license from the Township.
§ 4-7.3. Application. [1978 Code § 4-4.3]
Each applicant for a license shall make written application on forms
supplied by the Municipal Clerk setting forth:
a. Full name and post office address of the applicant;
b. Exact location of the proposed licensed premises, giving the street
address, block and lot number as shown on the tax assessment map of
the Township and the exact dimensions of the lands upon which the
business is to be conducted;
c. Description of the buildings, structures and accommodations upon said
lands, including a statement of the number of housing or lodging units,
the maximum number of persons who can be accommodated at any
given time, a description of the character of the buildings or structures
as to use, type of construction and whether or not the same are
fireproof, and a description of automobile parking space and facilities;
d. Name and address of the owner of the lands and buildings;
e. Name or names of the persons on the licensed premises upon whom
process may be served;
§ 4-3.1 SPARTA CODE § 4-7.3
1:96
§ 4-7.4. Pre-licensing Investigations; Recommendations. [1978
Code § 4-4.4]
The Municipal Clerk shall forthwith forward copies of the application to the
Sanitarian, the Chief of the Fire Department and the Construction Official,
who shall inspect the premises to determine whether or not the premises
comply with the health, fire and building ordinances, codes and regulations
of the Township. If the premises do not comply, the officers shall attach
to the application a written list of recommendations to the Township Clerk
who shall, in turn, return the application to the applicant. If the premises
do comply with the codes and ordinances, the officers shall attach thereto
certificates of approval. The Municipal Clerk shall thereupon present this
application, with the certificates of approval, attached, to the Township
Council. The Township Council shall thereupon cause to be made such
further investigation of the premises and of the information set forth in the
application as it may deem necessary and shall determine on the basis of the
investigation and application whether or not such license shall be granted.
§ 4-7.5. Conviction as Bar to License. [1978 Code § 4-4.5]
No such license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted
of a crime involving moral turpitude. No license shall be issued to any
corporation in which any stockholder holding 5% or more of any of the stock
thereof, or any director or officer thereof, shall have been convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude.
§ 4-7.6. Issuance. [1978 Code § 4-4.6]
Upon being satisfied as to the accuracy of the information filed in the
application and as a result of the investigations conducted by the respective
agencies of the Township, the Township Council shall direct the Municipal
Clerk to issue a license for the conduct of a tourist home or motel.
f. Whether any person constituting the individual or partnership
applicant, or if a corporate applicant, any stockholder holding 5% or
more of the stock thereof, or any director or officer thereof has ever
been convicted of any crime, and if so, the details thereof, including
with respect to each conviction, the name of the person convicted, the
date thereof, and the nature of the crime, the court in which the
conviction was entered, and the punishment imposed;
g. In the case of corporate applicants, the names and residences of all
stockholders holding 5% or more of any stock of the corporation, the
names and residences of all officers of the corporation, and the office
held by each; and the name and address of the registered agent of the
corporation in New Jersey.
§ 4-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7.7
1:97
§ 4-7.7. Fee. [1978 Code § 4-4.7; 8-7; Ord. No. 521]
The annual fee for the license of tourist homes and motels shall be $10 for
each housing or lodging unit, provided, however, that the annual license fee
shall not exceed $100 annually.
§ 4-7.8. Term of License. [1978 Code § 4-4.8]
A license under the provisions of this section shall be for a term of one year,
commencing January 1 and expiring December 31.
§ 4-7.9. Transfer. [1978 Code § 4-4.9]
On application setting forth the same matter and things as are required by
this section to be set forth in connection with an original application for a
license, the Township Council, with the consent of the licensee, may transfer
to such applicant any license issued under the terms and provisions of this
section.
§ 4-7.10. Display; Change in Application Data. [1978 Code § 4-4.10]
§ 4-7.11. Registration of Guests; Information Required. [1978 Code
§ 4-4.11]
§ 4-7.12. Schedule of Rates Filed. [1978 Code § 4-4.12]
a. Each license shall be displayed at a prominent place on the licensed
premises.
b. Any change in any of the information set forth in the application during
the term of the license shall forthwith be communicated by the licensee
in writing to the Municipal Clerk.
a. Every person engaged in the business of conducting a tourist home or
motel in the Township where sleeping accommodations are furnished
for tourists, transients or travelers, shall keep and maintain, or cause to
be kept or maintained therein, a register in which shall be inscribed the
true name and address of each and every guest renting or occupying a
room or lodging unit.
b. Such register shall be signed by the person renting such room or
lodging unit or by someone under his direction. The proprietor, or his
agent, shall write opposite each name, the number of the room or
lodging unit assigned to and occupied by each such guest, and the State
license number of any motor vehicle then being used or operated by the
registrant. The proprietor, or his agent, shall keep and preserve the
record showing the date of registration and date when the occupant of
each room or lodging unit quits and surrenders the same. This register
shall be available at all times to all duly authorized officials of the
Township as well as other duly authorized peace officers upon request.
§ 4-7.7 SPARTA CODE § 4-7.12
1:98
§ 4-7.13. Minimum Occupancy Requirements. [1978 Code § 4-4.13]
No licensee shall permit the occupancy of, nor shall any person occupy any
room in any tourist home or motel which does not contain at least 80 square
feet for the first occupant thereof and at least 50 square feet of floor area
for each additional person occupying such room.
§ 4-7.14. Notice Posted in Each Room. [1978 Code § 4-4.14]
The licensee shall cause to be posted in every room in every licensed motel
or tourist home, a notice in substantially the following form:
NOTICE
"The occupancy of this room is limited by an ordinance of the Township
of Sparta to . . . . . persons. Any person or persons violating the above
provision shall be, upon conviction thereof, subject to a fine of not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or both.
The filed maximum rates for the rental of this room are as follows: Single
person, $_____ per day; two persons, $_____ per day; each additional
person, under occupancy limit, $_____ per day."
§ 4-7.15. Inspection by Police. [1978 Code § 4-4.15]
It shall be the duty of the Township Police Department to inspect the
licensed premises from time to time at any hour of the day or night to
determine that the provisions of this section are being complied with.
§ 4-7.16. Certain Employees Prohibited; Fingerprinting Required.
[1978 Code § 4-4.16]
No licensee shall employ in, or about the licensed premises any person
convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, and the licensee shall
require every employee to be fingerprinted by the Police Department of the
Township within 36 hours of hiring.
§ 4-7.17. Suspension or Revocation. [1978 Code § 4-4.17]
Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked for
any violation of this section or for the conviction of any licensee, or of any
stockholder holding 5% or more of the stock of any corporate license, or any
a. Every licensee shall file with the Municipal Clerk at the time of making
initial application hereunder, a schedule of the rates applicable to the
various types of rooms or units in the licensed premises, and such rates,
as posted, shall not be altered or varied by the licensee, his agents or
employees prior to filing anew schedule with the Township Clerk.
b. No licensee, his agents, servants, or employees, shall charge any guest
or guests for any room in the licensed premises any higher rate than
that shown in the schedule applicable to that type of room.
§ 4-7.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7.17
1:99
director or officer thereof, of a crime involving moral turpitude, after due
notice of the charges and the hearing before the Township Council, at which
time the licensee shall be afforded full opportunity to be heard.
§ 4-7.18. Duration of Stay. [New]
No licensee shall permit any guest(s) or occupant(s) to lease, rent or
otherwise occupy or utilize a room or rooms within the tourist home or
motel for a period of time greater than 30 consecutive days. Failure to
comply with this section may subject the owner to suspension or revocation
provisions provided in Subsection 4-7.17.
§ 4-7.19. Violations. [1978 Code § 4-4.18; New]
Any person who violates any provision of this section or willfully gives false
information on any application filed pursuant to this section, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty as stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 4-8. through § 4-11. (RESERVED)
§ 4-12. ALARM SYSTEMS.
§ 4-12.1. Title. [1978 Code § 26-1; Ord. No. 787; Ord. No. 807]
This section shall be known and may be cited as "Alarm System Regulations
of the Township of Sparta."
§ 4-12.2. Purpose. [1978 Code § 26-2; Ord. No. 787; Ord. No. 807]
The purpose of this section is to establish standards and regulations
concerning the installation, operation and maintenance of certain alarm
systems within the Township.
§ 4-12.3. Definitions. [1978 Code § 26-4; Ord. No. 787; Ord. No.
807]
As used in this section:
ALARM CONSOLE — Shall mean the console or control panel of devices
giving a visual or audio response, or both, and located within the confines
of the Police Department.
ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean any device employed to call attention to
or provide warning of intrusion by any person or by fire, smoke, flood or
other peril, whether the same provides a visual or audio response, alarm or
warning.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Shall mean an alarm system which when actuated
emits a sound which can be heard beyond the boundaries of the premises
on which it is located.
§ 4-7.17 SPARTA CODE § 4-12.3
1:100
CENTRAL STATION ALARM — Shall mean an alarm system that transmits
the alarm to an alarm processing center which then calls to dispatch the
Police or Fire Department.
DIAL ALARM — Shall mean that type of automatic telephone dialing service
using the telephone system to transmit an alarm of intrusion, fire, smoke,
flood or other peril to the Police Department or any third party.
DIRECT ALARM — Shall mean an alarm device which has a direct line to
the Police Department alarm console.
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean any alarm or signal of an alarm actuated
by inadvertence, negligence, intentional or unintentional act of a person
other than an intruder, and including alarms caused by mechanical failure,
malfunction or improper installation of the alarm system and related
equipment. "False alarms" shall not include activations caused by power or
phone line interruptions, where such interruptions have been reported to
the Police Department.
LOCAL ALARMS — Shall mean any alarm device other than a direct dial
alarm, which when activated produces an external emergency signal.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, person, firm, association,
partnership, corporation, organization or club.
REGISTRANT — Shall mean any person who operates, owns or leases an
alarm system within the scope of this section, who has been issued a
registration permit to operate and maintain such alarm system.
§ 4-12.4. Registration Permit. [1978 Code § 26-3; Ord. No. 787; Ord.
No. 807; Ord. No. 01-23 § 1; Ord. No. 08-24 § 1]
a. Any person who operates, owns or leases an alarm system in the
Township shall file a registration permit annually. The registration
permit shall contain the location of the alarm system, the name, address
and telephone number of the installer or person currently servicing or
maintaining the alarm system, the alarm function (fire, burglary, panic,
etc.); whether audible or silent; reporting method, if any (central
station alarm, dial alarm, direct alarm, local alarm, etc.); the type of
alarm system, information relating to false alarms and testing
procedures, a list of names and addresses and telephone numbers of
persons to be contacted in the event of an alarm, who must be able to
respond within 1/2 hour when needed at the alarm installation site, and
such other information as may be required by the Police Department.
b. The Police Department shall issue a registration permit to any person
who operates, owns or leases an alarm system, if the Police Department
is satisfied that the registration information is complete and the alarm
system is capable of being operated in conformance with this section.
The registration permit may be granted subject to any special
conditions stated thereon, if this is deemed necessary by the Police
Department.
§ 4-12.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12.4
1:101
§ 4-12.5. Applicability. [1978 Code § 26-5; Ord. No. 787; Ord. No.
807]
The provisions of this section shall apply to any person who owns, operates,
leases or maintains any alarm system situated in the Township if the alarm
system has an audible signaling device or a device which requires a
response by the Police Department, Fire Department, Emergency Squad
or other Township agency. The provisions of this section shall in no way
prohibit service by a private source to persons within or without the
Township, so long as such activity is not in violation of this section, and
provided further that any person owning, operating, leasing or maintaining
a premises protected by an alarm system shall be responsible for the
registration thereof in accordance with this section.
§ 4-12.6. Alarm Console. [1978 Code § 26-6; Ord. No. 787; Ord. No.
807]
Any connection to the Police alarm console shall be of a type inspected and
approved by the Chief of Police or his designated representative.
§ 4-12.7. Maintenance, Malfunctions and Disconnection. [1978
Code § 26-7; Ord. No. 787; Ord. No. 807]
All components of an alarm system shall be maintained in good repair and
shall operate in a proper manner. When evidence exists that there has been
failure to comply with the maintenance and operation requirements of this
section, the Police Department shall then be authorized to demand that
such alarm system be disconnected until such time as compliance with the
provisions of this section has been established. The Police Department shall
have the right to disconnect any malfunctioning equipment from any alarm
system until such time as the malfunction has been corrected and the alarm
system is operating in accordance with the provisions of this section.
c. A registration permit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it
is issued, provided that all required amendments thereto have been
filed. A registration permit shall automatically terminate upon a change
in occupancy for the premises for which the permit was issued.
d. Any permit granted hereunder shall be accepted upon the express
condition that the registrant shall indemnify and hold the Township
harmless from and on account of any and all damages arising out of the
activities of the registrant, its alarm contractor, and the contractor of
the alarm console licensee of the Township.
e. A fee of $25 shall be paid when filing for a registration permit. The
permit application shall be submitted no later than January 31 of each
year or within 30 days of installation of the system. A late fee of $5 per
month shall be incurred.
f. A fee of $25 shall be paid to the Township for any alarm not registered
as required by this section.
§ 4-12.4 SPARTA CODE § 4-12.8
1:102
§ 4-12.8. Time Limit for Audible Alarms. [1978 Code § 26-8; Ord.
No. 787; Ord. No. 807]
All audible signaling devices for private residence shall be equipped with a
timing device to limit the sounding of the signaling device to 15 minutes or
less, except for audible fire alarms, which shall have no time limit. Audible
devices for commercial establishments shall be limited to 30 minutes or
less, except for audible fire alarms which shall have no time limits. Audible
alarms for schools, hospitals and hotels shall have no time limits. Any
person owning, operating, leasing or maintaining such an alarm device
shall make available to the Police Department the names, addresses and
telephone numbers of people who can be called to respond to assist the
Police Department in gaining entrance to the premises and securing the
premises upon completion of the security check and/or defeating the alarm
mechanism if it is malfunctioning, so that it does not create an annoyance to
people living within the sound of the audible alarm. These people chosen to
respond shall be able to respond within 30 minutes. More than one person
shall be made available so that someone will be available to respond at all
times.
§ 4-12.9. False Alarms. [1978 Code § 26-9; Ord. No. 787; Ord. No.
807]
a. In case of false alarm or of improper maintenance or operation of an
alarm system, any person having knowledge thereof shall immediately
notify the Police Department. The Police Department shall cause an
investigation to be made of all false alarms and of all improper
maintenance or operation of alarm systems and shall keep a record of
such false alarms on file. For such alarms, the following penalties shall
prevail:
1. For the first and second false alarm in the same calendar year, a
warning will be issued.
2. For the third and fourth false alarm in the same calendar year, a
service fee of $25 per false alarm shall be paid to the Township.
3. For the fifth or all subsequent false alarms in the same calendar
year, a service fee of $50 per false alarm shall be paid to the
Township.
b. Where the investigation of the Police Department discloses a continued
disregard by the owner for taking remedial steps for avoiding false
alarms or for continued failure to maintain or operate an alarm system,
the Police Department shall have the right to require disconnection of
the alarm system for a limited or permanent time, giving the owner an
opportunity to show cause to the Police Department why such action
should not be taken. A person aggrieved by the decision of the Police
Department shall have the right to appeal the decision to the Township
Manager within 10 days of the decision.
§ 4-12.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-13
1:103
§ 4-13. through § 4-15. (RESERVED)
§ 4-16. TAXICABS.
§ 4-16.1. License Required. [1978 Code § 4-5.1]
No person shall carry on or conduct the business of transporting passengers
in the Township by means of taxi, automobiles, cab or autobus, or other
vehicles within the Township without having first obtained a license from
the Municipal Clerk.
§ 4-16.2. Issuance of License. [1978 Code § 4-5.3; § 8-7; Ord. No.
521; Ord. No. 01-22 § 1; Ord. No. 02-19 § 1; Ord. No. 04-15]
The Municipal Clerk is hereby authorized to issue a license for any vehicles
to be used in accordance with the terms hereof, upon the payment by the
applicant of the initial application fee of $1,000 plus the fee of $30 per
vehicle. The annual application fee after the initial application shall be $100
plus the fee of $30 per vehicle.
License revocation hearing fee $100
License reinstatement fee after
revocation
$100
§ 4-16.3. Term; Transferability. [1978 Code § 4-5.4]
Every such license shall remain in force and be valid only for the time
therein expressed and shall apply only to the person to whom granted for
the designated vehicle and shall not be transferable.
§ 4-16.4. Exhibition of License. [1978 Code § 4-5.5]
Any person or persons to whom such license is granted is hereby required
to exhibit such license whenever called upon to do so.
§ 4-16.5. Investigation of Applicant; Denials; Appeals. [Ord. No.
01-22 § 2; Ord. No. 02-19 § 2]
a. A license shall not be granted to any person unless an application has
been submitted to the Township Council. An applicant shall be
thoroughly investigated by the Township Police Department and shall
be fingerprinted and photographed. Part of the investigation shall
include a determination whether any criminal or motor vehicle
violations exist. A complete report of the investigation shall be
submitted to the Township Council for its action.
1. If, as a result of the investigation by the Police Department, the
applicant's character or driving record is found to be
unsatisfactory, the Police Department shall endorse on such
application their disapproval and their reasons therefor.
§ 4-13 SPARTA CODE § 4-16.5
1:104
§ 4-16.6. Qualification of License Applicants. [Ord. No. 01-22 § 2]
An applicant for a taxicab license shall be the owner or owner's agent
and must be at least 18 years of age. All applicants for licenses under the
provisions of this section shall be of good moral character.
§ 4-16.7. Contents of Initial and Renewal License Application;
License Approval. [Ord. No. 01-22 § 2; Ord. No. 02-19 § 3; Ord. No.
04-15]
2. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant is found to be
satisfactory, the Police shall endorse their approval.
b. In the event of denial, the Township Council shall instruct the Township
Clerk to notify the applicant, by certified mail, setting forth the reasons
for denial. Within seven days thereafter, the applicant may file with the
Township Council a written request for a hearing on the application,
together with written exceptions to the findings of fact upon which the
Township Police base their investigative report. Upon the filing of such
a request, the Township Council shall fix the time and place for a
hearing and shall notify the applicant thereof, which hearing shall be
held within 30 days after the request is filed. Within 10 days after the
conclusion of the hearing, the Township Council shall make its final
decision whether to issue the license or sustain the denial of the
application.
c. The applicant shall pay a fee of $25 for the Division of State Police
Bureau of Identification history check as well as any other fees that may
be required by the State of New Jersey in accordance with N.J.S.A.
53:1-20.6A.
a. Application Contents. An application for an initial license or renewal of
an existing license shall be made to the Township Clerk upon forms
provided by the Township Clerk and shall contain the following
information:
1. The name and address of applicant's principal place of business
and if a business entity, such as a partnership, corporation or LLC,
the name and address of the registered agent.
2. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
violating any criminal or quasi-criminal statute, including traffic
laws and municipal ordinances. If the applicant has been convicted,
a statement as to the date and place of conviction, the nature of the
offense and the punishment imposed.
3. A description of the taxicab(s) sought to be licensed, including the
type of motor vehicle, the name of the manufacturer, the serial
number, license number and seating capacity.
4. Proof that the taxicabs have current New Jersey State Department
of Motor Vehicle registrations and inspections.
§ 4-16.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-16.7
1:105
§ 4-16.8. Duration and Contents of License; Register. [Ord. No.
01-22 § 2; Ord. No. 02-19 § 4]
§ 4-16.9. Insurance Required and Revocation for Failure to Comply
with Insurance Requirements. [Ord. No. 01-22 § 2; Ord. No. 02-19 §
5]
5. The previous experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers for hire, including the name of any other state or
municipality where the applicant has ever been licensed to operate
a taxicab. A list of all drivers complete names and their New Jersey
Drivers License Number.
6. Whether applicant's license was ever suspended or revoked or
application for issuance or renewal of a license denied and the
reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation.
7. All applications shall be verified by oath or affirmation attesting to
the truth and accuracy of all information contained in the
information.
b. License Approval. Upon submission of a complete application and
completion of the investigation and fingerprinting provided for in
Subsection 4-16.5, the application shall be submitted to the Township
Council for review. A license shall not be issued or held by any person
who is not a citizen of a good moral character, nor shall such license be
issued to or held by a corporation other than one organized or existing
under the laws of the State of New Jersey and maintaining a facility in
the Township of Sparta. Prior to denying a license, the applicant shall
be entitled to a hearing before the Township Council. The applicant may
be represented by an attorney at such hearing.
a. Licenses shall be numbered consecutively and shall be valid from the
date of issuance until December 31 of the year of issuance, or shall
expire at such time as the insurance policy required in Subsection
4-16.9 expires, lapses or is canceled, whichever occurs first. Licenses
not suspended or revoked may be renewed annually upon submission of
a renewal application as provided in Subsection 4-16.7, subject to all of
the same terms, conditions, provision and charges as required for the
original license. Every license shall contain the following:
1. The purpose of the license.
2. The number of the license.
3. The name and address of the licensee.
b. Every license shall also include the character and description of the
vehicle.
The Township Clerk shall keep a register of all licenses granted, which
register shall contain the details required by this subsection.
§ 4-16.7 SPARTA CODE § 4-16.9
1:106
§ 4-16.10. Power of Attorney. [Ord. No. 01-22 § 2]
The owner of the taxicab shall execute and deliver to the Township Clerk
a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint the
Chief Fiscal Officer of the municipality as the true and lawful attorney for
the purpose of acknowledging service of any process, out of a court of
competent jurisdiction, to be served against the insured by virtue of the
indemnity granted under the insurance policy or bond filed pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 48:16-3 and 48:16-4.
§ 4-16.11. Refusal to Carry Passenger. [Ord. No. 01-22 § 2]
No owner or operator of any taxicab, while waiting for employment at any
place other than the garage or residence of the owner thereof, shall refuse
conveyance to any person without just cause.
§ 4-16.12. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 01-22 § 2]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000
and/or a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days and/or a term of
community service not to exceed 90 days.
§ 4-16.13. Revocation or License Suspension. [Ord. No. 02-19 § 6]
Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the
Governing Body after notice and hearing, whenever it shall appear that the
licensee has failed to furnish or keep in force the insurance policy or bond
and power of attorney required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 et seq. or fails to comply
with any terms and conditions imposed by the Township or any State law.
The licensee shall pay a hearing fee to cover the costs of the Township
attorney's participation in the hearing as provided for in Subsection 4-16.2.
a. No license shall be issued unless the applicant has filed an insurance
policy with the Township Clerk in accordance with the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 48:16-3. The insurance must be paid in full for the calendar
year and proof of payment must be supplied to the Township. At the
time the application is filed the applicant shall attach a written
statement from the applicant's insurance company, whereby the
insurance company agrees to provide notice of any cancellation or lapse
or the insurance coverage to the Township.
b. Failure to Maintain Insurance. In the event a license is revoked by the
Township twice within a twelve (12) month period for failure to
maintain insurance, the license shall be revoked, after a hearing as
provided for in Subsection 4-16.13, and shall not be reinstated until the
applicant provides proof that the insurance has been restored and the
insurance premium is paid in full through December 31 of the current
calendar year.
§ 4-16.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-16.14
1:107
§ 4-16.14. Taxicabs; Inspections; Transportation of Children. [Ord.
No. 02-19 § 7]
§ 4-17. PORTABLE ADVERTISEMENT SIGNS.20
§ 4-17.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
The purpose of this section is to regulate the placement of portable
advertisement signs in the interest of public safety and for the visual
aesthetics of the commercial districts in the Township. The Township
Council recognizes the benefit of promoting local businesses by permitting
portable advertisement signs in locations approved by the Sparta Township
Planning Board Subcommittee.
§ 4-17.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
As used in this section:
PORTABLE ADVERTISEMENT SIGN — Shall mean a temporary portable
sign for the purpose of advertising specials for retail sales and retail service
uses in commercial zoning districts. The three designated sign prototypes
set forth in Subsection 4-17.7 below shall be the only signs used consistent
with the standards specified in this section.
SPARTA TOWNSHIP PLANNING BOARD SITE PLAN SUBCOMMITTEE —
As defined in the Sparta Township Land Management Code shall be the
approving authority for the location of portable advertisement signs
consistent with the standards set forth in this section.
Definitions of the Sparta Township Land Management Code shall apply as required.
§ 4-17.3. Licenses Required. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
A license shall be required for any portable advertisement sign to be placed
outside or placed on a wall on any commercial zoned property.
a. The Township Manager is authorized and empowered to establish
reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection of taxicabs, in
conjunction with the Sparta Police Department, including requirements
as to the fitness for the safe and adequate transportation of passengers
and the general cleanliness of the taxicabs.
b. Every person operating a taxicab who is transporting a child under the
age of five years of age on roadways, streets or highways of the
Township shall be responsible for the protection of the child by properly
using a child passenger restraint system that complies with Federal
safety requirements. The operator shall also comply with any other
statutes or regulations concerning the transportation of children in
motor vehicles in general.
20.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 04-18.
§ 4-16.14 SPARTA CODE § 4-17.4
1:108
§ 4-17.4. Application for License. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
Any business desiring a license under this section shall submit a Site
Plan Waiver Application to the Planning Department for approval by the
Sparta Township Planning Board Site Plan Subcommittee. The following
information shall be required.
§ 4-17.5. Duration of License. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
The license is renewable every year on June 15 for a fee of $25.
§ 4-17.6. Location and Design Regulations. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
The following regulations shall apply to all portable advertisement signs:
a. Name of business;
b. Type of use;
c. Address of property;
d. Block and lot;
e. Zone district;
f. Applicant's name;
g. Mailing address, telephone and fax number;
h. Property owner's signature approving the submission of the
application;
i. Mailing address of property owner and telephone number;
j. Property survey indicating the location of the portable advertisement
sign or signs;
k. A hold harmless and indemnification agreement signed by the applicant
indemnifying the Township of Sparta.
a. Portable advertisement sign locations are prohibited in the public rightof-
way or sight triangle of any public street or driveway entrance.
b. A portable advertisement sign may only be approved for the property on
which the business is located.
c. Portable advertisement sign locations may not cause a traffic hazard by
blocking the path and the visibility.
d. Portable advertisement sign locations may not block the free flow of
pedestrian traffic on a sidewalk.
e. One portable advertisement sign is permitted per lot, except in a multitenanted
building a second location can be approved by the Site Plan
Waiver Committee if the signs are separated by a minimum of 40 feet.
§ 4-17.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-17.6
1:109
§ 4-17.7. Fines and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-08]
This section is enforceable by the Zoning Officer. Any portable
advertisement sign found in violation will be subject to a fine of up to a $50
fine for the first offense, up to $75 for the second offense, and up to $200
for each subsequent offense.
§ 4-18. FIREWORKS PERMIT.
f. The portable advertisement sign may be placed displaying both sides or
one side including being attached to a building facade.
g. A portable advertisement sign shall not obscure, conflict with, or cover
any architectural detail (i.e. cornice). A wall sign must be aligned with
major building elements, such as windows, trim and building lines.
h. A portable advertisement sign size shall not exceed 27 inches by 48
inches.
i. A portable advertisement sign shall be the same or similar to the
drawings included in this section.
j. Portable advertisement signs may only be displayed during business
hours and must be stored in a location not visible to the public including
signs temporarily affixed to a building. The entire sign including the
frame must be removable.
k. The frame and base of the sign must be weighted, must be made of
weather proof material, and must be one of the three prototypes shown
below:
27 inches wide
27 inches wide
l. The colors for the sign frame or border shall include: white, maroon,
green, black or wood.
§ 4-17.6 SPARTA CODE § 4-18.1
1:110
§ 4-18.1. Compliance with Statutory Provisions. [Ord. No. 2018-06
§ 1]
No person or entity shall offer or expose for sale, sell, distribute, possess,
use or explode any fireworks or pyrotechnics or any devices in which
explosives are used for fireworks or pyrotechnics except under the
provisions of N.J.S.A. § 21:3-1 to § 21:3-9, as amended, as relates to public
displays.
§ 4-18.2. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2018-06 § 1]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. § 21:3-3 and § 21:3-4, in addition to all State
permits and requirements set forth therein, a permit must be obtained from
the Township Council for any fireworks display to be conducted within the
Township. The permit shall be issued providing all conditions of N.J.S.A.
§ 21:3-3 to § 21:3-9 are complied with by the applicant, including posting of
the required bond.
§ 4-18.3. Fees. [Ord. No. 2018-06 § 1]
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
a. The permit fee for a fireworks display is $600.
b. $500 of this permit fee shall be specifically dedicated by the Township
to an account for maintenance and/or capital improvements of Fire
Department vehicles and equipment.
c. Noncompliance with this section shall result in a violation of N.J.S.A.
§ 21:3-8.
§ 4-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18.3
1:111

ARTICLE I
Dogs
§ 5-1. WORD USAGE.
§ 5-1.1. Definitions. [1978 Code § 5-1.1; Ord. No. 800; 1978 Code
§ 5-17.1; Ord. No. 839 § 1; New; Ord. No. 07-14 § VIII]
As used in this article:
ANIMAL — Shall mean dog.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Shall mean any person or agency
designated or certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions
of this article.
DOG — Shall mean any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any dog which has attained the age
of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
HARBOR — Shall mean the act of providing space or making available food
or shelter in such a manner which attracts a dog or dogs to one's premises.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Health Services or any
designated representative thereof charged with administering the issuance
and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this
article.
NEUTERED — Shall mean rendered permanently incapable of reproduction
as certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog shall include every
person having a right of property or custody in such dog and every person
who has such dog in his/her keeping, or who harbors or maintains a dog or
knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership,
organization, or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 5-2. VACCINATION AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
§ 5-2.1. Vaccination Required. [Ord. No. 950 § II]
All animals shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian
in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines
and Recommendations for Immunizations" published by the National State
Public Health Veterinarian, except as provided in subsection 5-2.2.
§ 5-2.2. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 950 § II; Ord. No. 07-14 § VIII]
Any dog may be exempted for the requirements of such vaccinations for a
specified period of time by the Sparta Health Services, upon presentation
of a veterinarian certificate stating that because of an infirmity or other
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2.2
1:113
physical condition, or region of therapy, the inoculation of such dog shall be
deemed inadvisable.
§ 5-2.3. License Required; Lost Tags. [1978 Code § 5-1.2; § 8-5; Ord.
No. 617; Ord. No. 800; Ord. No. 950 § A VI; Ord. No. 07-04 § 1; Ord.
No. 07-14 § VIII; Ord. No. 2016-19 § 1]
§ 5-2.4. Annual License and Tag; Placement on Dog. [1978 Code
§ 5-1.3; Ord. No. 800; Ord. No. 07-14 § VIII]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age shall in
the month of January of each year, and annually thereafter, apply for and
procure from the Health Services a license and official metal registration
tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored, and shall place upon each
dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 5-2.5. Proof of Rabies Vaccination Required. [New; Ord. No. 07-14
§ VIII]
The Sparta Health Services shall not grant any such license and official
registration tag or sleeve for any dog unless the owner thereof provides
evidence that the dog to be licensed and registered has been inoculated
with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance
with the recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture
and the United States Department of Human Services, or has been certified
exempt as provided by subsection 5-2.1. The rabies inoculation shall be
administered by a duly licensed veterinarian.
§ 5-2.6. Fees; Term of License. [1978 Code § 5-1.4; § 8-5; Ord. No.
591; Ord. No. 618; Ord. No. 638; Ord. No. 795; Ord. No. 800; Ord.
No. 845 § 1; Ord. No. 950 § VI; Ord. No. 01-23 § 2; Ord. No. 07-04
§ 1; Ord. No. 07-29 § 1; Ord. No. 13-14 § 1]
The person applying for the license and registration tag shall pay a fee of
$15 for a one-year license and $35 for a three-year license for each dog.
Additional fees established by the State of New Jersey will also be incurred.
The licenses, registration tags and renewals thereof shall expire on the last
day of January in each year.21
a. No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog, within the Township
without first obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by the Health
Services upon application by the owner and payment of the prescribed
fee, and no person shall keep or harbor any dog except in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
b. The owner of any dog may, if the license tag is mislaid, stolen or lost,
procure a replacement dog license and registration upon the payment
of a fee of $1. The owner must provide adequate proof that the dog is
currently licensed for the year in which the replacement tag is desired.
§ 5-2.2 SPARTA CODE § 5-2.7
1:114
§ 5-2.7. Seeing Eye Dogs. [1978 Code § 5-1.5; Ord. No. 800]
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeing eye"
dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs as hereinabove provided
for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay
any fee therefor.
§ 5-2.8. Delinquent Fees. [1978 Code § 5-1.6; § 8-5; Ord. No. 591;
Ord. No. 618; Ord. No. 638; Ord. No. 795; Ord. No. 800; Ord. No.
845 § 1; Ord. No. 950 § VI; Ord. No. 07-04 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-19 § 1]
Any dog owner or person harboring a dog, found to have an unlicensed dog
by the Animal Control Officer, dog canvassers or any other municipal official
after February 1 of each year, shall be required to pay a delinquent fee of $5
per month for each dog, plus the required license and registration tag fees
provided in this section, in addition to any fine imposed for failure to obtain
a dog license before February 1. The aforementioned delinquent fee shall
not apply to dogs which have been acquired by the owner after March 1, on
which the license fee shall be the same as required in subsection 5-2.5. The
owner, however, shall present sufficient proof to establish that the dog was
acquired after March 1.
§ 5-2.9. License Transferable from Another Municipality. [1978
Code § 5-1.7; Ord. No. 800]
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag issued by
any other municipality of this State shall be accepted by the Township as
evidence of compliance with subsections 5-2.3 and 5-2.5.
§ 5-2.10. Newly-acquired Dogs; Dogs Attaining Licensing Age.
[1978 Code § 5-1.8; Ord. No. 800]
The owner of any newly-acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall make application for license and registration tag
for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 5-2.11. Contents of Application; Monthly Report to State
Department of Health. [1978 Code § 5-1.9; Ord. No. 800; Ord. No.
07-14 § VIII]
a. The application shall state: the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the dog for which license and registration are sought; whether it is of a
long- or short-haired variety; and the name, street and post-office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such dog.
b. The information on the application and the registration number issued
for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by Health
21.Editor's Note: The fee for a license for a Potentially Dangerous Dog is established in
Subsection 5-9.14.
§ 5-2.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2.11
1:115
§ 5-2.12. Dogs Brought into the Township. [Ord. No. 950 § 1]
§ 5-2.13. Removal of Tag Forbidden; Attaching Tag Wrongfully.
[1978 Code § 5-1.11; Ord. No. 800]
§ 5-2.14. Disposition of Fees. [1978 Code § 5-3; Ord. No. 800]
§ 5-3. ANNUAL CANVASS; REPORT. [1978 Code § 5-4; Ord. No. 800;
Ord. No. 07-14 § VIII]
The Chief of Police or such other person designated by the Township
Manager shall promptly after February 1 of each year cause a canvass
to be made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the
Township. He shall report on or before May 1 of each year to the Township
Services Registration. Numbers shall be issued in the order of the
applications.
c. Health Services shall forward to the State Department of Health each
month, on forms furnished by the Health Services, an accurate account
of registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed of.
a. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any dog licensed in another State for the current year, and bearing a
registration tag, and shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept
within the Township for a period of more than 90 days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog,
unless a license for such dog is not required under Section 5-16.
b. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township
any unlicensed dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to be
kept within the Township for a period of more than 10 days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog,
unless a license for such dog is not required under Section 5-16.
a. No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall
remove a registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent
of the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for
which it was not issued.
b. No licensed dog shall be allowed off the premises of the person
harboring or keeping the dog, without the metal registration tag
attached to its harness or collar.
a. License or other fees collected under the provisions hereof, except
those paid to the State, shall be turned over to the Treasurer within 30
days of collection. The fees collected shall be accounted for and spent in
accordance with A.4:19-15.11, as amended.
b. The registration tag fee as established in subsection 5-2.5 for each dog
shall be forwarded within 30 days after collection by the Health
Services to the State Department of Health.
§ 5-2.11 SPARTA CODE § 5-3
1:116
Manager, to the Township Health Services, and to the State Department
of Health the result thereof, setting forth in separate columns the names
and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring such dogs, the
number of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person, together
with the registration numbers of each dog, and the number of unlicensed
dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person, together with a complete
description of each unlicensed dog.
§ 5-4. CONTROL OF DOGS.
§ 5-4.1. Barking or Crying Dogs.22 [1978 Code § 5-10.1; Ord. No.
800]
No person shall allow any dog in his keeping, custody, control or ownership
to bark, howl or cry, continuously for any period longer than 1/2 hour
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or otherwise repeatedly at
intervals of more than 1/2 hour at any time of the day or night, in such
volume or manner as to disturb the comfort, peace or repose of persons in
the vicinity.
§ 5-4.2. Running at Large; Filing of Complaint. [1978 Code § 5-10.2;
Ord. No. 800]
§ 5-4.3. Dogs to be Accompanied by Person Over 12 Years Old;
Leash. [1978 Code § 5-10.3; Ord. No. 800]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it to
be upon the public or private streets or in any public place of the Township
unless such dog is accompanied by a person over the age of 12 years and
is securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than six
feet long.
a. No person owning, keeping, or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit
such animal to run at large in, upon, or through any public, quasipublic,
or private street, public park or recreation area, public building,
or any other public place or place to which the public is invited and no
person owning, keeping, or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit
such animal to run at large in, upon, or through any private property
without the authority of the owner of the private property.
b. When a dog has been impounded for running at large, the Animal
Control Officer shall file a complaint of this violation in the Municipal
Court.
22.Editor's Note: For additional regulations concerning noise by animals, see Chapter 3,
Subsection 3-1.4.
§ 5-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4.4
1:117
§ 5-4.4. Examination of Dogs by Veterinarian After Bite to Any
Person. [1978 Code § 5-10.5; Ord. No. 800]
All dogs which bite any person shall be examined by a veterinarian within
24 hours after such incident for the purpose of determining whether such
dog is affected by any disease and shall thereafter be quarantined for a tenday
period.
§ 5-4.5. Dogs Attacking Other Animals; Penalty. [1978 Code
§ 5-10.6; Ord. No. 800]
When a dog attacks other dogs or domestic animals, a complaint may
be made against the owner thereof for keeping or harboring such a dog.
Mandatory minimum penalty $100 up to $1,000.
§ 5-4.6. Damage to Property and Injury to Persons. [1978 Code
§ 5-14; Ord. No. 800; Ord. No. 950 § 544]
No person owning, keeping, or harboring a dog/cat shall permit it to injure
any persons or to do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds
or property or a complaint may be made against the owner or keeper of
such dog/cat.
§ 5-5. PET WASTE ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE LANDS.
§ 5-5.1. Definitions. [1978 Code § 5-13.1; Ord. No. 800; Ord. No.
05-26]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and
words used in the singular include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
a. IMMEDIATE – Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
b. OWNER/KEEPER – Shall mean any person who shall possess, maintain,
house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether
or not the owner of such pet.
c. PERSON – Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
d. PET – Shall mean a domesticated animal (other than a disability
assistance animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
e. PET SOLID WASTE – Shall mean waste matter expelled from the bowels
of the pet; excrement.
§ 5-4.4 SPARTA CODE § 5-5.1
1:118
§ 5-5.2. Purpose. [1978 Code § 5-13.2; Ord. No. 800; Ord. No. 05-26]
The purpose of this section is to (1) protect the health, safety and welfare
of all those frequenting this Township, by preventing the needless health
hazards and nuisances caused by pet solid waste upon public and private
properties (2) protect the waterways from stormwater runoff containing pet
solid waste, within the Township of Sparta.
§ 5-5.3. Defecation on Private Property. [1978 Code § 5-13.3; Ord.
No. 800; Ord. No. 05-26]
No person owning or in charge of any pet shall cause or allow such pet
to soil, defile, defecate upon or commit any nuisance upon any private
property without the permission of the owner of the property. Any person
owning or in charge of a pet which soils, defiles, defecates or commits any
such nuisance shall immediately remove all feces deposited by such pet in a
sanitary manner.
§ 5-5.4. Defecation on Public Property. [1978 Code § 5-13.4; Ord.
No. 800; Ord. No. 05-26]
No person owning or in charge of any pet shall cause or allow such pet
to soil, defile, defecate upon or commit any nuisance on any place where
people congregate or walk, or upon any public property. Any person owning
or in charge of a pet which soils, defiles, defecates or commits any such
nuisance shall immediately remove all feces deposited by such pet in a
sanitary manner.
§ 5-5.5. Defecation on Owner's Property. [1978 Code § 5-13.5; Ord.
No. 800; Ord. No. 05-26]
No person shall permit the accumulating of pet solid waste upon his/her
property, or property occupied by him/her, to the extent that the odor may
be noticeable to any adjoining property owners.
§ 5-5.6. Disposal of Defecation. [1978 Code § 5-13.6; Ord. No. 800;
Ord. No. 05-26]
The pet solid waste removed from the aforementioned designated areas
shall be disposed of by the person owning or in charge of any such pet in
a sealed, nonabsorbent, and leak-proof container. Disposition in a sanitary
manner shall include taking the solid waste home for deposit, or wrapping
the solid waste and placing same in a trash can. It shall not include burial,
disposal by placement in a storm sewer, or placing unwrapped solid waste
in a trash can.
f. PROPER DISPOSAL – Shall mean placement in a designated waste
receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse
container which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other
refuse collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic
sewage for proper treatment and disposal.
§ 5-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5.7
1:119
§ 5-5.7. Defense of Violation. [1978 Code § 5-13.7; Ord. No. 800;
Ord. No. 05-26]
It shall be a complete defense to violations of subsections 5-5.2 through
5-5.7 if a person shall have immediately removed such defecation and
disposed of it in a sanitary manner.
§ 5-5.8. Complaints of Violations. [1978 Code § 5-13.8; Ord. No.
800; Ord. No. 05-26]
In the event of a violation on private property, a complaint is only to be filed
by the owner of such property. In the event of such a violation occurring on
public property, thoroughfare, walkways or parks, a complaint may be filed
by any witness to such an action.
§ 5-5.9. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 05-26]
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 5-5.10. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 05-26]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Animal Control
Officer, Police Department or Registered Environmental Health Sanitarian.
§ 5-6. through § 5-7. (RESERVED)
§ 5-8. ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.
§ 5-8.1. Penalties.23 [1978 Code § 5-16; Ord. No. 800]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter may, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to a penalty up to $1,000 for each violation, or may be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed six months, or both, at the discretion
of the court before whom the complaint is made. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation of this
chapter occurs or continues.
§ 5-8.2. Enforcement. [1978 Code § 5-13.9; Ord. No. 800]
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to enforce the provisions
of this Article.
§ 5-9. VICIOUS OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.24
23.Editor's Note: For Violations Bureau Fine Schedule see subsection 1-5.7.
24.Editor's Note: The 1978 Code contained a subsection referring to Vicious Dogs
(subsection 5-10.4).
§ 5-5.7 SPARTA CODE § 5-9.1
1:120
§ 5-9.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 950 § 5-10.4.1]
As used in this section:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Shall mean a certified municipal animal
control officer or, in the absence of such an officer, the Chief Law
Enforcement Officer of the Township or his designee.
DOG — Shall mean any dog or dog hybrid.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Shall mean any cat, dog, or livestock other than
poultry.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Shall mean any dog or dog hybrid
declared potentially dangerous by a Municipal Court.
VICIOUS DOG — Shall mean any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by a
Municipal Court.
§ 5-9.2. Seizure and Impoundment of Dog by Animal Control
Officer; Grounds. [Ord. No. 950 § 5-10.4.2]
An Animal Control Officer shall seize and impound a dog when the officer
has reasonable cause to believe that the dog:
§ 5-9.3. Notice of Seizure and Impoundment; Determination of
Identity of Owner; Notice of Hearing; Return of Statement by
Owner; Destruction of Dog. [Ord. No. 950 § 5-10.4.3]
The Animal Control Officer shall notify the Municipal Court and the
Township Health Officer immediately that he has seized and impounded a
dog, or that he has reasonable cause to believe that a dog has killed another
domestic animal and that a hearing is required. The Animal Control Officer
shall, through a reasonable effort, attempt to determine the identity of the
owner of any dog seized and impounded. If its owner cannot be identified
within seven days, that dog may be humanely destroyed.
a. Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury (as defined
in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b)) to that person;
b. Caused bodily injury (as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C-11-1(a)) to a person
during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of harm to
persons or domestic animals;
c. Engaged in dog-fighting activities as defined by N.J.S.A. 4:22-24 and 26;
d. Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether the dog
is vicious or potentially dangerous. Subject to the approval of the Township
Health Officer, the dog may be impounded in a facility or other structure
agreeable to the owner.
§ 5-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-9.3
1:121
The Animal Control Officer shall, within three working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and impounded,
notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner concerning the
seizure and impoundment, and that, if the owner wishes, a hearing will
be held to determine whether the impounded dog is vicious or potentially
dangerous. This notice shall also require that the owner return within
seven days, by certified mail or hand delivery, a signed statement indicating
whether he wishes the hearing to be conducted or, if not, to relinquish
ownership of the dog, in which case the dog may be humanely destroyed.
If the owner cannot be notified by certified mail, return receipt requested,
or refuses to sign for the certified letter, or does not reply to the certified
letter with a signed statement within seven days of receipt, the dog may be
humanely destroyed.
§ 5-9.4. Agreement Between Township and Dog Owner; Settlement
and Disposition; Liability of Township; Legal Expenses. [Ord. No.
950 § 5-10.4.4]
Notwithstanding any statutory or municipal provision to the contrary, the
Township and the owner of the dog may settle and dispose of the matter
at any time in such manner and according to such terms and conditions
as may be mutually agreed upon. Notwithstanding any provision of P.L.
1989, c.307 to the contrary, no municipality or any of its employees shall
have any liability by virtue of having entered into any settlement agreement
pursuant to this section, or for any action or inaction related to the entry
into such agreement, for any injuries or damages caused thereafter by the
dog. The Township may, as a condition of the settlement agreement, also
require that the owner of the dog hold the Township harmless for any legal
expenses or fees the Township may incur in defending against any cause
of action brought against the town notwithstanding the prohibition against
such causes of action set forth in this section.
§ 5-9.5. Finding to Declare Dog Vicious; Grounds. [Ord. No. 950
§ 5-10-4.5]
The Municipal Court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear and
convincing evidence that the dog:
a. Killed a person or caused a serious bodily injury (as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C: 11-1(b)) to a person; or
b. Has engaged in dog-fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A. 4:22-24
and 26.
A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious bodily injury
as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) upon a person if the dog was provoked. The
Municipality shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that the dog was
not provoked. If the Municipal Court declares a dog to be vicious, and no
appeal is made of this ruling, the dog shall be destroyed in a humane and
expeditious manner, except that no dog may be destroyed during the pendency
of an appeal.
§ 5-9.3 SPARTA CODE § 5-9.6
1:122
§ 5-9.6. Finding to Declare Dog Potentially Dangerous. [Ord. No.
950 § 5-10.4.6]
The Municipal Court shall declare a dog to be potentially dangerous if it
finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
§ 5-9.7. Order and Schedule for Compliance for Potentially
Dangerous Dog; Conditions. [Ord. No. 950 § 5-10.4.7]
If the Municipal Court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous, it shall
issue an order and a schedule for compliance which, in part:
a. Caused bodily injury (as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a)) to a person
during an unprovoked attack, and poses a serious threat of bodily injury
or death to a person, or
b. Killed another domestic animal, and
1. Poses a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person; or
2. Poses a threat of death to another domestic animal, or encouraged
to engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic
animals.
c. Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
1. Causing bodily injury to a person if the dog was provoked, or
2. Killing a domestic animal if the domestic animal was the aggressor.
The Township shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that the dog was
not provoked.
a. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
1. To apply, at his own expense, to the Township Clerk or other official
designated to license dogs for a special municipal Potentially
Dangerous Dog License, municipal registration number, and red
identification tag issued. The owner shall, at his own expense, have
the registration number tattooed upon the dog in a prominent
location. A potentially dangerous dog shall be impounded until the
owner obtains a municipal Potentially Dangerous Dog License,
municipal registration number, and red identification tag;
2. To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises warning
that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall
be visible and legible from 50 feet of the enclosure required
pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subsection;
3. To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property where the potentially dangerous
dog will be kept and maintained, which has sound sides, top and
§ 5-9.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-9.7
1:123
§ 5-9.8. Liability of Owner for Costs of Impoundment and
Destruction. [Ord. No. 950 § 5-10.4.8]
If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous, and all appeals
pertaining thereto have been exhausted, the owner of the dog shall be liable
to the town for the costs and expenses of impounding and destroying the
dog. The owner shall incur the expense of impounding the dog in a facility
other than the town pound, regardless of whether the dog is ultimately
found to be vicious or potentially dangerous.
§ 5-9.9. Right to Convene Hearing for Subsequent Actions of Dog.
[Ord. No. 950 § 5-10.4.9]
Even if a dog is found to be not vicious or potentially dangerous, the
Municipal Court shall retain the right to convene a hearing to determine
whether the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous for any subsequent
actions of the dog.
§ 5-9.10. Duties of Owner of Potentially Dangerous Dog. [Ord. No.
950 § 5-10.4.10]
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall:
bottom to prevent the potentially dangerous dog from escaping by
climbing, jumping, or digging and within a fence of at least six
feet in height separated by at least three feet from the confined
area. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock
(combination or key lock) the enclosure to prevent the entry of
the general public and to preclude any release or escape of a
potentially dangerous dog by an unknowing child or other person.
All potentially dangerous dogs shall be confined in the enclosure
or, if taken out of the enclosure, securely muzzled and restrained
with a tether approved by the animal control officer and having
a minimum tensile strength sufficiently in excess of that required
to restrict the potentially dangerous dog's movements to a radius
of no more than three feet from the owner and under the direct
supervision of the owner;
b. May require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the Municipal Court to cover any damage or injury
caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance, which
may be separate from any other homeowners policy, shall contain a
provision requiring the town to be named as an additional insured for
the sole purpose of being notified by the insurance company of any
cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy.
a. Comply with the provisions of this section, in accordance with a
schedule established by the Municipal Court, but in no case more than
60 days subsequent to the date of determination;
§ 5-9.7 SPARTA CODE § 5-9.10
1:124
§ 5-9.11. Violations by Owner; Penalties; Enforcement; Seizure and
Impoundment of Dog; Destruction by Order of Court. [Ord. No. 950
§ 5-10.4.11]
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who is found by clear and
convincing evidence to have violated this section or any related statute,
rule or regulation, or to have failed to comply with a court's order shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 per day of the violation,
and each day's continuance of the violation shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this
section. An Animal Control Officer is authorized to seize and impound any
potentially dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with the provisions
of this section, or any related Statute, rule or regulation, or a court's order.
The Municipal Court may order that the dog so seized and impounded be
destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
§ 5-9.12. Inspection to Determine Continuing Compliance. [Ord.
No. 950 § 5-10.4.13]
The Animal Control Officer shall inspect the enclosure and the owner's
property at least monthly to determine continuing compliance with
subsection 5-9.7(a).
§ 5-9.13. Fee for License for Potentially Dangerous Dogs.25 [Ord. No.
950 § VI]
The annual license and registration fee for a Potentially Dangerous Dog is
$500 each.
b. Notify the Township, the local Police Department, and the Animal
Control Officer if a potentially dangerous dog is at large, or has
attacked a human being or killed a domestic animal;
c. Notify the Township, local Police Department, and the Animal Control
Officer within 24 hours of the death, sale or donation of a potentially
dangerous dog;
d. Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner that
the dog has been declared potentially dangerous;
e. Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a different
municipality, notify the department and licensing authority, Police
Department or force, and Animal Control Officer of that municipality of
the transfer of ownership and the name, address, and telephone
number of the new owner; and
f. In addition to any license fee required pursuant to subsection 5-2.6, pay
a Potentially Dangerous Dog License fee to the town.
25.Editor's Note: Fees established in Section 5-2 for delinquent payment or replacement of
lost license and registration tags are applicable to potentially dangerous dogs.
§ 5-9.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-10
1:125
§ 5-10. (RESERVED)
§ 5-10 SPARTA CODE § 5-10
1:126
ARTICLE II
Cats
§ 5-11. WORD USAGE.
§ 5-11.1. Definitions. [1978 Code § 5-17.1; Ord. No. 839 § 1; Ord.
No. 07-14 § VIII]
As used in this article:
ANIMAL — Shall mean cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Shall mean any person or agency
designated or certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions
of this article.
CAT — Shall mean any member of the domestic feline species; male, female,
or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any cat which has attained the age
of seven months, or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage, or exhibition
pen, not part of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
HARBOR — Shall mean the act of providing space or making available food
or shelter in such a manner which attracts a cat or cats to one's premises.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Health Services or any
designated representative thereof charged with administering the issuance
and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this
article.
NEUTERED — Shall mean rendered permanently incapable of reproduction
as certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat shall include every
person having a right of property or custody in such cat and every person
who has such cat in his/her keeping, or who harbors or maintains a cat or
knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership,
organization, or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 5-12. VACCINATION AND LICENSING OF CATS.
§ 5-12.1. Vaccination and Licensing Required. [1978 Code § 5-17.2;
Ord. No. 839 § 2; Ord. No. 07-14 § VIII]
a. No person shall own, keep, harbor, or maintain any cat over seven
months of age within the Township unless such cat is vaccinated and
licensed. The provisions of this section do not apply to cats held in a
cattery, or those held by a State or Federally licensed research facility,
or a veterinary establishment where cats are received or kept for
§ 5-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-12.1
1:127
§ 5-12.2. Display of License. [1978 Code § 5-17.3; Ord. No. 839 § 3;
Ord. No. 07-14 § VIII]
Any person who shall own, keep, or harbor a cat of licensing age shall
annually apply for and procure from the Sparta Health Services, a license
and official registration tag with license number, or a registration sleeve for
each cat so owned, kept, or harbored, and shall place upon such cat a collar,
or other device with the license number securely fastened or displayed
thereto. Acceptable methods of displaying license number shall include, but
are not limited to, break-away or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are
not transferable.
§ 5-12.3. Time for License Application. [1978 Code § 5-17.3; Ord.
No. 839 § 3]
The owner of any newly acquired cat of licensing age, or of any cat which
attains licensing age, shall make application for license tag or sleeve for
such cat within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment. This
requirement will not apply to a nonresident keeping a cat within the
Township for no longer than 90 days.
§ 5-12.4. Cats Brought into the Township. [1978 Code § 5-17.3; Ord.
No. 839 § 3]
diagnostic, medical, surgical, or other treatments, or licensed animal
shelters, pounds, kennels, or pet shops.
b. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animals
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization" published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in paragraph d.
c. Vaccination Certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to
the owner of each animal vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian on
forms provided by the State.
d. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted for the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the Sparta Health Services,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of
an infirmity or other physical condition, or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
a. Any person who shall bring, or cause to be brought into the Township,
any cat licensed in another State for the current year, and bearing
registration tag or sleeve, and shall keep the same or permit the same
to be kept within the Township for a period of more than 90 days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for each
such cat.
§ 5-12.1 SPARTA CODE § 5-12.4
1:128
§ 5-12.5. Content of Application. [1978 Code § 5-17.3; Ord. No. 839
§ 3; Ord. No. 07-14 § VIII]
The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color, and markings of the
cat for which license and registration are sought, and whether it is of a longor
short-haired variety; also the name, street and post office address of the
owner, and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The information
on said application and the registration number issued for the cat shall be
preserved for a period of three years by the Sparta Health Services.
§ 5-12.6. License Forms and Tags. [1978 Code § 5-17.3; Ord. No. 839
§ 3]
License forms and official tags or sleeves shall be furnished by the
municipality and shall be numbered serially, and shall bear the year of
issuance and the name of the municipality.
§ 5-12.7. Proof of Rabies Vaccination Required. [1978 Code
§ 5-17.3; Ord. No. 839 § 3; Ord. No. 07-14 § VIII]
The Sparta Health Services shall not grant any such license and official
registration tag or sleeve for any cat, unless the owner thereof provides
evidence that the cat to be licensed and registered has been inoculated
with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance
with the recommendations of the United States Department of Agriculture
and the United States Department of Human Services, or has been certified
exempt as provided by subsection 5-12.1. The rabies inoculation shall be
administered by a duly licensed veterinarian.
§ 5-12.8. Fees. [1978 Code § 5-17.3; Ord. No. 839 § 3; Ord. No. 950
§ XIV; Ord. No. 01-23 § 2; Ord. No. 07-04 § 1; Ord. No. 08-24 § 2;
Ord. No. 2016-19 § 1]
A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of $12 for each neutered
cat for a one-year license or $24 for a three-year license and $15 for each
unneutered cat for a one-year license or $30 for a three-year license for
each unneutered cat. Persons who fail to obtain a license as required by
February 1, will be subject to a delinquent fee of $5 per month for each cat.
§ 5-12.9. Renewals; Term of License; Transfer of License from
Another Municipality. [1978 Code § 5-17.3; Ord. No. 839 § 3]
b. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the Township of
Sparta any unlicensed cat, and shall keep same or permit same to be
kept within the Township for a period of more than 10 days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for each
such cat.
a. License from another municipality shall be accepted. The person
applying for the license and registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay the
fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the renewal of license and
§ 5-12.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-12.9
1:129
§ 5-12.10. Loss of License; Replacement Fee. [1978 Code § 5-17.3;
Ord. No. 839 § 3]
If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the Health Services
may issue a duplicate license and/or registration sleeve for that particular
cat at a fee of $1.
§ 5-12.11. Proof of Licensing. [1978 Code § 5-17.3; Ord. No. 839 § 3]
Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person owning, keeping,
maintaining, or harboring a cat, upon the request of any Health Official,
Police Officer, Animal Control Officer, or other authorized person.
§ 5-12.12. Interfering with Authorized Persons. [1978 Code
§ 5-17.3; Ord. No. 839 § 3]
No person shall hinder, molest, or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this section.
§ 5-12.13. Disposition of Fees. [1978 Code § 5-17.3; Ord. No. 839
§ 3]
License fees and other moneys collected or received under the provisions
of this section shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the municipality, be
placed in an animal control fund in accordance with applicable law.
§ 5-12.14. Penalty.26 [1978 Code § 5-17.4; Ord. No. 839 § 4]
Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person who violates, or
who fails, or refuses to comply with this section, shall be liable to a penalty
up to $1,000 for each violation, or may be imprisoned for a period not to
exceed six months, or both, at the discretion of the court before whom the
complaint is made. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation of this section occurs or continues.
§ 5-13. CONTROL OF CATS.
§ 5-13.1. Cats Defined as Public Nuisance. [1978 Code § 5-15; Ord.
No. 800; Ord. No. 950 § 5-15]
registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for the original, and said
license, registration tag or sleeve and renewal thereof shall expire on
January 31 of each year, in the following year.
b. Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in the
licensing year for any cat in the Township of Sparta. Any valid New
Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey municipality shall be
accepted by this municipality as evidence of compliance.
26.Editor's Note: For Violations Bureau Fine Schedule, see subsection 1-5.7
§ 5-12.9 SPARTA CODE § 5-13.1
1:130
§ 5-14. through § 5-15. (RESERVED)
a. Any cat shall be considered a public nuisance and shall be subject to
subsection 5-20.1 paragraph i, if it has no owner or custodian; if it has
no place of care, or shelter; or if it trespasses upon or damages either
private or public property; or if it bites, scratches, or harms persons
within the township.
b. Any cat off the premises of the owner or the person keeping or
harboring the cat and constituting a public nuisance as defined in
subsection 5-4.7, shall be impounded according to subsection 5-20.1
paragraph i, provided that the owner of the property upon which the
trespassing occurs authorizes the seizure.
c. Any cat off of the premises of the owner or the person keeping or
harboring the cat which the Animal Control Officer or other authorized
person has taken into custody; in accordance with 5-13.1a and b shall
be impounded.
d. There shall be charged to the owner of each cat which is impounded,
the sum listed in subsection 5-20.4a, for picking up each cat; and the
sum listed in subsection 5-20.4b for each cat which is redeemed by its
owner plus the listed sum in subsection 5-20.4c per day maintenance
for each day or part thereof that the cat has been impounded, which
fees shall be paid when the cat is released.
§ 5-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-14
1:131

ARTICLE III
Kennels, Pet Shops, Shelters and Pounds
§ 5-16. LICENSE REQUIREMENTS FOR KENNELS, PET SHOPS,
SHELTERS AND POUNDS.
§ 5-16.1. Definitions. [1978 Code § 5-1.1; Ord. No. 800]
As used in this article:
KENNEL — Shall mean any establishment wherein or whereon the business
of boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a
pet shop.
PET SHOP — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition
pen, not part of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — Shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs seized
either under the provisions of this section or otherwise.
SHELTER — Shall mean any establishment where dogs are received,
housed and distributed without charge.
§ 5-16.2. License Required; Exemption for Individual Dog Licenses.
[1978 Code § 5-2.1; Ord. No. 800]
§ 5-16.3. Application. [1978 Code § 5-2.2; Ord. No. 800]
The application shall describe the premises where the establishment for a
kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound is located or is proposed to be located,
the purpose for which it is to be maintained, and shall be accompanied
by the written approval of the Township Health Department showing
compliance with the local and State rules and regulations governing the
location of and sanitation at such establishments.
§ 5-16.4. Revocation of License to Operate Establishment for Dogs.
[1978 Code § 5-2.3; Ord. No. 800; Ord. No. 950 § 5-2.3]
All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be subject
to revocation by the manager on recommendation of the State Department
of Health or the Township Department of Health for failure to comply with
the applicable provisions of this section, or the rules and regulations of
a. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a
pet shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the Health Department for
a license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment. All
licenses issued for such establishments shall state the purpose for
which the establishment is maintained, shall expire annually on January
31 and shall not be transferable to another owner or different premises.
b. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishments.
§ 5-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-16.4
1:133
the State Department of Health, or of the Township Department of Health
governing the same, after the licensee has been afforded a hearing by either
the State Department of Health or the Township Manager as provided in
subsection 2-5.13.
§ 5-16.5. Fees. [1978 Code § 5-2.4; § 8-5; Ord. No. 591; Ord. No. 618;
Ord. No. 638; Ord. No. 795; Ord. No. 800; Ord. No. 845 § 1; Ord. No.
950 A VI]
§ 5-16.6. Permitting Dogs off Premises on Leash or in Crate. [1978
Code § 5-2.5; Ord. No. 800]
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises, except on leash or in a crate, or under other safe control.
§ 5-16.7. List Forwarded to State Department. [1978 Code § 5-2.6;
Ord. No. 800]
The Health Department shall forward to the State Department of Health a
list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed, within 30 days
after the licenses therefor are issued, which list shall include the name and
address of the licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 5-17. through § 5-18. (RESERVED)
a. The annual license fee for a kennel shall be $25. The annual license fee
for a pet shop shall be $25. No fee shall be charged for a shelter or
pound.
b. License fees for dog establishments shall be paid with the application.
§ 5-16.4 SPARTA CODE § 5-17
1:134
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement; Impoundment
§ 5-19. ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. [1978 Code § 5-5; Ord. No.
800]
The manager may appoint, at such times and for such terms as may seem
expedient one or more persons, to be known as the Animal Control Officer,
whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this section and to take
into custody and impound dogs as provided in Section 5-20. The Manager
may authorize the members of the Police Department to perform the above
services.
§ 5-20. IMPOUNDING OF DOGS.
§ 5-20.1. Causes for Impoundment. [1978 Code § 5-6; § 5-12.1; Ord.
No. 800; Ord. No. 950 § IV]
The Animal Control Officer or other persons designated by the Manager
shall take into custody or impound or cause to be taken into custody and
impounded, and thereafter destroyed or disposed of as hereinafter provided
in this section:
a. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog which the official or his agent have reason to believe
is a stray dog;
b. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on his collar;
c. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog;
d. Any dog upon the public or private streets or in any public place not
accompanied by a person over the age of 12 and not confined or
controlled as prescribed by subsection 5-4.3;
e. Any dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound and off such
establishment and not confined or controlled as prescribed by
subsection 5-16.6;
f. Any dog running at large is in violation of subsection 5-4.2;
g. Any dog declared vicious as determined by the provisions of subsection
5-9.5 and the dog has not been disposed of in accord with Section 5-9;
h. Any dog which the owner or persons keeping or harboring said dog
wishes to dispose of and to which he renounces ownership, custody and
control, in writing; and
i. Impounding and Disposal of Animals. Any animal off the premises of the
owner or of the person keeping or harboring said animal which the
Animal Control Officer or other authorized person has reason to believe
§ 5-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-20.1
1:135
§ 5-20.2. Notice to Owner of Impoundment. [1978 Code § 5-6; Ord.
No. 800]
§ 5-20.3. Disposal of Unclaimed Dogs. [1978 Code § 5-6; Ord. No.
800]
§ 5-20.4. Fees. [1978 Code § 5-6; § 8-5; Ord. No. 591; Ord. No. 618;
Ord. No. 638; Ord. No. 795; Ord. No. 800; Ord. No. 845 § 1; Ord. No.
2016-19 § 1]
The following fees are established:
is a stray animal or which the owner renounces ownership shall be
taken into custody, impounded and disposed.
a. If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon
or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag, or the owner or the person keeping or harboring the
dog is known, the Animal Control Officer or anyone authorized by the
Manager shall forthwith serve on the person whose address is given on
the collar, or on the owner or the person keeping or harboring the dog,
if known, a notice in writing stating that the dog has been seized and
will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven
days after the service of the notice.
b. A notice under paragraph a above may be served either by delivering it
to the person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the person's
usual or last known place of abode, or at the address given on the collar,
or by forwarding it by mail in a pre-paid letter addressed to that person
at his usual or last known place of abode, or to the address given on the
collar.
a. When any dog so seized has been detained for seven days after notice,
when notice can be given as above set forth in this section, or has been
detained for seven days after seizure, when notice has not been and
cannot be given as above set forth in this section, and if the owner or
person keeping or harboring the dog has not claimed the dog and paid
all expenses incurred by reason of its detention, and, if the dog be
unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or person keeping
or harboring the dog has not produced a license and registration tag for
the dog, the Animal Control Officer may cause the dog to be destroyed
in a manner causing as little pain as possible.
b. When any dog shall be delivered under subsection 5-20.1, paragraph h,
no notice to the owner shall be required, unless the person delivering
the dog is someone other than the owner, in which event the foregoing
procedure shall be followed; if the person delivering the dog is the
owner, the Animal Control Officer or any person so authorized may
forthwith destroy the dog in a manner causing as little pain as possible.
a. For each dog/cat impounded $30.
§ 5-20.1 SPARTA CODE § 5-20.4
1:136
§ 5-21. SEIZURE OF DOGS; ENTRY UPON PREMISES. [1978 Code
§ 5-8; Ord. No. 800]
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this Article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs which he may lawfully seize and impound when
such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs, except upon the
premises of the owner of the dog if said owner is present and forbids the
same.
§ 5-22. INTERFERENCE FORBIDDEN. [1978 Code § 5-9; Ord. No.
800]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter. The mandatory
minimum penalty shall be $100 up to $1,000.
b. For each dog/cat redeemed $10.
c. Maintenance charge for each day or part thereof while impounded $10.
d. Disposal of dogs $45.
e. Disposal of cats $30.
f. Checks returned for insufficient funds $20.
g. Replacement dog license and registration; for each dog $1.
h. Adoption fee for a dog or cat $10.
There shall be charged to the owner of each dog which is impounded, pursuant
to subsection 5-20.1, the sum listed in paragraph a for picking up each dog;
and the sum listed in paragraph b for each dog which is redeemed by its owner,
plus the sum listed in paragraph c per day maintenance fee for each day or part
thereof that the dog has been impounded, which fee shall be paid when the dog
is released.
§ 5-20.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-22
1:137
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [1978 Code § 6-1]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township in accordance with the provisions of an act of
the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its
supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [1978 Code § 6-2]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [1978 Code § 6-3]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in § 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New Jersey
or the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [1978 Code § 6-3.2]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Township
Council, which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [1978 Code § 6-3.3; Ord. No. 609 § 1]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township
without obtaining a license in accordance with the act referred to in § 6-1
and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Fees. [1978 Code § 6-3.3; § 6-3.4; Ord. No. 621; Ord.
No. 01-23 § 3; Ord. No. 04-15; Ord. No. 08-24 § 3; Ord. No. 13-14
§ 2]
The annual fee of licenses for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages
in the Township shall be as follows:
§ 5-22 SPARTA CODE § 6-3.4
1:138
Class of License Annual License
Number of
Licenses
Plenary Retail Consumption
License
$940 17
Club License $150 2
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
No plenary retail distribution licenses, limited retail distribution licenses, or
seasonal retail consumption licenses shall be issued by the Township.
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [1978 Code § 6-4.1]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or served in any licensed
premises on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. except
Sundays and New Year's Day each year as hereinafter provided.
§ 6-4.2. Sundays. [1978 Code § 6-4.2; Ord. No. 2017-13 § 1;
amended 5-28-2019 by Ord. No. 19-04]
The provisions of Subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on Sundays. On Sunday
no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served or delivered in the licensed
premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.3. New Year's Day. [1978 Code § 6-4.3; Ord. No. 2017-13 § 2]
Provisions of Subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on January 1. On that day
alcoholic beverages may not be sold or delivered in the licensed premises
between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless January 1st is a Sunday,
in which case alcoholic beverages may not be sold, served, delivered to or
consumed in the licensed premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 9:00
a.m.
§ 6-4.4. Time Standards. [New]
The times above set forth shall be Eastern Standard Time except when
Daylight Saving Time is in effect, when the times shall be Daylight Saving
Time.
§ 6-4.5. Sales to Certain Persons. [1978 Code § 6-4.4]
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person or minor, or
permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any licensed premises by
any of the above-named classes of persons, or permit any such persons to
congregate in or about the licensed premises.
§ 6-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-4.6
1:139
§ 6-4.6. Closing Provision. [1978 Code § 6-4.5]
During the hours sales of alcoholic beverages are hereinabove prohibited,
the entire licensed premises shall also be closed and no person shall be
admitted or permitted to remain therein except the licensee or bona fide
employees of the licensee. This requirement shall not apply to: hotels,
restaurants as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1(t); clubs as defined in N.J.S.A.
33:1-12(5).
§ 6-5. (RESERVED) [1978 Code § 6-3.5; Ord. No. 631; Ord. No. 696;
Ord. No. 826; Ord. No. 05-11 § 1; deleted by Ord. No. 2017-08]
§ 6-6. REVOCATION OF LICENSES. [1978 Code § 6-6]
Any license issued under this Chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
Mayor and Township Council for the violation of any of the provisions of
this Chapter or the violation of any provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96,
and the rules and regulations of the State Director of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
Proceedings for the suspension or revocation of a license shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the statutes cited by service of a five
day notice of charges preferred against the licensee. The licensee shall be
afforded a reasonable opportunity for a hearing.
Suspension or revocation shall carry the penalties and prohibitions provided
for in the statutes cited and shall be in addition to any of the penalties
imposed for the violation of this Chapter.
§ 6-7. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-7.1. Sale of Alcoholic Beverages. [1978 Code § 6-5; Ord. No. 609
§ 2]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the service
or delivery of any alcoholic beverage, directly or indirectly, to any person
under the legal age.
§ 6-7.2. Entering Premises. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to enter any premises
licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of
purchasing, or having served or delivered to him or her, any alcoholic
beverage.
§ 6-7.3. Consumption; Purchase. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to consume any
alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have another purchase
for him or her any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-4.6 SPARTA CODE § 6-7.4
1:140
§ 6-7.4. Misrepresentation of Age. [New]
It shall be unlawful for a person to misrepresent or misstate his or her age
or the age of any other person for the purpose of inducing any retail license
to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under the legal
age.
§ 6-7.5. Violations and Penalties. [N.J.S.A. 33:1-8]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon conviction
thereof and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, shall be punished by a fine
of not less than $500. In addition, the Court shall suspend the person's
license to operate a motor vehicle for six months or prohibit the person
from obtaining a license to operate a motor vehicle in this State for six
months beginning on the date he becomes eligible to obtain a license or
on the date of conviction, whichever is later. In addition to the general
penalty prescribed for an offense, the court may require any person under
the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages who violates this act to
participate in an alcohol education or treatment program authorized by the
Department of Health for a period not to exceed the maximum period of
confinement prescribed by law for the offense for which the individual has
been convicted.
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Words and Phrases. [1978 Code § 7-1]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 7-1.2. Official Time Standard. [1978 Code § 7-2]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 7-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET. [New]
a. The Mayor and, in the event of his/her absence, disability or inability to
act, then the Chief of the Police Department, is hereby authorized to
provide by regulation for the closing of any street or portion thereof to
motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during specified hours on any
§ 6-7.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:141
§ 7-3. TOW-AWAY. [New]
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any Police
Officer may provide for the removal of that vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 7-4. PENALTIES.27 [New]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [New]
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 7-6. REPEAL. [New]
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Sparta are hereby repealed,
and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except that this
repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any
person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby
repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 7-7. PARKING.
day or days whenever he/she finds that such closing is necessary for the
preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Mayor, and in accordance with
Subsection a above, shall provide for the posting of proper warning
signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during the time
the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
27.Editor's Note: For Violations Bureau Fine Schedule see Subsection 1-5.7.
§ 7-2 SPARTA CODE § 7-7.1
1:142
§ 7-7.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [1978 Code § 7-3.1]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive, provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-7.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [1978 Code
§ 7-3.2]
§ 7-7.3. Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and
Removal. [1978 Code § 7-3.3; Ord. No. 01-04 § 1]
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his/her absence,
the ranking Police Officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
c. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic and any Police Officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the
removal and storage which may result from such removal, before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, an emergency shall exist and no vehicles shall be
parked on the following streets or highways or portions thereof listed
below.
The parking prohibitions listed below shall remain in effect after the
snow has ceased, until the streets have been plowed significantly, and
to the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
ordinance shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic and any police officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the
§ 7-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.3
1:143
§ 7-8. CONSTRUCTION ZONE: TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREET
AND HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATION
AND ADOPTION OF MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES FOR STREETS AND HIGHWAYS (MUNICIPAL ROADS
ONLY).
removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
c. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon signs being
erected as required by law.
d. Unless other penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this subsection or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
All Municipal and County Roads except:
Name of Street Sides Location
Burnbrae Lane North Southern leg
Dandelion Road South Entire length
Lake Shore Drive South Entire length
Lincoln Drive South Entire length
Maple Parkway East Entire length
West Cherry Tree Lane South Entire length
Note: All other Municipal and County Roads - parking prohibited both
sides, entire length.
Within the Lake Mohawk Country Club Reservation except:
Name of Street Sides Location
Fern Road West Entire length
Glenside Trail West Entire length
Hillside Trail West Entire length
Indian Trail North Entire length
Lakeview Road East Entire length
Longview Road East Entire length
Springbrook Trail West Entire length
Sunset Trail East Entire length
Woodlawn Road East Entire length
Note: All other Lake Mohawk Country Club Roads - parking
prohibited both sides, entire length.
§ 7-7.3 SPARTA CODE § 7-8.1
1:144
§ 7-8.1. Controls Established for Construction Zone. [New]
The Governing Body hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur and traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operations, and utility work, above and below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal
flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous
when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health,
safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and
regulations directed to the safety and expeditious movement of traffic
through construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the
work force performing these operations.
The Township of Sparta, in the County of Sussex, State of New Jersey,
does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
hereafter known as M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby supplemented and
amended, as it controls and regulates whenever construction maintenance
operations of utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person,
contractor, or utility, who fails to comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D.
while performing such work is in violation of this section.
§ 7-8.2. Pre-Construction Meetings. [New]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility agreement, wishing to conduct work on, under or above
the roadway to contact the Police Department in order to arrange a preconstruction
meeting in order to submit plans for the safe movement of
traffic during such period of construction work. Any person, contractor or
utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the start of such work
or whose plans are not approved by the Police Department is in violation of
this section.
§ 7-8.3. Hazardous Conditions. [New]
The person, contractor, or utility shall provide the Police Department with
at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of
emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to the
start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be reached,
or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call from
the Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the Township
may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for
such emergency service by the Township shall be charged to the person,
contractor, or utility for such condition.
§ 7-8.4. Hours. [New]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work on
any roadway in the Township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00
p.m. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the Police Department. If it is
determined by the officer in charge that the construction or maintenance
§ 7-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8.4
1:145
operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay
traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted
only between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 7-8.5. Road Closing and Detours. [New]
Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Police Department.
§ 7-8.6. Traffic Directors. [New]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Police Department that same is necessary to
provide for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 7-8.7. Stop Work. [New]
The Police Department shall have the authority to stop work, including
the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within the street
right-of-way, back filling of open excavations and/or other related work, in
order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this
section.
§ 7-8.8. Site Preparation. [New]
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicle or equipment
are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk or until all construction, signs,
lights, devices and pavement markings are installed.
§ 7-8.9. Violations and Penalties. [New]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense pay a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days. For a second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a
fine of not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-8.10. Inconsistent Regulations. [New]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this section are hereby repealed to the extent of any such
inconsistency.
§ 7-8.11. Approval of Commissioner Required. [New]
This section shall take effect after approval by the Commissioner of
Transportation 20 days after passage and publication as prescribed by law.
§ 7-8.4 SPARTA CODE § 7-9
1:146
§ 7-9. (RESERVED)
§ 7-10. STOPPING OR STANDING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN
HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS. [1978 Code § 7-3.5; Ord. No. 09-18
§ 1]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described, except where other
parking regulations have been provided for.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Andover Road Both All Between the intersection of
Route 517/616 and the
intersection of Route 517/
Stacey Court
Main Street East All Between a point 300 feet
north and the northerly
curbline of Route 181.
Professional Quadrangle
(paved portion)
North All Entire length extending from
the westerly right-of-way line
of Route 181 and running to
the easterly right-of-way line
of Stanhope Road
Stanhope Road Both All Between the projected
southerly curbline of Winona
Parkway and a point 110 feet
south thereof
§ 7-11. PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS. [1978
Code § 7-3.6; Ord. No. 2015-14]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described,
except where other parking regulations have been provided for.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
West Shore Trail Both 2 hours
between
8:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
Between White Deer
Plaza and the Spillway
West Shore Trail Both 30 minutes
between
3:00 a.m.
and 5:00
a.m.
Between White Deer
Plaza and the Spillway
§ 7-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:147
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
White Deer Plaza West 10 minutes
between
5:00 a.m.
and 11:00
p.m.
First 3 parking stalls
south of Mohawk Avenue
White Deer Plaza West 10 minutes
between
5:00 a.m.
and 11:00
p.m.
First 3 parking stalls
south of West Shore Trail
White Deer Plaza [Ord.
No. 2015-14]
Both 2 hours
between
5:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
From Mohawk Avenue to
the beginning of East
Shore Trail, (excluding 10
minute locations)
White Deer Plaza [Ord.
No. 2015-14]
East 2 hours
between
5:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
First 3 parking stalls for
"Compact Cars Only"
from the crosswalk to in
front of 21 White Deer
Plaza
White Deer Plaza Both No parking
at any time
between
3:00 a.m.
and 5:00
a.m.
Entire length
§ 7-12. PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING. [New]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
street between the specified hours and days described.
Name of Street Sides Hours & Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-13. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN
STREETS. [1978 Code § 7-3.3; Ord. No. 01-19 § 2; Ord. No. 01-20
§ 1]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described, except where other parking regulations have been provided for.
Name of Street Sides Location
Gail Court Both Entire length
Llewellyn Drive Both Entire length
§ 7-11 SPARTA CODE § 7-13
1:148
Name of Street Sides Location
Main Street Both Both sides of the intersection of Route 181
and Main Street to the southeast end of the Uturn
located in the front of the Sparta
Municipal Building, a distance of 2,097 feet
West Mountain
Road
Both Between Main Street and a point 0.6 miles
more or less distant northwest, at New Jersey
Power and Light Company #1144
Wilson Drive Both Entire length
§ 7-14. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS.
§ 7-14.1. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets. [1978 Code § 7-3.4]
No person shall park or stand a vehicle between the hours specified any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets described,
except where other parking regulations have been provided for.
Name of
Street Sides Days Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-14.2. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours During Certain
Times of the Year. [1978 Code § 7-3.4; New]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00
p.m., Monday through Friday upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets from September 1 through June 30th of every year.
Name of Street Side Location
Radcliffe Drive Both Entire length
Echo Drive Both Entire length
Mountain Spring Drive Both Entire length
Schindler Drive Both Entire length
§ 7-15. PARKING OF VEHICLES WEIGHING IN EXCESS OF FOUR
TONS PROHIBITED.
No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or omnibus having
registered gross weights in excess of four tons upon any street between the
hours specified.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All Township streets Both 1:00 a.m. to 5:00
a.m.
All
§ 7-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16
1:149
§ 7-16. ROUTES FOR TRUCKS OVER FOUR TONS.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1 the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as route for vehicles over four tons. All trucks having
a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in excess of
four tons shall be excluded from all streets, except for those streets listed
which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles will be permitted
on all streets for the purpose of the pick up and delivery of materials.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-17. VEHICLES OVER DESIGNATED WEIGHT EXCLUDED FROM
CERTAIN STREETS. [1978 Code § 7-4.1; § 7-4.2; Ord. No. 07-06;
Ord. No. 2015-15; New; Ord. No. 05-13]
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pick up and delivery of
materials on such street, or the use of emergency vehicles on such street.
Name of Street Weight Location
Angelo Drive 4 tons Entire length
Boulder Ridge
Crossing
4 tons Entire length
Crystal Rock Road 4 tons From Township line to end
Davis Road 4 tons Entire length
Demarest Road 4 tons From Route 15 to Wilson Drive
Edison Road 4 tons From Glen Road to Ogdensburg
Borough Line
Haywards Road 4 tons Entire length
Old Prospect
School Road
4 tons Entire length
Pinkneyville Road 4 tons Entire length
Sterling Hill Road 4 tons From West Mountain Road to
Ogdensburg Borough Line
Sussex Mills Road 4 tons Entire length
West Mountain
Road
4 tons From County Route 517 to State Route
94
West Shore Trail
[Ord. No.
2015-15]
15 tons Bridge over the Wallkill River
White Lake Road 4 tons The length between North Church Road
(Route 94) and Route 15 (Lafayette
Road)
§ 7-16 SPARTA CODE § 7-18
1:150
§ 7-18. ONE-WAY STREETS. [1978 Code § 7-5]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street Direction Location
Carriage Lane East Entire length
Heighwood Trail Southbound Entire length
Seminary Lane South From Mohawk Avenue to Woodport
Road
Village Green East Off Trepasso Drive
§ 7-19. THROUGH STREETS. [1978 Code § 7-6.1]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs
shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
Benham Way From Lambert Drive to terminus
Brookside Drive From Green Road to terminus
Columbus Road-Hilltop
Trail
Between East Shore Trail and Stanhope Road
Conestoga Trail Between Hunters Lane and Sawmill Road
Demarest Road Between State Route 15 and CR669
East Mountain Road Between State Route 181 and CR620
East Mountain Road Between Woodport Road and Glen Road
Edison Road Between CR620 and the Ogdensburg Township
line
Fox Trail Road From CR620 to terminus
Green Apple Road Between CR605 and Warren Road
Green Road Between CR605 and State Route 181
Green Road Between Stanhope Road and Woodport Road
Heritage Drive Between Sawmill Road and Conestoga Trail
a. Between State Route 181 and Pine Cone
Lane
Hunters Lane
b. The intersection of Pine Cone Lane and
Hunters Lane is stop intersection: Stop sign
on Hunters Lane
§ 7-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-19
1:151
Name of Street Limits
c. Between Pine Cone Lane and CR605
Hunters Lane Between Stanhope Road and Woodport Road
a. Between Route 181 (Woodport Road) and
Pine Cone Lane
b. The intersection of Pine Cone Lane and
Hunters Lane is hereby designated as a Stop
intersection: "Stop" signs shall be installed
on Hunters Lane
Hunters Lane
c. Between Pine Cone Lane and Stanhope Road
Knoll Road Between CR517 and Lewis Lane
Lambert Drive From Sussex Mills Road to terminus
Milton Road Between CR620 and Jefferson Township line
Morningstar Drive From East Mountain Road to terminus
Park Road Between CR605 and CR613
Park Road Between East Shore Trail and Stanhope Road
Pinkneyville Road Between CR616 and Andover Township line
Radcliff Drive From West Mountain Road to terminus
Richmond Hill Drive Between Pinkneville Road and Pinkneyville Road
Sawmill Road Between Green Road and State Route 181
Scudders Road From West Mountain Road to terminus
Seneca Lake Road Between CR605 and Tomahawk Trail
Seneca Lake Trail Between CR605 and Seneca Lake Road
Signal Hill Trail Between State Route 181 and Hunters Lane
Sussex Mills Road Between CR 616 and Andover Township line
Under Rock Road From Sunset Lake Road to terminus
Warren Road Between CR605 and Tyler Street
Waters Edge From CR620 to terminus
Westgate Drive From CR517 to terminus
West Mountain Road Between CR 517 and State Route 94
West Mountain Road Between North Church Road and Main Street
§ 7-20. STOP INTERSECTIONS. [1978 Code § 7-6.2; Ord. No.
2017-05]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 7-19 SPARTA CODE § 7-20
1:152
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Arielle Way and Silver Lane Silver Lane
Birch Tree Lane and Tulip Tree
Lane
Tulip Tree Lane
Bolder Ridge Crossing and Sir
Arthurs Court
Sir Arthurs Court
Cedar Tree Lane and Birch Tree
Lane
Birch Tree Lane
Center Street and Center Drive Center Drive
Cherry Tree Lane and West Cherry
Tree Lane [Ord. No. 2017-05]
West Cherry Tree Lane
Cheyenne Trail and Cherokee Court Cherokee Court
Cottonwood Trail and Sequoia Court Sequoia Court
Cottonwood Trail and Butternut Way Butternut Way
Crystal Rock Road and Bolder Ridge
Crossing
Bolder Ridge Crossing
Deire Drive and Frizzell Terrace Frizzell Terrace
Farmbrook Drive and Malibu Drive Malibu Drive
Forrest Hill Road and Winthrop Gait
Road
Winthrop Gait Road
Fox Hollow Road and Fox Ridge
Road
Fox Ridge Road
Fox Hollow Road and Valley Road Valley Road
Ginger Lane and Lancer Street Lancer Street
Graphic Boulevard and Hideaway
Lane
Hideaway Lane
Hidden Glen Drive and Pheasant
Walk
Pheasant Walk
Hopkins Corner Road and Kimble
Lane
Kimble Lane
Lewis Lane and Knoll Road Knoll Road
Linden Drive and Concord Trail Concord Trail
Merideth Drive and Heather Lane Heather Lane
Mill Creek Road and Crestview Lane Crestview Lane
Morris Lake Road and Burnbrae
Lane
Burnbrae Lane
Morris Lake Road and Burnbrae
Road
Burnbrae Road
§ 7-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-20
1:153
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Mt. Pleasant Road and Mill Creek Mill Creek
Natale Drive and Joseph Court Joseph Court
Natures Way and Country Lane Country Lane
Nazarene Lane and Spring Avenue Spring Avenue
Newstar Ridge Road and
Continental Drive
Continental Drive
Old Cedar Drive and Millstone Court Millstone Court
Old Cedar Drive and Sunrise Court Sunrise Court
Old Prospect School Road and Davis
Road
Davis Road
Pheasant Walk and Doe Run Doe Run
Pine Cone Lane and Hunters Lane Hunters Lane
Poplar Tree Lane and Oak Tree
Lane
Oak Tree Lane
Prides Crossing and Deire Drive Deire Drive
Roamin Way and Sharon Drive Roamin Way
Rockview Drive and High Crest
Drive
High Crest Drive
Skyline Drive and Grandview
Terrace
Grandview Terrace
Spring Avenue and Margaret
Terrace
Margaret Terrace
Sterling Hill Road and Wild Cat
Road
Wild Cat Road
Stonebridge Road and Natasha
Court
Natasha Court
Stratton Court and Timberline Drive Timberline Drive
Summer Tree Run and Daniel Drive Daniel Drive
Sunset Lake Road and Under Rock
Road
Under Rock Road
Sunset Lake Road and White Birch
Lane
White Birch Lane
Surrey Lane and Prosperity Court Prosperity Court
Timberline Drive and Bromley Court Bromley Court
Timberline Drive and Coventry Lane Coventry Lane
Tomahawk Trail and Seneca Lake
Road
Seneca Lake Road
§ 7-20 SPARTA CODE § 7-20
1:154
Intersection Stop Sign(s) on
Tyler Street and Polk Street Polk Street
Under Rock Drive and Evergreen
Place
Evergreen Place
Under Rock Drive and White Birch
Lane
White Birch Lane
Wild Cat Road and Mud Pond Road Mud Pond Road
Wild Cat Road and Woods End Court Woods End Court
Wilson Drive and Gail Court Gail Court
Wordsworth Drive and Byron Place Byron Place
Wordsworth Drive and Shelly Court Shelly Court
§ 7-21. FOUR-WAY STOPS. [New]
The following intersections are hereby designated as Four-Way Stops.
Intersection Stop Sign On
(Reserved)
§ 7-22. YIELD INTERSECTIONS. [1978 Code § 7-6.3]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Signs On
Houses Corner Road and Houses
Corner Road (North leg)
Yield sign on Houses Corner Road
(North leg)
§ 7-23. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [1978 Code § 7-10.1; § 7-10.2;
§ 7-10.3; § 7-10.4; Ord. No. 07-13 § 1]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described.
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Balsam Parkway (South
end) and East Shore
Trail
Left No left turn onto East Shore Trail
Birch Parkway (North
End) and East Shore
Trail
Right No right turn onto East Shore Trail
§ 7-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-23
1:155
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Maple Parkway (North
end) and East Shore
Trail
Right No right turn onto East Shore Trail
Green Road and
Woodport Road (Route
181)
Left No left turn onto Woodport Road
Route NJ 181 and
Forest Hill Drive
Left Eastbound on Forrest Hill Drive to
Northbound on Route NJ 181
§ 7-24. NO TURN ON RED. [New]
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
(Reserved)
§ 7-25. LOADING ZONES.28 [1978 Code § 7-7]
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in these locations during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Time Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-26. BUS STOP. [1978 Code § 7-9; New]
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Street Hours
(Reserved)
Note: Below are minimum standards for bus stop length which are based on
recommendations of the Institute of Transportation Engineers and Studies
conducted by the Bureau of Traffic Engineering and Safety programs. These
standards include minimum lengths required for Bus Stops in order that
buses may leave moving traffic lanes safely, keeping in mind that buses
alongside the curb must be within six inches thereof as provided by state
law pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-135. These minimums are as follows:
28.Note: Minimum length for all Loading Zones is 50 feet. No Loading Zone may be
established in any area where it is prohibited to stand or park by statute N.J.S.A. 39:4-136.
§ 7-23 SPARTA CODE § 7-26
1:156
NEAR SIDE — 90 feet plus the distance from the curbline to the end of the
curb return, property line or crosswalk approximately 105 feet to 120 feet.
Minimum acceptable length is 105 feet.
FAR SIDE — 85 feet plus the distance from the curbline to the end of the
curb return, property line or crosswalk approximately 105 feet to 120 feet.
Minimum acceptable length is 105 feet.
MID-BLOCK — No intersection on either side of roadside minimum
acceptable length is 135 feet.
FAR-SIDE (AFTER BUS MAKES RIGHT TURN) — Minimum acceptable
length is 150 feet. An additional 45 feet of length should be provided for
each additional bus expected to stop simultaneously.
§ 7-27. TAXI STANDS. [1978 Code § 7-8; New]
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy these locations during the
times indicated.
Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
Note: Minimum length of taxi stand near intersection is 25 feet. Adding the
sidewalk area of about 10 feet to the area where parking is prohibited by
State Law would make the starting point approximately 35 feet from the
curbline. Other locations should be at least 30 feet for one taxi and 25 feet
for each additional taxi.
No taxi stand may be established in any area where it is prohibited to stand
or park by Statute pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-136.
§ 7-28. LANE USE RESERVATIONS. [New]
The lane locations described are designated as lane use reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
(Reserved)
§ 7-29. SPEED LIMITS. [1978 Code § 7-11; New; Ord. No. 01-19 § 1;
Ord. No. 07-23 § 1; Ord. No. 08-02 § 1; Ord. No. 08-26; Ord. No.
09-05; Ord. No. 2017-02]
Speed limits shall be established as follows. Regulatory and warning signs,
conforming to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways, shall be erected and maintained to effect the
designated speed limit(s), as required by the Commissioner of
Transportation of the State of New Jersey and as specified and authorized
in writing from the Bureau of Traffic Engineering of the Department of
Transportation.
§ 7-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-29
1:157
Street Direction
Speed
(mph) Limits
Andover Road
(Route 517)
Both 40 From Sparta Avenue (Route
517/Route 616) to Sparta
Township/Andover Township
line
Balsam Parkway Both 20 Entire length
Birch Parkway Both 25 Entire length
Bridle Way Both 15 Entire length
Carriage Lane Both 15 Entire length
Cherry Tree Lane Both 20 Entire length
Columbus Road Both 25 Entire length
Davis Road Both 30 Entire length
Demarest Road Both 35 Entire length
East Mountain
Road
Both 40 Entire length
East Shore Trail-Mohawk Avenue (County Route 613)
Zone 1 Both 35 From the southerly Sparta
Township line to 100 feet
north of Wallkill Avenue
Zone 2 Both 25 From 100 feet north of
Wallkill Avenue to State Route
181
Edison Road Both 25 From Glen Road (County Road
620) to the Sparta Township/
Ogdensburg Borough line
Father John's Lane Both 30 Entire length
Glen Road (County
Route 620)29
Both 40 From Main Street to 700 feet
east of Lincoln Drive; thence
Glen Road (County
Route 620)
Both 45 To the easterly Sparta
Township line
Green Apple Road Both 30 Entire length
Green Road Both 30 Entire length
Haywards Road Both 25 From the dead end to Milton
Road
Hilltop Trail Both 25 Entire length
29.Trucks and buses over four tons gross weight shall use a lower gear in descending steep
declivities and such gear shall cause the truck or bus not to exceed 25 m.p.h. from 100
feet west of East Mountain Road to 750 feet east of Main Street when traveling in a
westerly direction.
§ 7-29 SPARTA CODE § 7-29
1:158
Street Direction
Speed
(mph) Limits
Houses Corner
Road, Northbound
Traffic
Both 50 From southerly Township line
to a point 3,270 feet north of
the center of Randazzo Road
Houses Corner
Road, Northbound
Traffic
Both 40 From the point 3,270 feet
north of the center of
Randazzo Road to the point
4,480 feet north of State
Route 15
Houses Corner
Road, Northbound
Traffic
Both 35 From the point 4,480 feet
north of State Route 15 to
West Mountain Road
Houses Corner
Road, Southbound
Traffic
Both 35 From West Mountain Road to
a point 9,800 feet south of
West Mountain Road
Houses Corner
Road, Southbound
Traffic
Both 40 From a point 9,800 feet south
of West Mountain Road to a
point 6,120 feet south of the
center of Demerest Road
Houses Corner
Road, Southbound
Traffic
Both 50 From a point 6,120 feet south
of the center of Demerest
Road to the southerly Sparta
Township line
Hunters Lane Both 25 Entire length
Layton Lane Both 35 Entire length
Llewellyn Drive Both 10 Entire length
Main Street
(Sparta-
Ogdensburg Road;
County Route 517)
Both 30 From State Highway Route
181 (Woodport Road) to a
point 1,300 feet north of State
Highway Route 181
(Woodport Road)
Main Street
(County Route 517,
County Route 620)
Both 35 From a point 1,300 feet north
of State Highway Route 181
(Woodport Road) (where it
intersects Main Street) to the
New York, Susquehanna and
Western Railroad grade
crossing
§ 7-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-29
1:159
Street Direction
Speed
(mph) Limits
Main Street
(County Route 517,
County Route 620)
Both 50 From the center of the New
York, Susquehanna, and
Western Railroad crossing to
the northerly Sparta Township
line
Maple Parkway Both 25 Entire length
Maple Tree Lane Both 15 Entire length
Milton Road Both 30 From Glen Road (County Road
620) to the Sparta Township/
Jefferson Township line
Old Prospect School
Road
Both 40 Entire length
Park Road Both 25 Entire length
Pine Cone Lane Both 30 Entire length
Pinkneyville Road Both 35 Entire length
Sawmill Road Both 35 Entire length
Seneca Lake Road Both 30 Entire length
Sparta Avenue
(Sparta-Newton
Road; Alternate
County Route 517
County Route 517)
Both 50 From the westerly Sparta
Township line to Andover
Road (County Route 517)
Sparta Avenue
(Sparta-Newton
Road; Alternate
County Route 517
County Route 517)
Both 45 From Andover Road to State
Highway 181 (Lafayette Road)
Stanhope Road Both 45 From Byram Township line to
Green Road, thence
Stanhope Road Both 40 To 350 feet south of the
center of the southerly leg of
Cherry Tree Lane, thence
Stanhope Road Both 35 To Route 181 [Ord. No.
2017-02]
Stanhope Road Both 25 In the Helen Morgan School
in Zone b during recess or
while children are going to or
leaving school during opening
or closing hours
§ 7-29 SPARTA CODE § 7-29
1:160
Street Direction
Speed
(mph) Limits
Station Road Both 30 Entire length
Sterling Hill Road Both 35 Between West Mountain Road
and the Sparta Township
Ogdensburg Borough
Corporate line
Sussex County Route 517
a. Zone 1: Both 35 Between County Route 616
and Surrey Lane
b. Zone 2: Both 45 Between Surrey Lane and
State Route 181
c. Zone 3: Both 50 Between State Route 181 and
a point 450 feet south of
County Route 620
d. Zone 4: Both 45 Between a point 450 feet
south of County Route 620
and a point 2,110 feet north of
Roamin Way
e. Zone 5: Both 40 Between a point 2,110 feet
north of Roamin Way and the
municipal boundary of Sparta
Township and the Borough of
Ogdensburg
f. School Zone: Both 30 In the Reverend Brown School
Zone located between CR 616
and South Shore Trail in
Sparta Township (within Zone
1), during recess or while
children are going to or
leaving school during opening
or closing times
Sussex County Route 616
a. Zone 1: Both 45 From between the municipal
boundary of Sparta Township
and Andover Township to
Sussex Mills Road
b. Zone 2: Both 35 Between Sussex Mills Road
and County Route 517
§ 7-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-29
1:161
Street Direction
Speed
(mph) Limits
Sussex Mills Road Both 35 From intersection of Sussex
Mills Road and Sparta
Avenue-Route 616 to
intersection of Limecrest
Road
Tall Oaks Road Both 25 Entire length
Tomahawk Trail Both 30 Entire length
Tyler Street Both 25 Entire length
Warren Court Both 25 Entire length
Warren Road Both 25 Entire length
West Mountain
Road
Both 40 Zone 1, between Radcliffe
Drive and the intersection of
Graphic Boulevard
West Mountain
Road
Both 25 Zone 1, between Route 517
and the intersection of
Radcliffe Drive
Westgate Drive Both 30 Entire length
White Lake Road Both 40 From intersection with N.J.
Route 94 to intersection with
N.J. Route 15
White Lake Road Both 25 From intersection with N.J.
Route 94 to a point 1,100 feet
south of said intersection
during school hours
Wild Cat Road Both 35 Between Sterling Hill Road
and the Sparta Township
Franklin Borough Corporate
line
Wild Cat Road Both 35 Entire length
Wordsworth Place Both 15 Entire length
All other Township roadways are statutory speed as defined in N.J.S.A.
39:4-98 and N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
§ 7-30. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS. [New; Ord. No. 2018-05]
A Mid-Block Crosswalk shall be established and maintained at the following
locations.
§ 7-29 SPARTA CODE § 7-30
1:162
Name of Street Location
Andover Road (Route 517) 1,053 feet west of the western
curbline of Sparta Avenue (Route
517/Route 616), to a point 10 feet
westerly therefrom
Main Street [Ord. No. 2018-05] 1,125 feet east from the intersection
of Sparta Avenue to a point 10 feet
easterly
Main Street [Ord. No. 2018-05] 515 feet east from the intersection
of Town Center Drive to a point 10
feet easterly therefrom
Sparta Avenue [Ord. No. 2018-05] 930 feet south from the intersection
of Route 517 and Sparta Avenue to a
point 10 feet southerly therefrom
Town Center Drive [Ord. No.
2018-05]
300 feet south from the intersection
of Route 517, to a point 10 feet
southerly therefrom
West Mountain Road 1,647 feet north of the northern
curbline of Route 517, to a point 10
feet northerly therefrom
West Mountain Road [Repealed
7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-11]
West Mountain Road 2,037 feet north of the northern
curbline of Route 517, to a point 10
feet northerly therefrom
White Lake Road [Repealed
7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 19-11]
§ 7-31. NO PASSING ZONES. [New]
No Passing Zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts thereof.
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch No.
(Reserved)
§ 7-32. through § 7-34. (RESERVED)
§ 7-35. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 7-35.1. Handicapped Parking on Streets. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following on
street locations are designated as handicapped parking places. Such spaces
are for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
§ 7-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-35.1
1:163
plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these places.
Street
No. of
Spaces Location
Apple Tree Lane 1 East side at northern terminus of
roadway
Center Street 2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
White Deer Plaza 3 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
§ 7-35.2. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and
Board of Education Property. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 the following off
street parking yards and Board of Education property are designated as
Handicapped Parking areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have
been issued special identification cards, plates or placards issued by the
Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of
Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
Property
No. of
Spaces Location
Alpine School 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Helen Morgan School 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
High School 2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Junior High School
(Mohawk Avenue)
2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Middle School 3 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Sparta Ambulance
Building
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Sparta DPW 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Sparta Municipal
Building
2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Sparta Public Library 3 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
§ 7-35.1 SPARTA CODE § 7-35.2
1:164
Property
No. of
Spaces Location
Station Park 14 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Sussex County Vo-Tech 15 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Ungerman Field 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
§ 7-35.3. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the
Public and to Which the Public is Invited (Retail Business). [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following off
street parking yards are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property
No. of
Spaces Location
Arora Electric 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Bagel Station (Route
15)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Homestead Restaurant
(Route 94)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
1 Main Street 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
1A Main Street 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
16 Main Street
(Nazarro's)
2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
33 Pine Cone Lane
(7-11 Store)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
PNC Bank (Mohawk
Avenue)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Popa Roni's (Route 15) 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
19 Sparta Avenue (Cafe
Perot)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
25 Sparta Avenue
(Talbots)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
§ 7-35.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-35.3
1:165
Property
No. of
Spaces Location
28 Sparta Avenue
(Dairy Queen)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
27 Sparta Avenue
(Dime Bank)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
31 Sparta Avenue
(Bank of NY)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
41 Sparta Avenue (1st
Union Bank)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
48 Sparta Avenue
(NBSC)
2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
49 Sparta Avenue
(Burger King)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
53 Sparta Avenue
(Gibson Girl)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
55 Sparta Avenue (Star
Cleaners)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
60 Sparta Avenue
(Grand Union)
3 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
115 Sparta Avenue (SC
Racket Center)
2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
117 Sparta Avenue
(Lakeland Bank)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
270 Sparta Avenue
(Upper Lake Plaza)
2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Sparta Town Center
(Post Office)
5 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Theatre Center
Woodport Road
9 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Valley National Bank
(Route 181)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
9 White Deer Plaza (St.
Moritz)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
23 White Deer Plaza
(Kroghs)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
8 Woodport Road (SC
Glass)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
17 Woodport Road 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
§ 7-35.3 SPARTA CODE § 7-35.3
1:166
Property
No. of
Spaces Location
41 Woodport Road
(Rowley)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
80 Woodport Road
(Mohawk Diner)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
155 Woodport Road 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
163 Woodport Road
(Mohawk Gard)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
172 Woodport Road 2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
182 Woodport Road (Sp
Hardware)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
191 Woodport Road
(Sparta Plaza)
4 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
215 Woodport Road
(Kids Cons.)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
409 Woodport Road 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
712 Woodport Road
(Wt Village)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
In any space on public or private property appropriately marked for vehicles
for the physically handicapped pursuant to P.L. 1977 c202 (C.39:4-197.5),
P.L. 1975 c217 (C.52:27D-119 et seq.) or any other applicable law unless
the vehicle is authorized by law to be parked therein and a handicapped
person is either the driver or a passenger in that vehicle. State, county, or
municipal law enforcement officers shall enforce the parking restrictions on
spaces appropriately marked for vehicles for the physically handicapped on
both public and private property (chgd. by L1989, c201(1), eff. 6/1/90).
No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
Pursuant to P.L. 1989, C 201, the penalties for violations must be $100 for
a first offense and for a subsequent offense must be a fine of at least $100
and up to 90 days community service on such terms and such form as the
court shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 7-35.4. Handicapped Parking on All Other Private Property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following off street
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates
or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued
§ 7-35.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-35.4
1:167
by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
Property
No. of
Spaces Location
28 Andover Road (P.J.
HS)
3 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
6 Apple Tree Lane (Dr.
Harte)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Blue Heron Office
Building
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Challenge Industries 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
27 Commerce Drive 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
85 Conestoga Trail (St.
Mary's)
2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
99 Demarest Road
(Sparta Engin.)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
2 Gail Court 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
4 Gail Court 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
10 Gail Court (Spec.
Child Sch.)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
30 Gail Court (Med-
Alert)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Geldback 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
286 House Corner
Road
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Knoll Heights
Community Center
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
32 Lafayette Road
(Hilltop)
2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
22 Main Street
(Gobels)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
32 Main Street (1st
Pres. Church)
4 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
21 Mohawk Avenue (Dr.
Grano)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
§ 7-35.4 SPARTA CODE § 7-35.4
1:168
Property
No. of
Spaces Location
Newton Hospital
Wellness Center
3 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
1 Pro Quadrangle 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
564 Route 15 (Data
Print)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
53 Sparta Avenue
(Valley View)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
70 Sparta Avenue 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
71 Sparta Avenue
(Methodist Church)
2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
121 Sparta Avenue
(Baptist Church)
2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
294 Sparta Avenue
(OLL Church)
3 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
334 Sparta Avenue (Sp.
Med. Assoc.)
2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
350 Sparta Avenue 3 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
Sparta Business
Campus
3 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
427 Stanhope Road
(Bless Kateri)
5 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
27 West Shore Trail
(Dr. Duddy)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
471 West Shore Trail
(LM golf Club)
2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
40 White Lake Road 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
34 White Lake Road 2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
2 Wilson Drive 2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
12 Wilson Drive (MLP) 2 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
20 Wilson Drive (Post
Pkg.)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
§ 7-35.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-35.4
1:169
Property
No. of
Spaces Location
30 Wilson Drive (Ron
Fastner)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
34 Wilson Drive
(Rectus Corp.)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
48 Woodport Road 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
54 Woodport Road
(Real Estate)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
66 Woodport Road 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
83 Woodport Road 1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
156 Woodport Road
(Foresight)
1 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
246 Woodport Road
(Shep of Hill)
3 (As per drawing on file in
Township Clerk's Office)
§ 7-35.5. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[New]
The owners of the premises referred to in Subsections 7-35.3 and 7-35.4
shall provide and install signs and pavement markings for each parking
space reserved for the use of handicapped persons, which signs and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain
such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense
to the Township of Sparta. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and
restoration or replacement of same.
§ 7-36. PARKING SPACES FOR CHARGING ELECTRIC VEHICLES.
[Added 11-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-21]
§ 7-36.1. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CHARGING STATION — A location that is fitted with charging station
equipment.
CHARGING STATION EQUIPMENT — The conductors, including
ungrounded and grounded, and the electric vehicle connectors, attachment
plugs, and all other fittings, devices, power outlets, charging status or
§ 7-35.4 SPARTA CODE § 7-36.1
1:170
apparatus installed specifically for the purpose of delivering electrical
energy from the charging station to the electric vehicle.
CHARGING STATION SPACE — A dedicated, marked parking space that is
fitted with charging station equipment and exclusively used for the charging
of electric vehicles.
ELECTRIC SCOOTER and/or ELECTRIC MOTORCYCLE — A two-wheel or
three-wheel electric vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy
stored in the vehicle's batteries.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE — A vehicle that operates, either partially or
exclusively, on electrical energy from a charging station or other electrical
energy source that is stored in the vehicle's battery for propulsion purposes.
"Electric vehicle" includes: a battery electric vehicle; a plug-in hybrid
electrical vehicle; a neighborhood electric vehicle; and electric scooters or
electric motorcycles.
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE — An electric vehicle that is a lowspeed
vehicle, built to have a top speed of 25 miles per hour and has a
maximum loaded weight of 3,000 pounds.
NON-ELECTRIC VEHICLE — A vehicle that does not meet the definition of
"electric vehicle" as provided herein.
PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLE or PHEV — An electric vehicle
that: contains an internal combustion engine and also allows power to be
delivered to drive wheels by an electric motor; charges its battery primarily
by connecting to a charging station or other electrical source not on board
the vehicle; may additionally be able to sustain a battery charge using an
on-board internal-combustion-driven generator; and has the ability to be
propelled through the use of electricity.
§ 7-36.2. Spaces designated.
The Township of Sparta has designated the following spaces:
§ 7-36.3. Limitations and restrictions.
Use of the charging station spaces shall be limited and restricted as follows:
a. Municipal Building Parking Lot: Two charging station spaces.
b. Station Park Parking Lot: Two charging station spaces.
c. Sparta Library Parking Lot: Two charging station spaces.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing a vehicle in
a stall or space that is designated as a charging station space unless the
vehicle is an electric vehicle as defined in this section and is connected
for electric charging purposes; and
b. Nonelectric vehicles are prohibited from parking in charging station
spaces; and
§ 7-36.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-36.3
1:171
§ 7-36.4. Fee.
The fee for parking and charging an electric vehicle in a charging station
space is $1.50 for the first two hours and $2.50 for each hour thereafter.
§ 7-36.5. Violations and penalties.
For each violation of this section, the violator shall be subject to such fines
and other penalties as provided in § 1-5, General Penalties, of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Sparta. Repeat offenders shall be
subject to additional fines and other penalties as provided in § 1-5 of the
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Sparta.
§ 7-37. CONTROL FOR MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 7-37.1. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Property and Board of Education Property. [1978 Code
§ 7-13; § 7-14; New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
Municipal and Board of Education Property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate, or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
c. Electric vehicles are authorized to park in spaces designated as
charging station spaces only during the time when the vehicles are
connected for electric charging purposes or up to four hours, whichever
is less. When the vehicle is no longer charging, the owner or operator of
the vehicle shall be required to remove the vehicle from the charging
station space. If the owner or operator of the vehicle allows his or her
vehicle to remain in a charging station space while the vehicle is no
longer charging, then the owner or operator shall be in violation of this
section.
a. Sparta High School Grounds.
1. Parking.
(a) Parking only in designated areas and between the painted lines
provided.
(b) Parking by Permit Only. All vehicles must be properly
identified.
2. One-Way Streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as One-Way Streets in the direction
indicated, as shown on the attached site plan30 and made a part of
this section.
30.Editor's Note: A copy of the aforementioned site plan can be found on file in the office of
the Township Clerk.
§ 7-36.3 SPARTA CODE § 7-37.1
1:172
3. Speed Limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic is as
follows:
15 m.p.h. shall be established for the entire area of the High School
Grounds.
b. Sussex County Vocational Technical School.
1. Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and
between the lines provided.
2. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
site plan filed with the Township Clerk's office, and signed with
R7-8 (Reserved Parking signal and penalty plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped
parking permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles.
3. Stop Intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as Stop Intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign
Road A and White Lake Road Road A
Road D and White Lake Road Road D
Road E and White Lake Road Road E
Road C and Road B Road C
Road F (west intersect) with Road
D
Road F
Road D and Road G Road D
Road G and Repair Drive Road G
4. Speed Limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 m.p.h.
(b) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
road are:
Road MPH Limits
Roads A, B, C, D, E,
F, G
15 Entire length
Repair Drive 15 Entire length
5. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
§ 7-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37.1
1:173
§ 7-37.2. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Private Property Open to the Public and to Which the Public is
Invited (Retail Business). [New; Ord. No. 2018-11]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following
private property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited,
the movement of traffic shall be controlled by the types of regulations
indicated. No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the
following regulations.
Property Description/Regulation
RM Sparta Donuts,
LLC 550 Lafayette
Road
The request made by RM Sparta Donuts, LLC, to
have Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of
the State of New Jersey be applied to its property
located at 550 Lafayette Road, Township of Sparta,
County of Sussex, State of New Jersey (Tax Block
12006, Lot 11) is hereby approved.
6. Reserved Parking. The parking lot has reserved parking for various
type vehicles which must be properly identified as per site plan.
7. Loading Zones. As designated in site plan.
8. Crosswalks. As indicated in site plan.
9. Stopping or Standing Prohibited. No person shall stop or stand a
vehicle any time upon any of the following described roadways or
parts of roadways:
Road MPH Limits
Roads A, B, C, D, E, F, G 15 Entire length
Repair Drive 15 Entire length
10. Left Turn Prohibition. No person shall make a left turn at the
following location:
Location
North on Road B Exit Drive of the Sussex County Vocational-
Technical School to west on Route NJ 94.
11. All signs, posts, bolts, or other necessary materials shall be
installed and paid for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by
the Police Department to ensure installations meet State and
Federal Specifications, and all signing shall conform to the current
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
12. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey
Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this section or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-37.1 SPARTA CODE § 7-37.3
1:174
§ 7-37.3. Violations of Provision of Chapter. [New]
For a violation of the provision of this section or any supplement thereto
for which no specific penalty is provided, the offender shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days, or both; except that for a violation of § 7-37, N.J.S.A. 39:4-80 et seq.,
N.J.S.A. 39:4-105 et seq., N.J.S.A. 39:123 et seq., or N.J.S.A. 39:4-140 et seq.
or any supplement thereto for which no specific penalty is provided, the
offender shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $50 or more than $200
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 7-37.4. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
All Other Private Property. [1978 Code § 7-15; New; Ord. No. 09-33]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 the regulations of
Subtitle 1 of the Title 39 are hereby made applicable to the properties listed
below.
a. Lake Mohawk Country Club.
1. Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and
between the lines provided.
2. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan31 and signed with R7-8 (Reserved Parking
sign and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons
who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Division of Motor Vehicles.
3. Through Street. The following streets or parts of streets are hereby
designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the
near right side of each street intersecting the through street,
except where Yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of
Street Limits
Winona
Parkway
Entire length: Between White Deer Plaza (CR
613) and Lafayette Road (Route. NJ 181)
West Shore
Trail
From a point 05 feet west of White Deer Plaza,
County Route. 613 to Byram Township Corporate
line
Indian Trail From a point 05 feet north of West Shore Trail to
the terminus
North Shore
Trail
From a point 05 feet west of West Shore Trail to
a point 05 feet east of Sparta Avenue. (CR 517)
31.Editor's Note: A copy of the aforementioned site plan may be found on file in the office of
the Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 838.
§ 7-37.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37.4
1:175
Name of
Street Limits
South Shore
Trail
From a point 05 feet west of West Shore Trail to
a point 05 feet east of Sparta Avenue (CR 517),
except at the intersect with Alpine Trail
Alpine Trail From a point 05 feet south of West Shore Trail to
the terminus
Valley View
Trail
From a point 05 feet west of Alpine Trail to a
point 05 feet west of Summit Road
Summit Road From the prolongation of the north curbline of
Valley View Trail to a point 05 feet west of
Alpine Trail
Whippoorwill
Lane
From a point 05 feet west of West Shore Trail to
a point 05 feet west of Shady Lane
Springbrook
Trail
From the north terminus to the south terminus,
except at intersects with Columbus Road and
Park Road
4. Stop Intersections. The intersections described are hereby
designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
South Shore Trail and Alpine
Trail (both intersects)
South Shore Trail
Valley View Trail and Summit
Road
Valley View Trail
Summit Road (south intersect)
and Summit Trail
Summit Road
Tennis Terrace and Summit
Trail
Tennis Terrace
Summit Terrace and Summit
Trail
Summit Terrace
Mountain Trail and Mountain
Terrace
Mountain Terrace
Hickory Trail and Shawnee Trail Shawnee Trail
Road A and Seneca Trail Road A
Road A and Shawnee Trail Road A
Seneca Trail and Shawnee Trail Seneca Trail
Crestwood Terrace and
Dogwood Terrace
Dogwood Terrace
§ 7-37.4 SPARTA CODE § 7-37.4
1:176
Intersection Stop Signs On
Crestwood Terrace and Laurel
Terrace
Crestwood Terrace
Bridge Road and Island Trail Bridge Road
Cedar Falls Terrace and
Hummingbird Hill
Hummingbird Hill
Whippoorwill Lane and Shady
Lane
Whippoorwill Lane
Glenside Terrace and Glenside
Trail
Glenside Terrace
Glenside Trail and Fairview
Terrace
Glenside Trail
Viburnum Terrace and Hillside
Road
Viburnum Terrace
Springbrook Trail and Park
Road (both intersects)
Springbrook Trail
Springbrook Trail and
Columbus Road
Springbrook Trail
Hillside Road and Park Road Hillside Road
Woodlawn Road (both
intersects) and Park Road
Woodlawn Road
Hilltop Trail (south intersect)
and Columbus Road
Hilltop Trail
Sunset Trail and Columbus
Road
Sunset Trail
Mill Spring Road and Lakeview
Road (both intersects)
Lakeview Road
Mill Spring Road and Sunset
Trail (both intersects)
Sunset Trail
Sunset Trail and Wallkill Road Sunset Trail
Mill Spring Road and Hilltop
Trail
Mill Spring Road
Highview Road and Hilltop Trail Highview Road
White Stone Terrace and
Wallkill Road
White Stone Terrace
5. Yield Intersections. The intersections described are hereby
designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein:
§ 7-37.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37.4
1:177
Intersection Yield Signs On
South Shore Trail and South
Shore Trail North Leg
North Leg
6. Speed Limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 m.p.h.
(b) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roads are:
Road MPH Limits
Alder Road B-4 25 Entire length
Alpine Terrace B-3 25 Entire length
Alpine Trail B-3 25 Entire length
Arrowhead
Trail
B-2 25 Entire length
Balanced
Rock Terrace
C-2 25 Entire length
Balsam
Terrace
C-3 25 Entire length
Cardinal Drive B-1 25 Entire length
Cardinal
Terrace
B-1 25 Entire length
Cedar Falls
Terrace
B-2 25 Entire length
Chickadee
Terrace
B-2 25 Entire length
Crestwood
Trail
B-3 25 Entire length
Dennis Court B-2 25 Entire length
Dogwood
Terrace
B-3 25 Entire length
Fairview
Terrace
C-1 25 Entire length
Fairway Trail B-2 25 Entire length
Fern Road C-2 25 Entire length
Ferncliff
Terrace
B-4 25 Entire length
Garden
Terrace
B-1 25 Entire length
§ 7-37.4 SPARTA CODE § 7-37.4
1:178
Road MPH Limits
Glenside
Terrace
C-1 25 Entire length
Glenside Trail B-1 25 Entire length
Glenside
South
B-1 25 Entire length
Gold View
Terrace
B-2 25 Entire length
Golf Club
Drive
B-2 25 Entire length
Grove Terrace B-1 25 Entire length
Hayes Lane C-4 25 Entire length
Heighwood
Trail
B-3 25 Entire length
Hickory Trail B-3 25 Entire length
Highview
Road
C-3 25 Entire length
Hillside Road C-2 25 Entire length
Hilltop Trail C-3 25 Entire length
Hummingbird
Hill
B-2 25 Entire length
Indian Terrace B-4 25 Entire length
Indian Trail B-4 25 Entire length
Island Trail B-3 25 Entire length
Lakeview
Road
C-4 25 Entire length
Laurel
Terrace
B-3 25 Entire length
Ledgewood
Trail
B-3 25 Entire length
Llenroc
Terrace
B-1 25 Entire length
Linwood
Terrace
B-4 25 Entire length
Log Cabin
Terrace
C-3 25 Entire length
Longview
Road
C-2 25 Entire length
§ 7-37.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37.4
1:179
Road MPH Limits
Manitou Falls
Terrace
B-2 25 Entire length
Manitou
Island
B-3 25 Entire length
Mountain
Terrace
B-2 25 Entire length
Mountain
Trail
B-2 25 Entire length
North Shore
Terrace
B-3 25 Entire length
North Shore
Trail
B-4 25 Entire length
Oak Parkway C-3 25 Entire length
Oakwood Trail B-3 25 Entire length
Oriole Terrace B-2 25 Entire length
Powder Horn
Green
B-2 25 Entire length
Pueblo
Parkway
B-2 25 Entire length
Rainbow Trail B-2 25 Entire length
Rocky Terrace B-3 25 Entire length
Sagamore
Trail
B-3 25 Entire length
Seneca Trail B-3 25 Entire length
Shady Lane B-1 25 Entire length
Shawnee Trail B-3 25 Entire length
Sleepy Lagoon
Terrace
B-1 25 Entire length
South Shore
Trail
B-3 25 Entire length
Sparrow Drive B-1 25 Entire length
Spear Terrace C-2 25 Entire length
Springbrook
Terrace
C-2 25 Entire length
Springbrook
Trail
C-4 25 Entire length
Summit Road B-2 25 Entire length
§ 7-37.4 SPARTA CODE § 7-37.4
1:180
Road MPH Limits
Summit
Terrace
B-2 25 Entire length
Summit Trail B-2 25 Entire length
Sunset Trail C-4 25 Entire length
Tamarack
Road
B-4 25 Entire length
Tennis
Terrace
B-2 25 Entire length
Twin Elm
Terrace
C-3 25 Entire length
Valley View
Trail
B-2 25 Entire length
Viburnum
Terrace
C-2 25 Entire length
Wallkill Road B-3 25 Entire length
West Shore
Trail
C-3 25 Entire length
Whippoorwill
Lane
C-5 25 Entire length
Winona
Parkway
B-3 25 Entire length
Woodbine
Lane
C-3 25 Entire length
Woodbine
Terrace
C-3 25 Entire length
Woodlawn
Road
B-4 25 Entire length
Whitestone
Terrace
25 Entire length
7. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
8. Loading Zones. The locations described are hereby designated as
loading zones. No person shall park a vehicle in the location during
the times indicated other than for the loading or unloading of goods
and materials:
§ 7-37.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37.4
1:181
Location
Clubhouse Driveway off of West Shore Trail, as per site plan
9. Time Limit Parking. No person shall park a vehicle longer than the
time limit between the hours listed on any day, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described:
Name of
Street Sides
Time
Limit Hours Location
West Short
Trail
South 2 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From a point 115 feet
east of Indian Trail to
White Deer Plaza (CR
613)
West Shore
Trail
Both 30 min. 3:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
Between White Deer
Plaza and the Spillway
10. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
West
Shore
Trail
South All Beginning at a point 275 feet west of
the westerly curbline of White Deer
Plaza (CR 613) and extending 160
feet westerly therefrom
West
Shore
Trail
South All Between west intersect and east
intersect with West Shore Trail
Extension
11. Mid-Block Crosswalk.
Name of Street Location
West Shore Trail As per site plan
12. Weight Limit.
(a) Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain streets.
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded
from the streets or parts of streets described, except for the
pick up and delivery of materials on such streets.
Road Weight Location
Alder Road B-4 4 ton Entire length
Alpine Terrace B-3 4 ton Entire length
Alpine Trail B-3 4 ton Entire length
§ 7-37.4 SPARTA CODE § 7-37.4
1:182
Road Weight Location
Arrowhead Trail B-2 4 ton Entire length
Balanced Rock
Terrace
C-2 4 ton Entire length
Balsam Terrace C-3 4 ton Entire length
Cardinal Drive B-1 4 ton Entire length
Cardinal Terrace B-1 4 ton Entire length
Cedar Falls Terrace B-2 4 ton Entire length
Chickadee Terrace B-2 4 ton Entire length
Crestwood Trail B-3 4 ton Entire length
Dennis Court B-2 4 ton Entire length
Dogwood Terrace B-3 4 ton Entire length
Fairview Terrace C-1 4 ton Entire length
Fairway Trail B-2 4 ton Entire length
Fern Rod C-2 4 ton Entire length
Ferncliff Terrace B-4 4 ton Entire length
Garden Terrace B-1 4 ton Entire length
Glenside Terrace C-1 4 ton Entire length
Glenside Trail B-1 4 ton Entire length
Glenside South B-1 4 ton Entire length
Golf View Terrace B-2 4 ton Entire length
Golf Club Drive B-2 4 ton Entire length
Grove Terrace B-1 4 ton Entire length
Hayes Lane C-4 4 ton Entire length
Heighwood Trail B-3 4 ton Entire length
Hickory Trail B-3 4 ton Entire length
Highview Road C-3 4 ton Entire length
Hillside Road C-2 4 ton Entire length
Hilltop Trail C-3 4 ton Entire length
Hummingbird Hill B-2 4 ton Entire length
Indian Terrace B-4 4 ton Entire length
Indian Trail B-4 4 ton Entire length
Island Trail B-3 4 ton Entire length
Lakeview Road C-4 4 ton Entire length
Laurel Terrace B-3 4 ton Entire length
§ 7-37.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37.4
1:183
Road Weight Location
Ledgewood Trail B-3 4 ton Entire length
Llenroc Terrace B-1 4 ton Entire length
Linwood Terrace B-4 4 ton Entire length
Log Cabin Terrace C-3 4 ton Entire length
Longview Road C-2 4 ton Entire length
Manitou Falls
Terrace
B-2 4 ton Entire length
Manitou Island B-3 4 ton Entire length
Mountain Terrace B-2 4 ton Entire length
Mountain Trail B-2 4 ton Entire length
North Shore
Terrace
B-3 4 ton Entire length
North Shore Trail B-4 4 ton Entire length
Oak Parkway C-3 4 ton Entire length
Oakwood Trail B-3 4 ton Entire length
Oriole Terrace B-2 4 ton Entire length
Powder Horn
Green
B-2 4 ton Entire length
Pueblo Parkway B-2 4 ton Entire length
Rainbow Trail B-2 4 ton Entire length
Rocky Terrace B-3 4 ton Entire length
Sagamore Trail B-3 4 ton Entire length
Seneca Trail B-3 4 ton Entire length
Shady Lane B-1 4 ton Entire length
Shawnee Trail B-3 4 ton Entire length
Sleepy Lagoon
Terrace
B-1 4 ton Entire length
South Shore Trail B-3 4 ton Entire length
Sparrow Drive B-1 4 ton Entire length
Spear Terrace C-2 4 ton Entire length
Springbrook
Terrace
C-2 4 ton Entire length
Springbrook Trail C-4 4 ton Entire length
Summit Road B-2 4 ton Entire length
Summit Terrace B-2 4 ton Entire length
§ 7-37.4 SPARTA CODE § 7-37.4
1:184
Road Weight Location
Summit Trail B-2 4 ton Entire length
Sunset Trail C-4 4 ton Entire length
Tamarack Road B-4 4 ton Entire length
Tennis Terrace B-2 4 ton Entire length
Twin Elm Terrace C-3 4 ton Entire length
Valley View Trail B-2 4 ton Entire length
Viburnum Trail C-2 4 ton Entire length
Wallkill Road B-3 4 ton Entire length
West Shore Trail C-3 4 ton Entire length
Whippoorwill Lane C-5 4 ton Entire length
Winona Parkway B-3 4 ton Entire length
Woodbine Lane C-3 4 ton Entire length
Woodbine Terrace C-3 4 ton Entire length
Woodlawn Road B-4 4 ton Entire length
Whitestone Terrace 4 ton Entire length
13. One-Way Streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated. Parking on these streets will be permitted on the sides
indicated below:
Name of
Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
West Shore
Trail Extension
Eastbound From west
intersect with
West Shore
Trail to east
intersect with
West Shore
Trail
None
Heighwood
Trail
Southbound From north
intersect with
West Shore
Trail to south
intersect with
West Shore
Trail
Both sides
Entrance to Lot
A
Northbound From West
Shore Trail to
Lot A
Between stalls
§ 7-37.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37.4
1:185
Name of
Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
Exit from Lot A Southbound From Lot A to
West Shore
Trail
Between stalls
Lot B Westbound
(counterclockwise)
From Lot A Between stalls
14. Reserved Parking Lot. Lot D, as per site plan.32
15. No Parking Any Time. No person shall park a vehicle at any time
upon any streets or parts thereof described.
Name of
Street Sides Location
West Shore
Trail
North From the south curbline of White Deer
Plaza to a point 128 feet westerly
therefrom
Alpine Trail Both Beginning at a point 1,050 feet south of
Hummingbird Hill to the terminus
Valley View
Trail
Both From a point 2,200 feet south of Partride
Lane to Alpine Trail
Winona
Parkway
Both Entire length
East Shore
Trail
Both From beginning to Wallkill Road
Wallkill
Road
Both From East Shore Trail to Whitestone
Terrace
Sparta
Junction
Both Entire length
16. That all signs, posts, or other necessary materials be installed and
paid for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police
Department to ensure installations meet State and Federal
Specifications, and all signing shall conform to the current Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
17. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey
Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this section or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than
$200 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
b. 18 Sparta Avenue, LLC Parking Lot.
32.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk attached to Ordinance No. 838.
§ 7-37.4 SPARTA CODE § 7-37.4
1:186
§ 7-37.5. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[New]
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. The owner
shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and installation, maintain such
signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the
Township. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and restoration or
replacement of same.
Chapter 8
(RESERVED)
Chapter 9
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 9-1. DEFINITIONS. [1978 Code § 25-2; Ord. No. 689 § 1]
DIRECTOR — Shall mean the Director of Parks & Recreation of the
Township of Sparta.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean all on-road and off-road vehicles including
but not limited to cars, trucks, vans, motorcycles, mini-bikes, mopeds, go-
1. Parking.
(a) All motor vehicles must park in designated areas in between
the lines provided.
(b) No person shall park a motor vehicle for more than two hours
in the parking lots located at Block 39.01, Lots 11, 12 and 15.
The only exception that 18 Sparta Avenue, LLC may provide up
to six parking passes to its tenants and/or employees to allow
parking for more than two hours provided that such parking
passes be displayed in the vehicle.
2. Signs. All signs, posts or other materials shall be installed in
accordance with the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, to the extent applicable, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and
N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27 as same may be applicable.
3. Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New
Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this
ordinance or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of
not less than $50 nor more than $250 or imprisonment and/or
community service for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-37.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1
1:187
carts, dune buggies, and dirt bikes, and any other similar motor vehicles
of the type that is normally used on land for recreation, entertainment or
pleasure.
RECREATION AREA — Shall mean any property owned or leased by the
Township which is dedicated for open space and recreation purposes and
which is open to the public either without charge or on a fee basis. The
term includes, but is not limited to playgrounds, parks, ballfields, swimming
areas, beaches, natural education facilities, and any paths, roadways,
sidewalks, and parking areas therein or adjacent thereto.
§ 9-2. APPLICABILITY. [1978 Code § 25-3; Ord. No. 689 § 1]
The rules and regulations promulgated herein shall apply to public parks,
playgrounds and recreational areas, and where applicable to other lands
owned or controlled by the Township and devoted to public recreational use
or purpose.
§ 9-3. HOURS OF OPERATION. [1978 Code § 25-4.1; Ord. No. 689
§ 2]
Except as otherwise posted, all recreation areas shall open at sunrise and
shall close 1/2 hour after sunset. No person shall enter upon or remain
within a recreation area except during hours of operation.
§ 9-4. RESERVED USE OF FACILITIES. [1978 Code § 25-4.2, 3; Ord.
No. 689 § 2]
§ 9-5. FEES. [1978 Code § 25-6; Ord. No. 689 § 4]
All recreation areas shall be open to the general public unless specifically
restricted by action of the Township Council. The Township Council shall
have the power to establish fees for use of all facilities. For those facilities
open to the general public, the Township Council shall have the power to
establish higher fees for nonresidents than for residents.
§ 9-6. IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT. [1978 Code § 25-4,
25-9; Ord. No. 689 § 2,9]
a. Master schedule. The Director of Parks & Recreation shall maintain a
master schedule for the reserved use of all recreation facilities.
b. Applications for Reserving Facilities. Applications for reserved use of
facilities may be obtained at the office of the Director of Parks &
Recreation or other designated locations. Applications shall be
completed in full and returned at such times as may be designated by
established rules and regulations.
a. The Director of Parks & Recreation shall have the power to promulgate
and publish rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter governing activities and programs sponsored by the
§ 9-1 SPARTA CODE § 9-6
1:188
§ 9-7. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [1978 Code § 25-7.1, 7.2, 25-8;
Ord. No. 689 § 5, 6, 7]
§ 9-8. CONDUCT IN PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS. [Ord. No.
2018-06 § 2; 1978 Code § 25-5; Ord. No. 689 § 3; New; Ord. No.
2018-06]
No person or persons in a public park or recreation area shall:
Department of Parks & Recreation and for the safety and well being of
the general public, subject to review by the Township Manager.
b. It shall be the duty of the Township Manager through the Chief of Police
and Recreation Director to enforce the provisions of this chapter. It
shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the directive of any person
supervising any public park or recreation area or to disobey the
direction of any sign, or to deface, destroy, or remove any such sign.
a. Ejection from Area. The Director, any park attendant, and any Police
Officer shall have the authority to eject from any recreation area, any
person acting in violation of this chapter.
b. Seizure and Confiscation of Property. The Director, any park attendant,
and any Police Officer shall have the authority to seize and confiscate
any property, thing, or device in a recreation area if the possession or
use of such property, thing, or device is prohibited.
c. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable to
the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. The Municipal Court shall
have the power to ban a violator from entering upon or using the
recreation area until the further order of the court, upon petition, and
for good cause shown.
a. Ride or drive any motor vehicle except on established roads and ways,
and then only at posted speeds.
b. Enter upon any portions of the grounds in disregard of signs or posted
notices forbidding such entry.
c. Disturb or interfere with any improvements made or being made in or
about the parks or drives.
d. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area.
e. Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking
areas, or elsewhere in the park area.
f. Park any type of wheeled vehicle in a parking area designated for the
use of handicapped persons unless such vehicle is identified with a
special state license plate issued to handicapped persons.
g. Ride or drive any off-road vehicle or all-terrain vehicle (ATV), mini-bike
or dirt bike.
§ 9-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-8
1:189
h. Ride, hitch or walk horses except with written consent of the
Department of Parks & Recreation.
i. Allow any animals in any park or recreational area unless specifically
designated by the Director.
j. Kill, injure or disturb any animal or bird, or have in his possession the
young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or
bird; or damage any grass, trees, shrubs, plants, soil, rocks, sand,
buildings, sign structure, or equipment upon any premise under the
jurisdiction of the Township.
k. Carry or use firearms or explosives, fireworks, air rifles, bows and
arrows, sling shots or any weapon. At the discretion of the Mayor and
Council, a permit for a properly supervised fireworks display, in
accordance with all applicable State statutes, may be issued as set forth
in Section 4-18 and the Township Code.
l. Scatter litter or any form of waste material, or break, throw, or place
any glass on lawns, walks, roads, benches, tables, wooded, or other
areas on any park property.
m. Have glass bottles or containers of any type without written permission
from the Department of Parks & Recreation.
n. Use park or recreational area trash receptacles for personal refuse
removal or dumping of materials other than those generated from
picnic use at the time of that particular visit.
o. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the water
of any pond, lake, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any
park or tributary stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such water
any substance matter, or things, liquid or solid, which will or may result
in the pollution of such waters.
p. Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any
park except in such waters and such places as are provided therefore
and in compliance with such regulations and hours as are hereinafter
adopted.
q. Occupy any grounds for picnic parties, assemblages, business or
entertainment except those designated by the Department of Parks &
Recreation.
r. Have alcoholic beverages in one's possession except by obtaining a
permit from the Township Police, nor shall any person in the park be
under the influence of intoxicating beverages at any time.
s. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
t. Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas under regulations
as may be designated. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter
§ 9-8 SPARTA CODE § 9-8
1:190
lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco, paper, or other
flammable material within any park or on any highways, roads, or
streets abutting or contiguous thereto.
u. Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If
no such trash receptacles are available, then trash shall be carried
away from the park areas by the picnicker to be properly disposed of
elsewhere.
v. No person shall launch, land, use or operate any boat, canoe, raft, or
other water craft in or on any waters within or adjacent to any open
space and recreation area unless such body of water shall have been
designated by the Director for such purpose. Such activity shall be in
accordance with regulations as have been or may hereafter be adopted.
w. No person shall fish in any waters whether by the use of a hook and line,
net, trap, or other device except in waters designated by the Director
for that use and under such regulations and restrictions as have been or
may hereafter be adopted.
x. No person in any open space and recreation area shall engage in
boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting, or indecent language or
engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to cause a breach
of public peace.
y. Throw, cast, catch, kick, fly or strike any baseball, golf ball, football,
basketball, model airplane or other object except in designated and
approved places.
z. Loiter during any part of the period between 1/2 hour after sunset and
1/2 hour before sunrise, or permit a vehicle to remain standing for a
longer period than five minutes except when its occupants are
attending a gathering or function held under a permit.
aa. Coast with hand sleds, bob sleds, skis, carts, or other vehicles on
wheels or runners except in those places designated.
bb. Sell, vend, or give away in or upon any of the parks or drives, any
articles of merchandise whatever without the express written
permission of the Director of Parks & Recreation Department.
cc. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private
without the express written permission of the Director of Parks &
Recreation Department.
dd. Gamble or participate or abet any game of chance in such areas and
under such regulations as may be designated by the Director.
ee. Paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or
inscription whatever, nor shall any sign whatever be placed on
highways or roads adjacent to the park, except in areas designated.
§ 9-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-9
1:191
§ 9-9. SPARTA GLEN. [1978 Code § 3-5.1; New]
The following additional regulations shall apply to the Sparta Glen.
§ 9-10. STATION PARK, LIBRARY MINI-PARK, UNGERMAN FIELD.
[New]
The following additional regulations shall apply to Station Park, the Library
Mini-Park and Ungerman Field.
a. The Glen shall be open and maintained from May 1 through October 15
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. unless otherwise posted.
After October 15 the Glen will remain open, weather permitting.
b. The speed limit within the Glen shall be 15 miles per hour.
c. Motorcycles and horses are prohibited within the Glen.
d. No person in the Glen shall dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stone,
trees, shrubs, plants, or other wood materials, or make any excavation
by tool, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency.
e. No person in the Glen shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove
any tree or plants, or injure the bark, pick flowers or seeds of any tree
or plant, dig in, or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way
injure the natural beauty or usefulness of the area.
f. Dogs may be walked in the Glen but will not be allowed to run at large.
Any dog shall be deemed to be running at large unless the owner of the
dog carries, or leads the dog, in designated areas, by a strap or rope not
exceeding six feet in length, or unless such owner keeps such dog in an
automobile or vehicle, or causes such dog to be attached to such
automobile or other vehicle by a chain, rope or strap not exceeding six
feet in length.
g. Overnight camping is prohibited unless a permit is obtained through
the Parks & Recreation Department and a copy brought to the Police
Department.
h. Hunting is prohibited in the Glen.
a. Reservation of picnic facilities are limited to specified areas as
designated on the permit.
b. A "carry in, carry out" policy for groups shall be enforced.
c. Athletic field lights will remain on until 10:30 p.m. New innings may not
be started after 10:00 p.m.
d. No field maintenance shall be performed by anyone other than the
Parks Department staff or those individuals designated by the Director.
§ 9-9 SPARTA CODE § 9-11
1:192
§ 9-11. TYLER PARK AND EDISON PARK. [New]
The following additional regulations shall apply to Tyler Park and Edison
Park.
§ 9-12. WHITE LAKE BEACH CLUB. [New]
The following additional regulations shall apply to the White Lake Beach
Club.
§ 9-13. SKATE PARK. [Ord. No. 04-04 § 1]
No person shall enter or utilize the Skate Park except in accordance with
the following rules and regulations:
a. Tennis courts shall be used for the express purpose of playing tennis.
b. No person shall enter upon any court surface unless such person is
wearing tennis shoes or sneakers.
c. No person shall do any act which may cause damage to the surface,
nets, fencing or any other part of the tennis courts or surrounding
property.
d. Both parks enforce a "carry in, carry out" policy in regards to garbage.
a. Participation in the White Lake Beach Club is by membership only
unless otherwise stated by the Parks & Recreation Department.
b. A Waterfront Director shall be employed by the Parks & Recreation
Department for the purpose of enforcing the day to day operations of
the facility.
c. All members must abide by the rules and regulations posted at the site
as established by the Parks & Recreation Department and the New
Jersey Department of Health State Sanitary Code for Public
Recreational Bathing.
d. This facility enforces a "carry in, carry out" policy in regards to
garbage.
e. Parking is in designated areas only.
a. All persons entering the Skate Park are deemed to have acknowledged
that the Skate Park is an unsupervised activity site designed for
skateboarding and inline skating only, and that all use of the Skate Park
is at the risk of the user.
b. Skateboarding is prohibited outside of the enclosed Skate Park.
c. All persons entering the Skate Park are deemed to have agreed to
indemnify, defend and save harmless the Township of Sparta, its
officers, employees, agents and volunteers for, from and against
§ 9-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-13
1:193
accident, injury, including death, and/or loss of property or damage
thereto sustained as result of using the Skate Park.
d. All persons entering the Skate Park are deemed to have knowledge that
the Township of Sparta is not responsible for lost or stolen property.
e. All persons entering the Skate Park are required to use personal
protective equipment (including, but not limited to, helmet, elbow and
knee pads) at all times during use of the Skate Park.
f. Use of any and all motorized and non-motorized vehicles within the
Skate Park, including (without limitation) bicycles, tricycles, unicycles
and scooters, is strictly prohibited. Use of the Skate Park is limited to
non-motorized skateboard and inline skates.
g. No food, beverages or glass containers are permitted within the Skate
Park (with the sole exception of water contained in plastic water
bottles).
h. No alcoholic beverages, tobacco in any form, or illegal drugs are
permitted within the Skate Park.
i. No pets are permitted within the Skate Park.
j. No one may enter or use the Skate Park during the time it is closed due
to rain, snow or the occurrence of an event conducted under a permit
issued by the Recreation Commission or Coordinator unless the person
is participating in said event.
k. No one may enter or use the Skate Park during the time that it is closed
for routine maintenance.
l. The Skate Park shall be closed from 1/2 hour after sunset or 8:00 p.m.,
whichever is earlier, until 9:00 a.m. the following day. No one shall
enter the Skate Park during the aforesaid hours.
m. No ramps, obstacles or other devices not provided by the Township
(including, but without limitation, benches and tables) may be taken
into or used within the Skate Park.
n. Amplified music is not permitted within the Skate Park without the
express approval of the Recreation Commission or Coordinator. Other
music is permitted, provided that the volume is maintained at a
reasonable level and is not audible at a distance of 50 feet from the
sound device.
o. Express approval by the Recreation Commission or coordinator is
required for any and all competitive and demonstration events at the
Skate Park.
p. All persons using the Skate Park shall adhere to all other rules and
regulations governing Township field/parks and property set forth in
this chapter.
§ 9-13 SPARTA CODE § 9-13
1:194
Chapter 10
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 10-1. PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL.33
§ 10-1.1. Purpose.
It is the policy of the Township of Sparta to treat employees and prospective
employees in a manner consistent with all applicable employment laws
and regulations including, but not limited to Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964, as amended by the Equal Opportunity Act of 1972, the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act, the Equal Pay for Equal Work Act, the
Fair Labor Standards Act, the New Jersey Law Against Discrimination, the
Americans with Disabilities Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act, the
Conscientious Employee Protection Act, the Public Employee Occupational
Safety and Health Act, (the New Jersey Civil Service Act,) (the New Jersey
Attorney General's guidelines with respect to Police Department personnel
matters,) The New Jersey Workers Compensation Act, the Federal
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) and the Open
Public Meeting Act.
The Township of Sparta has determined that there is a need for personnel
policies and procedures to ensure that employees and prospective
employees are treated in a manner consistent with these laws and
regulations.
§ 10-1.2. Manual Adopted. [Ord. No. 12-20]
The Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual is hereby adopted.
§ 10-1.3. Applicability of Policies and Procedures. [Ord. No. 12-20]
These personnel policies and procedures shall apply to all Sparta Township
officials, appointees, employees, volunteers and independent contractors.
In the event there is a conflict between these rules and any collective
bargaining agreement, personnel services contract or Federal or State law,
the terms and conditions of that contract or law shall prevail. In all other
cases, these policies and procedures shall prevail.
§ 10-1.4. Amendment. [Ord. No. 12-20]
This manual is intended to provide guidelines covering public service by
Sparta Township employees and is not a contract. The provisions of this
q. Any person violating any rule or regulation set forth in this section shall
be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, General
Penalties of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Sparta.
33.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ord. of 4/15/77; 12/97; Ord. No. 10-22.
§ 9-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.4
1:195
manual may be amended and supplemented from time to time without
notice and at the sole discretion of the Township Council of the Township of
Sparta.
§ 10-1.5. Employment at Will. [Ord. No. 12-20]
To the maximum extent permitted by law, employment practices for Sparta
Township shall operate under the legal doctrine known as "employment at
will."
Chapter 11
HEALTH REGULATIONS
Editor's Note: Refer to Chapter 3, Section 3-1 for regulations
concerning Noise and Section 3-2 for Litter regulations.
§ 11-1. PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE CODE.
§ 11-1.1. Title. [1978 Code § 17-1.1]
This section shall be known as and may be cited as the "Public Health
Nuisance Regulations."
§ 11-1.2. Definitions. [1978 Code § 17-1.2]
As used in this section:
ENFORCING OFFICIALS — Shall mean and include the sanitarian,
Township Manager and other officials of the Township authorized by the
Township Council.
§ 11-1.3. Nuisances Defined. [1978 Code § 17-1.3]
The following matters, things, conditions or acts and each of them are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the health of the
inhabitants of this Township:
a. Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become detrimental
or a menace to the health of the inhabitants of this Township.
b. Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become an
annoyance, or interfere with the comfort or general well-being of the
inhabitants of this Township.
c. Pollution, or existence of a condition or conditions which cause or
threaten pollution, of any waters in this Township in such manner as to
cause or threaten injury to any of the inhabitants of this Township
either in their health, comfort or property.
d. The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any
entrance to the open air, or from any fire into the open air of such
quantities of smoke, fly, ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists, or gases as to
§ 10-1.4 SPARTA CODE § 11-1.3
1:196
§ 11-1.4. Nuisances Prohibited. [1978 Code § 17-1.4]
No person shall commit, maintain or allow any nuisance, as declared in
subsection 11-1.3.
§ 11-1.5. Prohibited Acts. [1978 Code § 17-1.5]
No person shall:
§ 11-1.6. Notice to Abate Nuisance. [1978 Code § 17-1.6]
Whenever a nuisance as described by this section is found on any privately
owned property, notice in writing shall be given to the owner thereof to
remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein
but not less than five days from the date of service thereof. If the owner
cause injury, detriment, or annoyance to the inhabitants of this
Township or endanger their comfort, repose, health or safety.
e. The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito larvae breed or exist.
f. The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
animal or vegetable matter which may attract flies and to which flies
may have access, or in which fly larvae or pupae breed or exist.
g. Depositing, accumulating, or maintaining any matter or thing which
serves as food for insects or rodents and to which they may have access
or which serves or constitutes a breeding place or harborage for insects
or rodents in or on any land, premises, building or other place.
a. Throw, dump, cast or deposit paper, paper products, bottles, tin cans,
containers, automobile parts, junk, usable machines or parts of
machines, metal, trash, garbage, debris, or other waste materials upon
open fields, woods or private property, or upon or along any private or
public street, highway or other private or public place, provided that
this section shall not be construed to prohibit the placing of such
materials in suitable containers for prompt removal to the authorized
sanitary landfill site.
b. Keep, store, abandon, or leave upon any parcel of private or public land,
street, road, right-of-way, alley-way or parkway in the Township any
motor vehicle not currently used for transportation and not being
licensed for the current year, or which cannot be readily operated under
its own power; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall
be determined to prohibit the placing, keeping or storing of any such
motor vehicle in a garage or other building in the Township.
c. Permit land to be covered with or contain refuse or debris resulting
from construction activities or the demolishing of a building which
refuse or debris has remained on the land for more than 30 days after
the completion of the construction activities or the demolition work.
§ 11-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1.6
1:197
resides out of the State or cannot be so notified speedily, such notice shall
be left at the premises with any tenant or occupant thereof or posted on
the premises and mailed by certified mail to the address of such owner as
shown by the tax records of the Township. Such action shall be considered
as proper notification to the owner, tenant and occupant of the premises.
§ 11-1.7. Failure to Comply. [1978 Code § 17-1.7]
If the owner, or the occupant of such premises shall fail to comply with such
notice within the time specified therein the enforcing officials may remove
or abate such nuisance in a summary manner using such means as the
enforcing officials deem proper.
§ 11-1.8. Recovery of Costs of Abatement or Removal. [1978 Code
§ 17-1.8]
The Township may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred by
it in the removal or abatement of any nuisance pursuant to the foregoing
sections from any person who shall have caused or allowed such nuisance
to exist including any owner, tenant or occupant of the premises who, after
notice as herein provided, shall fail to remove and abate the nuisance within
the time specified in such notice.
§ 11-1.9. Penalty.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
section including notices to abate nuisances, shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. The penalty set
forth herein shall not be in lieu of proceedings to remove or abate the
nuisance as set forth in subsection 11-1.7 et seq.
§ 11-2. RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT CODE.
§ 11-2.1. Title. [1978 Code § 17-2.1; Ord. No. 873]
This section shall be known and may be cited as "The Retail Food
Establishment Regulation of the Township of Sparta."
§ 11-2.2. Definitions. [1978 Code § 17-2.2; Ord. No. 873]
As used in this section:
CHAPTER XII — As referred to in this section shall be an abbreviated term
referring to Chapter XII of the State Sanitary Code, Sanitation in Retail
Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines.
CHAPTER XII, SANITATION IN RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES — Shall mean and refer to
that certain code approved by the State Department of Health (effective
date January 1, 1992); for adoption by reference in accordance with law,
being a code regulating retail food handling establishments, and food and
§ 11-1.6 SPARTA CODE § 11-2.2
1:198
beverage vending machines and providing for the inspection of such
establishments and vending machines.
§ 11-2.3. Adoption of Chapter XII, Sanitation in Retail Food
Establishments and Food and Beverage and Vending Machines.
[1978 Code § 17-2.3; Ord. No. 873]
§ 11-2.4. Retail Food Establishments; License Required. [1978 Code
§ 17-2.4; Ord. No. 873]
a. Pursuant to and in accordance with the Public Health and Sanitation
Codes Adoption by Reference Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6) there
is hereby established and adopted as the Retail Food Handling
Establishment Code of the Township the whole of Chapter XII of the
State Sanitary Code. A printed copy of the code is annexed to and
incorporated by reference in the ordinance passed on adopting the
code.
b. Chapter XII of the State Sanitary Code is hereby incorporated in this
section by reference and made a part hereof as fully as though it had
been set forth at length herein.
c. In accordance with law, 10 copies of the Chapter XII of the State
Sanitary Code have been placed on file in the office of the Township
Clerk and in the office of the Health Department and shall remain on
file in these offices for the use and examination of the public so long as
this section shall remain in effect.
a. No person shall conduct or operate a retail food establishment within
the Township unless a license to operate same shall have been issued by
the Department of Health. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in such establishment. Such license shall not be transferable.
b. If an itinerant retail food establishment is the holder of a current
certificate, permit or license to conduct or operate a retail food
establishment issued by the Board of Health or Department of Health of
another jurisdiction of this State, the approval thereof by the Township
Department of Health, hereinafter referred to as an "approval license,"
shall constitute the license to operate and conduct same within the
meaning of paragraph a of this subsection. All other provisions of this
subsection shall be applicable to such itinerant retail food
establishment.
c. There shall be a fee as established in subsection 11-2.7(a) charged for a
license or license approval issued pursuant to this section. Retail Food
Establishment Licenses, and associated fees are classified as follows:
CLASS I — Food and Drink. Any retail or wholesale food establishment
in which food or drink are prepared for sale or service on or off the
premises, and any other retail eating or drinking establishment or
operation where food is served, handled or provided for the public, with
§ 11-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-2.4
1:199
§ 11-2.5. Vehicles Distributing or Selling Milk or Cream; License
Required. [1978 Code § 17-2.5; Ord. No. 873]
§ 11-2.6. Permit - License Required to Operate a Vending Machine;
Posting; License Not Transferable. [1978 Code § 17-2.6; Ord. No.
873]
It shall be unlawful for any person whether as principal or agent, clerk or
employee, either for himself or any other person, or for any body corporate,
or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise to:
or without charge. Establishments which offer individually wrapped
food or drink items for sale which are less than 50% of all items sold
are indicated as pre-packaged. Other classifications of food and drink
establishments are based upon seating and smaller nonseating (less
than 12,000 square feet).
CLASS II — Supermarket. Any nonseating food establishment which is
12,000 square feet or more.
CLASS III — School. Any retail food establishment which serves an
education facility.
CLASS IV — Mobile Food and Drink. Any movable restaurant, truck,
van, trailer, cart, bicycle, or other movable unit including hand-carried
portable containers in or on which food or beverage is transported,
stored, or prepared for retail sale or given away at temporary locations.
CLASS V — Temporary Retail Food Establishment. Any retail food
establishment which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period
of time not to exceed five days in connection with a fair, carnival, circus,
public exhibition, or similar transitory gathering, including church
suppers, picnics or similar organizational meetings, mobile retail food
establishments, as well as agricultural markets.
a. No person shall operate a vehicle used in the distribution or sale of milk
or cream within the Township unless a license to operate same shall
have been issued by the Department of Health for the vehicle.
b. There shall be charged a fee as established in subsection 11-2.7(b) for
such license or approval of an existing license to operate a vehicle used
in the distribution or sale of milk or cream in the Township.
a. Engage in the operation of one or more machines or devices offered for
public use which, upon insertion of a coin, or token, or by other means,
dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk, or package,
without the necessity of replenishing the devices between each vending
operation, without first having applied to and procured a permit from
the Department of Health, or without complying with any and all of the
provisions of Chapter XII of the State Sanitary Code. Such permit shall
not be transferable.
§ 11-2.4 SPARTA CODE § 11-2.6
1:200
§ 11-2.7. License Fees. [1978 Code § 8-8; Ord. No. 638; Ord. No.
658; Ord. No. 873; Ord. No. 03-08 § 1; Ord. No. 07-14 § VIII; Ord.
No. 2016-19 § 2]
b. Maintain or permit to be maintained on or in any location in this
Township, one or more machines or devices offered for public use
which, upon insertion of a coin, coins or token, or by other means
dispenses unit servings of food or beverages, either in bulk or package,
without the necessity of replenishing the device from the Department of
Health or without complying with any and all of the provisions of
Chapter XII. Such license shall not be transferable.
c. There shall be a fee as established in subsection 11-2.7 charged for a
license or permit pursuant to this section.
a. Retail food establishment license fee annually:
CLASS I
Prepackaged only $40
Nonseating $65
1-50 seats $85
51-100 seats $120
101+ seats $140
CLASS II
Supermarkets (12,000 square feet) $200
CLASS III
Schools $85
CLASS IV
Mobile food and drink $75
CLASS V
Temporary retail food establishments $30
Temporary retail food establishments for
nonprofit organizations
$15
b. Milk or cream, distribution or sale, by motor vehicle, license fee,
annually $10.
c. There shall be a fee of $25 for each permit issued pursuant to this
section, per year. However, if the establishment sells only pre-packaged
foods such as candy, nuts, fruitcakes and like items, the fee shall be $20
for foods not contained in indoor vending devices. The fee for indoor
vending machines shall be $10 per machine, with the exception of gum
machines and $0.01 to $0.05 candy machines for which a fee of $2 per
machine shall be charged.
§ 11-2.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-2.7
1:201
§ 11-2.8. Term of License - Permit. [1978 Code § 17-2.7; Ord. No.
873]
Any license or permit issued or approved under this section shall expire
annually on June 30 of each year. Application for renewal thereof shall be
submitted together with the required fee prior to June 1 of each year.
§ 11-2.9. Suspension or Revocation. [1978 Code § 17-2.8; Ord. No.
873]
Any license, license approval or permit issued under this section may be
suspended or revoked for a violation by the holder thereof of any provision
of this section, including Chapter XII of the State Sanitary Code; after an
opportunity for a hearing; by the Department of Health or its authorized
representative.
§ 11-3. COPIES OF CERTIFICATES. [Ord. No. 03-08 § 2; Ord. No.
07-14 § 8; Ord. No. 13-14 § 3]
§ 11-4. FEEDING OF WILDLIFE ON TOWNSHIP PROPERTY.
§ 11-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 5-25]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by Sparta
Township so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for failure to comply.
§ 11-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 05-25]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
d. Farmer's Market Licenses shall be issued for the period January 1 to
December 31 of each year. There shall be a fee of $75 for each Farmer's
Market License issued per calendar year or any portion of a year. The
payment is due on or before March 1 of each year and in the event the
payment is not received by March 1 the applicant shall be subject to a
$25 late fee. Subsection 11-2.8 does not apply to the Farmer's Market
License.
a. Certified copies of births, marriage, civil unions and domestic
partnerships: $10.
b. Certified copies of death certificates: $25/first copy and $2 for each
thereafter.
§ 11-2.7 SPARTA CODE § 11-4.2
1:202
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
§ 11-4.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 05-25]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any property owned or
operated by Sparta Township, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for
example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 11-4.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 05-25]
§ 11-4.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 05-25]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 11-5. FEEDING OF MIGRATORY WATERFOWL.
§ 11-5.1. Purpose. [1978 Code § 17-10.1; Ord. No. 892]
It has been determined that the presence of large numbers of migratory
waterfowl on and around ponds and lakes in the Township causes a public
health nuisance in and around said ponds and lakes, including the
surrounding beaches and properties, which is detrimental to the health and
general welfare of the public. The purpose of this section is to prevent
such conduct that may attract such migratory waterfowl to properties in the
Township.
§ 11-5.2. Definitions. [1978 Code § 17-10.2; Ord. No. 892]
As used in this section:
MIGRATORY WATERFOWL — Shall include those non-domesticated species
of birds commonly known as geese, brant, puddle, diving and sea ducks and
any other waterfowl that generally follow a seasonal migration pattern.
a. This section shall be enforced by the Registered Environmental Health
Specialist of the Sparta Township Health Department.
b. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 11-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-5.3
1:203
§ 11-5.3. Feeding of Migratory Waterfowl Prohibited. [1978 Code
§ 17-10.3; Ord. No. 892]
No person shall systematically feed, cause to be fed or provide a food for
migratory waterfowl in the Township on lands either publicly or privately
owned.
§ 11-5.4. Exceptions. [1978 Code § 17-10.4; Ord. No. 892]
This section shall not be construed to prohibit humane acts towards
migratory waterfowl in individual cases, such as the temporary nurturing of
a wounded bird on one's own premises.
§ 11-5.5. Enforcement. [1978 Code § 17-10.5; Ord. No. 892]
The Police Department and members of the Department of Health are
hereby authorized and directed to enforce this section.
§ 11-5.6. Violations and Penalties. [1978 Code § 17-10.6; Ord. No.
892; New]
Any person found to be violating any provisions of this section shall be first
given a written warning, which warning shall be filed with the Township.
Any subsequent violations of this section shall be punishable, upon
conviction thereof, by the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 11-6. PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING.
§ 11-6.1. Applicability. [1978 Code § 15-2.1]
This section shall not be deemed to apply to or include private swimming
pools as defined in Chapter XII, subsection 12-3.1.
§ 11-6.2. Definitions. [1978 Code § 15-2.2]
As used in this section, definitions herein shall be as set forth in the New
Jersey State Sanitary Code, Chapter IX, Public Recreational Bathing.
§ 11-6.3. Implementation of New Jersey State Sanitary Code,
Chapter IX, Public Recreational Bathing. [1978 Code § 15-2.3]
Pursuant to and in accordance with law, the licensing procedures for public
recreational bathing places shall be as set forth herein pursuant to the
authority set forth in the New Jersey State Sanitary Code, Chapter IX,
Public Recreational Bathing.
§ 11-6.4. Permits and Licenses Required. [1978 Code § 15-2.4]
No persons shall locate and construct, alter or operate, a public recreational
bathing place until the permits or licenses therefor, as required by the New
§ 11-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 11-6.4
1:204
Jersey State Sanitary Code, Chapter IX, Public Recreational Bathing, shall
have been issued by the Department of Health of the Township of Sparta.
§ 11-6.5. Permit and License Fees. [1978 Code § 8-11; Ord. No.
15-2.5; Ord. No. 03-08 § 3]
The following fees are hereby established:
§ 11-6.6. Expiration; License Renewals. [1978 Code § 15-2.6]
§ 11-6.7. Denial, Suspension or Revocation. [1978 Code § 15-2.7]
A permit or license required under this section may be denied or suspended
or revoked by the Health Officer of the Township, for failure to comply with
any provision of this section, including the New Jersey State Sanitary Code,
Chapter IX, Public Recreational Bathing.
§ 11-7. ILLICIT CONNECTIONS TO THE MUNICIPAL SEPARATE
STORM SEWER SYSTEM. [Ord. No. 05-28]
a. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct a swimming pool,
the fee shall be as established in Chapter 12, subsection 12-1-3a2(h).
b. For the issuance of a permit to alter a swimming pool, the fee shall be as
established in Chapter 12, Section 12-1.3, Construction Permits.
c. For the issuance of an annual license to operate a public recreational
bathing place, the fee shall be as follows:
1. Public bathing place: $225.
2. Hot tub or spa: $40.
3. Swimming pool: $65.
4. Wading pool: $30.
a. Permits to locate and construct or alter a public recreational bathing
place shall expire nine months after issuance unless extended by the
issuing authority for cause.
b. Licenses issued for the operation of public recreational bathing places
shall expire on May 1st following the date of issuance.
c. Applications for license renewals, together with the required license
fee, shall be submitted prior to operation in each new license year.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit illicit connections to
the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the
Township of Sparta, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 11-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-7.1
1:205
§ 11-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 05-28]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Sparta, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of
Sparta or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from
§ 11-7.1 SPARTA CODE § 11-7.1
1:206
the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by product, or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is
not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling
water.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 11-7.2. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 05-28]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Township of Sparta any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 11-7.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 05-28; Ord. No. 07-14 § VIII]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department or Registered
Environmental Health Specialist.
§ 11-7.4. Penalties. [Ord. No. 05-28]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.
§ 11-8. AIR POLLUTION CONTROL.
§ 11-8.1. Title and Policy. [1978 Code § 17-8.1; Ord. No. 721 § 1]
§ 11-8.2. Definitions. [1978 Code § 17-8.2; Ord. No. 721 § 2]
As used in this section:
AIR CONTAMINANT — Shall mean solid particles, liquid particles, vapors
or gases which are discharged into the outdoor atmosphere.
AIR POLLUTION — Shall mean the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of
one or more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are, or tend
a. Title. This section shall be known and cited as the Air Pollution Control
Regulations of the Township of Sparta.
b. Findings and Policy. It is hereby declared that air pollution is a menace
to the health, welfare and comfort of the residents of the Township and
a cause of substantial damage to property. For the purpose of
preventing and reducing atmospheric pollution, it is hereby declared to
be the policy of the Township to minimize air pollution as herein defined
and to establish standards governing the installation, maintenance and
operation of equipment and appurtenances relating to combustion,
which is a source or potential source of air pollution.
§ 11-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8.2
1:207
to be injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life or property,
or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property.
ASBESTOS — Shall mean actinolite, amosite, anthophyllite, chrysotile,
crocidolite, tremolite.
DIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Shall mean equipment in which heat from
the combustion of fuel is transferred to a substance being heated so that the
latter is contacted by the products of combustion and may contribute to the
total effluent.
DIRECTOR OF AIR POLLUTION CONTROL OR DIRECTOR — Shall mean
the person or persons who are authorized by this section to exercise the
powers prescribed by this section.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Shall mean those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FRIABLE MATERIAL — Shall mean any material which can be crumbled,
pulverized, or reduced to powder by hand pressure.
FUEL — Shall mean solid, liquid or gaseous materials used to produce
useful heat by burning.
GARBAGE — Shall mean waste animal or vegetable matter from houses,
kitchens, restaurants, hotels, produce markets or any other source or food
of any kind to be thrown away.
INCINERATOR — Shall mean any device, apparatus, equipment or
structure used for destroying, reducing, or salvaging by fire any material
or substance including but not limited to refuse, rubbish, garbage, trade
waste, debris or scrap; or a facility for cremating human or animal remains.
INDIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Shall mean equipment in which heat
from the combustion of fuel is transferred by conduction through a heat
conducting material to a substance being heated, so that the latter is not
contacted by and adds nothing to the products of combustion.
INTERNAL CROSS-SECTIONAL DIMENSION — Shall mean any maximum
linear perpendicular distance from an inside wall of a stack or chimney to
the inside of an opposite wall, such as the diameter of a circular crosssection
or the length or width of a rectangular cross-section.
LIQUID PARTICLES — Shall mean particles which have volume but are
not of rigid shape and which, upon collection, tend to coalesce and create
uniform homogeneous films upon the surface of the collecting media.
MANUFACTURING PROCESS — Shall mean any action, operation or
treatment embracing chemical, industrial, manufacturing or processing
factor, methods or forms including but not limited to furnaces, kettles,
ovens, converters, cupolas, kilns, crucibles, stills, dryers, roasters,
crushers, grinders, mixers, reactors, regenerators, separators, filters,
reboilers, columns, classifiers, screens, quenchers, cookers, digesters,
towers, washers, scrubbers, mills, condensers or absorbers.
§ 11-8.2 SPARTA CODE § 11-8.2
1:208
MOTOR VEHICLES — Shall include all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, expecting such vehicle as run only upon rails or tracks.
ODOR — Shall mean the property of a substance which affects the sense of
smell.
OPACITY — Shall mean the property of a substance which renders it
partially or wholly obstructive to the transmission of visible light expressed
as the percentage to which the light is obstructed.
OPEN BURNING — Shall mean any fire wherein the products of combustion
are emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack
or chimney of an incinerator.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who has care, custody, or control
of a building or premises, or a portion thereof, whether with or without
knowledge of the owner thereof.
OUTDOOR ATMOSPHERE — Shall mean air space outside of buildings,
stacks or exterior ducts.
OWNER — Shall mean any person who alone or jointly, or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge or control
of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as
fiduciary including but not limited to executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate; or as a
mortgagee in possession regardless of how such possession was obtained.
Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part or all of any
dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor
and shall have a joint responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet
or assigned by said lessee.
PARTICLES — Shall mean any material, except uncombined water, which
exists in finely divided form as liquid particles or solid particles at standard
conditions.
PERSON — Shall mean and shall include corporations, companies,
associations, societies, firms, partnerships and joint stock companies, as
well as individuals, and shall also include all political subdivisions of this
State or any agencies or instrumentalities thereof.
PLANT LIFE — Shall mean vegetation including but not limited to trees,
tree branches, leaves, yard trimmings, shrubbery, grass, weeds and crops.
REFUSE — Shall mean rubbish, garbage, trade waste and plant life.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Shall be Ringelmann's Scale for Grading
for Density of Smoke, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines,
or any chart, recorder, indicator or device which is approved by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection as the equivalent of said
Ringelmann's Scale for the measurement of smoke density.
RUBBISH — Shall mean waste solids not considered to be highly flammable
or explosive including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber,
§ 11-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8.2
1:209
carpets, wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery,
masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATION — Shall mean any operation or activity from which
is salvaged or reclaimed any product or material including but not limited
to metals, chemicals or shipping containers.
SMOKE — Shall mean small gasborne or airborne particles, exclusive of
water vapor, arising from a process of combustion in sufficient number to
be observable.
SOLID PARTICLES — Shall mean particles of rigid shape and definite
volume.
SOURCE OPERATION — Shall mean any manufacturing process or any
identifiable part thereof emitting an air contaminant into the outdoor
atmosphere through one or more stacks or chimneys.
STACK OR CHIMNEY — Shall mean a flue, conduit or opening designed and
constructed for the purpose of emitting air contaminants into the outdoor
air.
STANDARD CONDITIONS — Shall be 70° F. and one atmosphere pressure
(14.7 psia or 760 mm Hg).
TRADE WASTE — Shall mean all waste solid or liquid material or rubbish
resulting from construction, building operations, or the prosecution of any
business, trade or industry including but not limited to plastic products,
cartons, paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders
and other forms of solid or liquid waste material.
VISIBLE SMOKE — Shall mean smoke which obscures light to a degree
readily discernible by visual observation.
§ 11-8.3. Prohibition on Air Pollution. [1978 Code § 17-8.3; Ord. No.
721 § 3]
No person or owner of property or person or persons having possession or
control thereof, shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ 11-8.4. Prohibition of Open Burning. [1978 Code § 17-8.4; Ord.
No. 721 § 4]
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit a salvage operation by
open burning.
b. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the disposal of rubbish,
garbage or trade waste, or buildings or structures by open burning.
c. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the disposal of any type of
plant life by open burning.
d. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
§ 11-8.2 SPARTA CODE § 11-8.4
1:210
§ 11-8.5. Prohibition of Smoke From Combustion of Fuel. [1978
Code § 17-8.5; Ord. No. 721 § 5]
§ 11-8.6. Emission of Solid Particles. [1978 Code § 17-8.6; Ord. No.
721 § 6]
1. Variances approved and issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:27-2.
2. Open burning of refuse for training or research exercises when
conducted at a permanent facility or training center designed to be
used solely for such purposes on a continuing basis.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit visible smoke to be
emitted into the outdoor air from combustion of fuel in any stationary
indirect heat exchanger except as provided in paragraph b.
b. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke, the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke
Chart, or greater than 20% opacity, exclusive of water vapor, to be
emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any
stationary indirect heat exchanger having a rated hourly capacity of
200,000,000 BTU or greater gross heat input, and discharging through
a stack or chimney having all internal cross-sectional dimensions of 60
inches or greater.
c. The provisions of paragraphs a and b above shall not apply to smoke
which is visible for a period of not longer than three minutes in any
consecutive 30 minute period.
d. The provisions of this section shall not apply to direct heat exchangers
or manufacturing processes, or any motor vehicle while operating on
the public highways.
e. Any person responsible for the construction, installation, alteration or
use of an indirect heat exchanger shall, when requested by the director,
provide the facilities and necessary equipment for determining the
density or opacity of smoke being discharged into the open air.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit particles to be emitted
from any stack or chimney into the outdoor air the shade or appearance
of which is greater than 20% opacity, exclusive of water vapor.
b. The provisions of this section shall not apply:
1. To particles the shade or appearance of which is greater than 20%
opacity, exclusive of water vapor, for a period of not longer than
three minutes in any consecutive 30 minute period;
2. To source operations issued a variance by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with
subchapter 6.5 of the New Jersey Administrative Code;
§ 11-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8.6
1:211
§ 11-8.7. Stacks and Chimneys. [1978 Code § 17-8.7; Ord. No. 721
§ 7]
§ 11-8.8. Operation and Installation of Incinerators. [1978 Code
§ 17-8.8; Ord. No. 721 § 8; Ord. No. 07-14 § VIII]
3. To indirect heat exchanger;
4. To incinerators;
5. For a period of five years from the date of issuance of a valid
permanent certificate to operate to a source operation equipped
with control apparatus for which a valid permit to construct or the
permanent certificate to operate was issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection during the period June
15, 1967 to March 27, 1972.
a. Except as herein provided, persons burning solid or liquid fuel whose
products of combustion are discharged into the open air from a stack or
chimney shall submit to the Director information for each such stack or
chimney relating to place, type of fuel burned, heat content in fuel
burned, quantity of fuel burned per hour and/or year, description of
combustion equipment, usual period of operation, height and size of
outlet, and description of air pollution control equipment, and such
other and pertinent information as may be requested on forms provided
for that purpose by the Director. The application forms shall also
require submission of name, address and telephone number of person
or persons responsible for day-to-day operation and, also, or person or
persons responsible for maintenance of any such equipment. Any
change in the name, address or telephone number of such person or
persons shall be reported within 10 days of the occurrence of such
change to the Director.
b. Such information shall be submitted to the Director within 90 days after
either new installations are placed into service or existing installations
are altered. Nothing herein shall be construed as relieving any person
from the requirements of the Building Code of the Township of Sparta.
Additional reports concerning these items may be requested by the
Director.
c. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to equipment designed
or used for a heat input rate not more than 1,000,000 British Thermal
Units (BTU) per hour unless the equipment is designed for or actually
using #4, #5 or #6 fuel oil or coal.
a. No person shall operate or permit the operation of an incinerator in the
Township without a permit issued by the Sussex County Health
Department. The Sussex County Health Department shall recommend
issuance of a permit for the operation of an incinerator after examining
the application and inspecting the facility and being satisfied that it may
be operated in accordance with this code. The permit may be
§ 11-8.6 SPARTA CODE § 11-8.8
1:212
conditioned on improvements being made within a prescribed time
or on certain operating restrictions, if necessary, to comply with this
section. All permits shall be issued by the Sussex County Health
Department and shall expire on September 15th following their
issuance, or at such time prior thereto as any conditions or restrictions
shall not be complied with. Each incinerator shall require a permit for
which the annual fee shall be $25 payable to the Township of Sparta.
b. No person shall operate or permit the operation of an incinerator in the
Township before 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., and all operation shall be
completely terminated by 5:00 p.m. including complete extinction of the
fire and removal of materials from the firebox to a noncombustible
container and in a safe manner, provided, however, that the Director
may, by special permit, because of exceptional circumstances, permit
different hours of operation under such conditions as he shall deem
necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public or of persons
in the vicinity.
c. Where the operation of an incinerator constitutes an immediate and
substantial menace to public health and safety, or is a substantial
source of air pollution causing irritation and discomfort to persons in
the vicinity, and the owner or operator fails upon written or oral notice
to take immediate corrective measures; the Director may take all
necessary measures to abate the condition including but not limited to
ordering the cessation of use of the equipment and sealing the same,
pending a hearing in the municipal court.
d. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any
incinerator the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 of the
Ringelmann Smoke Chart to be emitted into the open air; or emissions
of such opacity within a stack or chimney, or exclusive of water vapor, of
such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree greater than the
emission designated as No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart.
e. The provisions of subsection 11-8.4 shall not apply to smoke emitted
during the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is
not greater than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period of
three consecutive minutes; or emissions or such opacity within a stack
or chimney, or exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack
or chimney to a degree greater than the emission designated as No. 2 of
the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period no greater than three
consecutive minutes.
f. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of particles
of unburned waste or ash from any incinerator which are individually
large enough to be visible while suspended in the atmosphere.
g. No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any
incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell
in any area of human use or occupancy.
§ 11-8.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8.9
1:213
§ 11-8.9. Asbestos Surface Coatings. [1978 Code § 17-8.9; Ord. No.
721 § 9]
§ 11-8.10. (Reserved)34
§ 11-8.11. Inspections and Right of Entry. [1978 Code § 17-8.11;
Ord. No. 721 § 11]
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit surface coating by
spraying on any building, structure, facility, installation or internal or
external portion thereof, asbestos or friable material containing in
excess of 0.25% (by weight) asbestos.
b. Tests.
1. Any person responsible for the manufacture, application of use of
any coating which the Director, or any agent thereof, has reason to
believe contains asbestos shall, when requested by the Director,
conduct such tests as are necessary in the opinion of the Director to
determine the presence and the amount and/or kinds of asbestos in
the coating. Such tests shall be conducted in a manner approved by
the Director and shall be made at the expense of the person
responsible.
2. The Director may waive the testing requirements of paragraph 1
above upon receipt of a materials specification report from the
material manufacturer certifying that the asbestos content of the
surface coating for which testing is required complies with the
provisions of paragraph a.
a. Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the
Director has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses an
immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedures shall only
take place where the time taken to apply for and secure the issuance of
a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to
abate the condition.
b. Emergency inspections may also be authorized by the Governor in
times of air pollution emergencies in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:2C-32.
c. Where the Director or his agency is refused entry or access, or is
otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator
from conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in
violation of this code and subject to the penalties hereunder.
d. Search Warrant or Access Warrant. The Director may, upon affidavit,
apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township of Sparta for
a search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and
34.Editor's Note: Former subsection 11-8.10, Director of Air Pollution Control, previously
codified herein and containing portions of 1978 Code § 17-8.10 and Ordinance No. 721,
was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 07-14.
§ 11-8.9 SPARTA CODE § 11-8.11
1:214
§ 11-8.12. Penalties. [1978 Code § 17-8.12; Ord. No. 721 § 12]
circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a
violation of this section may exist on the premises, including one or
more of the following:
1. That the premises require inspection according to the cycle
established by the Township for periodic inspections of premises of
the type involved;
2. That observation of external conditions (smoke, ash, soot, odors) of
the premises and its public areas has resulted in the belief that
violations of this section exist;
3. Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning equipment
and/or system, type of incinerator, particular use of premises or
other factors which render systematic inspections of such buildings
necessary in the interest of public health and safety;
If the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township of Sparta is satisfied as
to the matter set forth in the said affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance
of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
e. All buildings and premises subject to this section are subject to
inspection from time to time by the Director of Air Pollution Control or
his duly authorized representatives: All rooms and areas in the building
shall be available and accessible for such inspection which shall be
made during usual business hours if the premises are used for
nonresidential purposes, provided, however, that inspections may be
made at other times if:
1. The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection;
2. There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the
premises which can be determined and proved by inspection only
during other than the prescribed hours; or
3. There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is
an immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
a. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section, or
who shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall upon conviction thereof, be liable for the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5 for each violation. Each day that such violation
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
b. The violation of any section or subsection of this section shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense independent of the violation of any other
section or subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to this section.
§ 11-8.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-8.13
1:215
§ 11-8.13. Construction and Separability. [1978 Code § 17-8.13;
Ord. No. 721 § 13]
§ 11-9. DREDGING OF LAKES AND OTHER BODIES OF WATER.
§ 11-9.1. Title. [1978 Code § 17-5.1]
This section shall be known and may be cited as "The Dredging Regulations
of the Township of Sparta."
§ 11-9.2. Definitions. [1978 Code § 17-5.2]
As used in this section:
DREDGING — Shall mean and include any activity undertaken or employed,
with the use of any tool, machine, apparatus, or equipment, to catch, gather,
bring up, clear out, clean, excavate, or remove sand, mud, silt, debris, solid
substances or materials from beneath the surface of the water which has
naturally or artificially settled, collected, accumulated therein, or at the
bottom thereof.
DREDGING ACTIVITIES — Shall mean and include dredging and any and
all other procedures, operations, or activities undertaken, conducted, or
employed, directly or indirectly in, for or during an entire project from
preparation and planning for the dredging itself to ultimate removal of all
dredged materials from the Township, including the ultimate disposition
thereof.
LAKE — Shall mean and include any naturally or artificially created,
confined, or impounded lake, pond, pool, or other body of water,
irrespective of the use to which the same is devoted, expressly excepting,
however, all streams, brooks, rivers, inlets and estuaries, and further
excepting all commercially fabricated swimming pools.
a. This section is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose herein
described. Nothing herein is to be construed as repealing or abridging
the emergency powers of any agency of government except to the
extent expressly set forth herein.
b. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or work
contained in this section shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this
section which shall remain in full force and effect.
c. This subsection is promulgated and adopted in accordance with Section
26:2C-8 of P.L. 1954, C.212 (Title 26:2C-1 to 2C-23), amended by P.L.
1962, C.215; P.L. 1967, C.105; and P.L. 1967, C.106; and nothing
contained herein or any action taken hereunder is to be interpreted as
being in conflict with the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Act and the
New Jersey Administrative Code.
§ 11-8.13 SPARTA CODE § 11-9.3
1:216
§ 11-9.3. Permit Required. [1978 Code § 17-5.3]
No person shall undertake or cause to be undertaken the cleaning,
excavation, or dredging (all hereinafter referred to synonymously as
dredging) of any lake, situate entirely or partially, in the Township without
having first obtained a permit therefor from the Township Department of
Health. Such permit shall be known and entitled a "dredging permit."
§ 11-9.4. Application for Dredging Permit. [1978 Code § 17-5.4]
Every person seeking to conduct any dredging activities shall, before
undertaking the same, submit to the Township Department of Health an
application for a dredging permit containing the following information:
a. The name of the lake to be dredged and the name and the address of the
owner or owners thereof.
b. A sketch plat of the lake to be dredged, drawn at a scale of not less than
one inch equal to 200 feet, prepared by a Professional Engineer or Land
Surveyor, licensed by the State of New Jersey, and including thereon the
following data:
1. Area or areas to be dredged, showing the acreage of each and the
existing and proposed depth of each.
2. Proposed locations of all dredging tools, machines, apparatus and
equipment and the relocations thereof if the same are to be moved
during the conduct of the dredging activities.
3. Proposed areas to be used and employed for the collection, transfer
and stockpiling of dredged materials.
4. Location of dikes, berms, walls or other devices intended to contain
and confine the dredged materials during the collection, transfer
and stockpiling thereof.
c. Description of the number, type, and size of all tools, machines,
vehicles, apparatus, and equipment to be used and employed for, in,
and during the dredging activities.
d. Proposed methods, procedures and measures to be used and employed
in the control of odor or noxious fumes which will, may or can,
reasonably be expected to emanate from the collected, transferred, or
stockpiled materials.
e. Estimated duration for completion of the dredging activities with a
fixed, determined and established date of termination and completion.
f. Proposed methods, procedures and measures to be used and employed
in removing the dredged materials from the areas of collection,
transfer, or stockpiling, including the roads, streets, or highways in the
Township to be traversed during the removal of the same.
§ 11-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-9.4
1:217
§ 11-9.5. Time Limitation for Collection of Dredged Materials.
[1978 Code § 17-5.5]
g. A true copy of the contract pursuant to the terms of which the dredging
activities shall be conducted.
h. The written consent of the owner or owners of the lake to be dredged
whenever the applicant for a dredging permit is not the sole owner
thereof. Where the owner of the lake to be dredged is:
1. A corporation, such application or consent as the case may be,
must be accompanied by a corporate resolution permitting the
proposed dredging project, duly certified by the secretary thereof,
under the seal of the corporation, and acknowledged before a
person authorized to administer oaths in the State of New Jersey;
or
2. A partnership or association, such application or consent, as the
case may be, must be accompanied by a certificate permitting the
proposed dredging project, naming the person appointed to act for
or on behalf of such partnership or association, duly certified by an
officer or general partner thereof and acknowledged before a
person authorized to administer oaths in the State of New Jersey;
or
3. A single person or several non-affiliated persons, such application
or consent, as the case may be, shall be acknowledged before a
person authorized to administer oaths in the State of New Jersey.
i. Proposed methods, procedures and measures to be used and employed
to prevent pollution resulting from dredging activities of any bathing
area, lake (including the lake to be dredged), stream, brook, river,
water course, reservoir, inlet, bay, estuary, well, water body, water
supply, or water system.
j. Proposed methods, procedures, and measures to be used and employed
in dealing with, processing, treating, utilizing or disposing of the
dredged materials anywhere within the Township.
k. Evidence of compliance with all statutes, codes, rules, and regulations
applicable to the dredging activities to be conducted hereunder,
enacted, adopted or promulgated by the United States of America or
the State of New Jersey, or any agency, bureau, department, or division
thereof.
a. Dredged materials shall be removed from all areas where the same
have been collected, transferred or stockpiled on or before the date
fixed for termination and completion of the dredging project.
b. No dredged materials shall remain in any area where the same have
been collected, transferred, or stockpiled for a period in excess of 180
days, thereby avoiding the creation of any danger or hazard to the
§ 11-9.4 SPARTA CODE § 11-9.5
1:218
§ 11-9.6. Permit Terms; Fees. [1978 Code § 17-5.6]
§ 11-9.7. Hours of Operation. [1978 Code § 17-5.7]
No tool, machine, apparatus, equipment or truck or earth-moving motordrawn
or motor-driven vehicle used or employed for, in or during dredging
activities shall be operated except during the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., prevailing time, provided, however, that no such activity shall be
conducted on any Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday observed in the State
of New Jersey.
§ 11-9.8. Motor Vehicle Operation and Equipment.
health, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the Township. At its
discretion, the Township Council may permit an extension of time for
removal not to exceed 90 days for just cause submitted by the applicant.
a. All dredging permits issued hereunder shall expire on the date fixed for
termination and completion recited therein. No dredging activities shall
be conducted thereafter except upon application for and the issuance of
a new dredging permit in accordance with the provisions hereof and the
payment of the appropriate fees.
b. The fee payable to the Township for and upon the issuance of a
dredging permit shall be determined in the following manner:
$0.005 per estimated cubic yard of material to be removed, provided
however, that fee shall not be less than $100.
c. Such fee is imposed to defray the costs and expenses incurred by the
Township in processing the application for a dredging permit and in
providing for supervision of dredging activities by its Department of
Health.
a. Motor-drawn or motor-driven vehicles used and employed for, in, or
during dredging activities shall prominently bear the name and address
of the owner on both sides thereof pursuant to the requirements of New
Jersey Statutes in such cases made and provided, the amendments
thereto and the supplements thereof.
b. Motor-drawn or motor-driven vehicles used and employed for, in, or
during a dredging project to carry away, remove or transport any
dredged materials shall all times while in transit maintain the load in
place by securing the same with a tarpaulin or other cover pursuant to
the amendments thereto and supplements thereof, and pursuant to the
requirements of any rule or regulation promulgated by the Director of
the Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey.
c. Any dredged materials falling, spilling, or emptying from a motordrawn
or motor-driven vehicle in, over, or upon any public or private
property, road, street, or highway, in the Township, shall be
§ 11-9.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-9.8
1:219
§ 11-9.9. Other Statutes, Ordinances, Codes, Rules and Regulations
Adopted Herein by Reference. [1978 Code § 17-5.9]
There is hereby adopted by reference, made a part hereof as is fully set
forth herein, and to be construed as pari material herewith, the following
statutes, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations:
§ 11-9.10. Bond Required. [1978 Code § 17-5.10]
No dredging permit shall be issued unless and until a cash performance
guarantee shall have been filed with the Township sufficient in amount, as
estimated by the Township Engineer, to restore to their original condition
all areas affected by the dredging project, excluding, however, those areas
lying beneath the surface of the water of the lake being dredged.
§ 11-9.11. Nuisance. [1978 Code § 17-5.11]
The conduct of any dredging project contrary to any provision of this section
is hereby declared to be a nuisance, detrimental to the public health, safety
and welfare.
§ 11-9.12. Violations and Penalties. [1978 Code § 17-5.12]
immediately collected and removed therefrom and shall in no event
remain thereon for a period in excess of 24 hours.
a. Regulation No. 1-10, Pertaining to the New Jersey Boat Act of 1952 (L.
1962, c. 73);
b. Section Nos. 80.18, 80.20, 80.21, 80.22, 80.23, 80.24, 80.25, and 80.29,
of Part 80, Subchapter D entitled "Navigation Requirements for Certain
Inland Waters," Chapter I entitled "Coast Guard, Department of the
Treasury" as embodied in Coast Guard Pamphlet No. CG-169, dated
September 1, 1962. Ten copies thereof have been placed on file in the
office of the Township Clerk and in the office of the Department of
Health and shall there remain for the use and examination of the public
as long as this section shall remain in effect.
c. Section 11-1, "Public Health Nuisance Code."
d. Section 3-1, "Noise" of Chapter 3, Police Regulations.
a. Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
section, including notices to abate nuisances, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
b. The penalties recited herein shall be separate, apart, and in addition to
any proceedings undertaken to remove or abate a nuisance.
§ 11-9.8 SPARTA CODE § 11-9.13
1:220
§ 11-9.13. Enforcement. [1978 Code § 17-5.13]
This section and the activities conducted hereunder shall be supervised and
enforced by the Township Department of Health.
Chapter 12
BUILDING AND HOUSING
Editor's Note: For licensing provisions for contractors and builders,
see Chapter 4, Section 4-10.
§ 12-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING
AGENCY.
§ 12-1.1. Establishment of Construction Inspection Office. [1978
Code § 9-1.1]
§ 12-1.2. Construction Board of Appeals. [Ord. No. 970 § 1]
The Sussex County Construction Board of Appeals as established pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:23A-1.1 et seq., shall serve as the Appeal Board for any
decisions made by the Township's Uniform Construction Code Enforcing
Agency.
§ 12-1.3. Fees for Construction Permits. [1978 Code § 8-6; § 9-1.3;
Ord. No. 604; Ord. No. 638; Ord. No. 712; Ord. No. 736; Ord. No.
a. There is hereby established in the Township a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the Construction
Inspection Office, consisting of a Construction Official, Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode
Official, and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes
as the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of
New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency.
b. Each official position created in paragraph a hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c.217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person; provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c.217 and N.J.A.C. 5:23, to hold each such
position.
c. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at the Municipal Building, 65 Main Street, from 8:30 a.m. to 10:30 a.m.
Monday through Friday, except for holidays, emergencies and
unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
§ 11-9.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.3
1:221
780; Ord. No. 815; Ord. No. 843, § 1; Ord. No. 01-03 §§ 1 - 3; Ord.
No. 05-17 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 08-24 § 4; Ord. No. 09-03 § 1; Ord. No.
12-14 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-19 § 3]
a. The fees for construction permits shall be as follows:
1. Plan review:
(a) The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to be
charged for the construction permit and shall be paid before
the plans are reviewed. The amount paid for this fee shall be
credited towards the amount of the fee to be charged for the
construction permit and shall not be refundable.
2. Building subcode: The building subcode fees shall be:
New construction (for all use groups except use
groups S-1 and S-2)
$0.033
New construction S-1 and S-2 use groups:
Up to 100,000 cu. ft. per cu. ft. $0.019
Over 100,000 cu. ft. per cu. ft. $0.011
New construction is subject to a minimum fee of:
For principal structure $110
For accessory structure $50
Additions to existing structures per cu. ft. $0.033
Subject to a minimum fee of $50
Alterations/renovations/repairs per $1,000 of cost:
For costs up to $50,000 $25
For costs from $50,000 to $100,000 $13
For costs exceeding $100,000 $11
Addition of open unroofed deck per $1,000 of
cost
$25
Subject to a minimum fee of $50
R3 or R4 re-roof or re-side $70
Combination of additions and alterations/renovations/repairs
shall be computed separately applying the sum of the above
schedule; subject to the same minimum fee
Pools:
Private:
Above ground $100
Below ground-includes fence $250
Certificate of occupancy $20
§ 12-1.3 SPARTA CODE § 12-1.3
1:222
Public:
Less than 25,000 gallons capacity $198
In excess of 25,000 gallons capacity $396
Certificate of occupancy $85
All structures for which volume cannot be computed, shall be
computed as follows:
Under 35 feet in height - per $1,000 of cost $20
Subject to minimum fee of $40
Exceeding 35 feet in height - per $1,000 of
cost
$25
Subject to minimum fee of $110
Solid fuel burning device $120
3. Plumbing subcode: The plumbing subcode fees shall be:
(a) Per fixture or stack except as elsewhere noted: $15.
(For the purpose of computing this fee, fixtures or stacks shall
include but not be limited to lavatories, kitchen sinks, slop
sinks, sinks, urinals, water closets, bathtubs (excluding
whirlpool type). Shower stalls, laundry tubs, floor drains,
leaders, roof drains, drinking fountains, dishwashers, water
heaters, air cooled air condition or refrigeration units, clothes
washers, or similar devices.)
(b) Special devices as listed herein: $50.
Grease interceptors, oil separators, water cooled air condition
or refrigeration units, public or private water or sewer utilities,
steam or water boilers, whirlpool type bathtubs, sewer
ejectors, storm sewer, lawn sprinkler systems, reduced
pressure backflow preventers, gas piping, water conditioners.
(c) Minimum plumbing subcode fee: $50.
4. Electrical subcode: The electrical subcode fees shall be 100% of
Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA) fees.
(a) In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(c) iii (see schedule of
fees on file in Construction Code Enforcement Office).
(b) Minimum fee: $50.
5. Fire protection subcode: The fire protection subcode fees shall be:
(a) Sprinkler systems and smoke and heat detectors.
(1) One to 20 heads or detectors: $50.
§ 12-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.3
1:223
(2) Twenty-one to 100 heads or detectors: $85.
(3) One hundred one to 200 heads or detectors: $163.
(4) Two hundred one to 400 heads or detectors: $423.
(5) Four hundred one to 1,000 heads or detectors: $585.
(6) Over 1,000 heads or detectors: $748.
In computing fees for heads and detectors the number of each
shall be counted separately and two fees, one for heads and one
for detectors shall be charged.
(b) Standpipes: The fee for each standpipe shall be $163.
(c) Pre-engineered systems: The fee for each independent preengineered
system shall be $65.
(d) Kitchen exhaust system: The fee for each kitchen exhaust
system shall be $42.
(e) Suppression systems (other than water) per $1,000 of cost $21.
Subject to a minimum fee of $42.
(f) Manual alarm systems: The fee for a manual alarm system
shall be $60.
(g) Appliances: The fee for each gas or oil fired appliance which is
not connected to the plumbing system shall be $50.
(h) Storage tanks:
(1) Up to 1,000 gallons, each tank: $50.
(2) 1,001 to 2,000 gallons, each tank: $75.
(3) 2,001 to 5,000 gallons, each tank: $100.
(4) 5,000 gallons or more, each tank: $150.
6. Elevator subcode: The elevator subcode fees shall be:
(a) In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6 (see schedule of fees of
elevator inspection agency on file in construction code
enforcement office).
(b) Township of Sparta administration fee shall be 15% of the
elevator subcode permit fee.
7. Demolition:
(a) The fee for a demolition permit for a structure less than 5,000
square feet and less than 30 feet in height for one- or twofamily
residences (use groups R-3 and R-4) and all structures
§ 12-1.3 SPARTA CODE § 12-1.3
1:224
on farms regardless of height, used exclusively for storage of
feed or grain or sheltering of livestock shall be $75.
(b) The fee for all other demolition permits shall be $125.
8. Moving/relocation:
(a) The fee for a permit for removal of one building from one lot to
another or to another location on the same lot shall be in the
amount of $25 per $1,000 of the estimated cost of moving, plus
the estimated cost of new foundation and all work necessary to
place the building in its completed condition in the new
location.
9. Signs:
(a) Advertising signs shall be computed on the basis of square
footage of surface area. Double faced signs shall be computed
on one side only:
Per sq. ft. $1.
Subject to minimum fee of $50.
10. Temporary structures:
(a) The fee for all temporary structures (tents, air supported
structures, trailers, etc.) shall be $50.
11. Permit update: The administrative fee for updating permits shall be
$25.
12. Renewal of permits:
(a) The fee for expired permits shall be the same as a new permit.
13. Variation: The fee for an application for a variation in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $423 for class I structures and $85
for class II and class III structures. The fee for resubmission of an
application for a variation shall be $163 for class I structures and
$46 for class II and class III structures.
14. Certificate of occupancy/approval:
(a) The minimum fee shall be $100 except for one- or two-family
(use group R-3 and R-4) structures of less than 5,000 square
feet in area and less than 35 feet in height and structures on
farms (regardless of height) used exclusively for storage of
food or grain or sheltering of livestock, for which the minimum
fee shall be $50.
(b) Change of use certificate of occupancy fee: $100.
(c) Certificate of continued occupancy fee: $100.
§ 12-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.3
1:225
(d) There shall be no fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy:
$0.
(e) Certificate of approval fee: $0.
(f) Certificate of occupancy for R-3 or R-4 additions or alterations:
$20.
15. All fees shall be rounded to the nearest dollar amount.
16. Waiver of fees:
(a) The Township of Sparta waives all construction code fees
subject to exceptions set forth herein for the following entities:
(1) Sparta Township Fire Department.
(2) Sparta Township Ambulance Squad.
(3) Charitable, philanthropic, fraternal, and religious
nonprofit organizations holding a tax exempt status under
the Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 U.S.C.
Section 501 (c) or (d)).
(4) Those entities set forth in Section 52:27D-16C of the
Uniform Construction Code Act.
(5) The within waiver shall not apply to Department of
Community Affairs Training Fees and private enforcing
agency fees.
17. Training fees:
(a) In order to provide for the training and certification and
technical support programs required by the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code, the Township shall collect a
surcharge fee which shall be forwarded to the Department of
Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey.
(b) This fee shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.19.
18. Unlisted fees: Construction fees not specifically listed in this
schedule shall be as listed in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20.
19. Mechanical subcode.
Mechanical inspections (replacement):
Fee for replacement or new installation of:
§ 12-1.3 SPARTA CODE § 12-1.3
1:226
§ 12-1.4. Recommendations by Construction Official. [1978 Code
§ 9-1.4]
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Township Manager biannually a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency, and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 12-1.5. Inconsistent Ordinances. [1978 Code § 9-1.6]
In the event any Township ordinance or portion thereof, or prior resolution,
shall be inconsistent with the provisions of this section or the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, the same are hereby repealed.
§ 12-1.6. (Reserved)35
§ 12-2. BUILDING NUMBERS.
§ 12-2.1. Title. [1978 Code § 9-4.1; Ord. No. 583 § 1]
This section may be known and may be cited as "The Building Numbering
Regulations of the Township of Sparta" and is referred to herein as "this
section."
§ 12-2.2. Ease of Identification. [1978 Code § 9-4.3; Ord. No. 583
§ 3]
The purpose of this section is to insure that buildings in the Township have
been incorporated within the numbering system of the Township and may
be so identified by emergency vehicles.
Oil or gas-fired stove or fireplace, water heater, boiler,
furnace, air conditioning unit, pool heater, oil and
propane tanks, oil or gas lines in existing R-3, R-4 and
R-5 structures
$100
For each additional appliance on same permit (No
additional fee for gas, fuel oil, or water piping
connection to appliance
$75
b. Building permits must be obtained before any work is commenced
involving new construction, additions or alterations to existing
structures and repairs or maintenance to existing structures (other
than exterior or interior painting or redecoration).
35.Editor's Note: Former subsection 12-1.6, Intermunicipal Service Agreement for Electrical
Inspectors, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 05-16,
was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 12-14.
§ 12-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-2.3
1:227
§ 12-2.3. Display, Placement and Size of Numbers. [1978 Code
§ 9-4.4; Ord. No. 583 § 4]
All structures which have been assigned a street number from the Tax
Assessor's office of the Township shall display such numbers in such a
manner that they may be readily visible from the street to individuals
driving the legal speed limit of such street, to both directions of traffic.
Specifically, no numbers shall be less than three inches in height nor less
than 1 1/2 inches in width and will be black on a light background or white
on a dark background. They shall be displayed on a free standing post, fence
post, mailbox, lamp post, or similar structure at the right or left side of the
driveway or pedestrian walkway to the residence. Such structure must be
within 10 feet of the driveway/walkway and within 10 feet of the roadway.
All businesses shall have the aforementioned numbers displayed on the
front wall of the building. Brass or metallic numbers, alpha characters, and
Roman numerals are not to be used to satisfy this requirement but may
be used as a secondary means of identification at the discretion of the
homeowner or business owner.
§ 12-2.4. Violation and Penalty. [1978 Code § 9-4.5; Ord. No. 583
§ 5; New]
Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable
to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a separate and distinct violation hereof.
§ 12-3. SWIMMING POOLS.36
§ 12-4. through § 12-7. (RESERVED)
§ 12-8. HOUSING CODE.
§ 12-8.1. Title. [1978 Code § 9-2.1]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Housing Code of the
Township of Sparta."
§ 12-8.2. Purpose. [1978 Code § 9-2.2]
The Township Council hereby finds and determines that:
a. There exists in the Township numerous dwellings which are
substandard in one or more important features of structure, equipment
or occupancy; and
b. Such conditions adversely affect public health and safety and lead to
the continuation, extension and aggravation of urban blight; and
36.Editor's Note: Former Section 12-3, Swimming Pools, previously codified herein and
contacting portions of 1978 Code §§ 15-1.1 through 15-1.7 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 01-03.
§ 12-2.3 SPARTA CODE § 12-8.2
1:228
§ 12-8.3. Definitions. [1978 Code § 9-2.3; Ord. No. 07-14 § IX]
As used in this section:
APPROVED — Shall mean approved in accordance with the regulations
promulgated by the Sussex County Health Department or the Sanitarian.
BASEMENT — Shall mean a portion of any dwelling located partly
underground where the floor level thereof is lower than 3 1/2 feet below the
average grade of the ground adjacent thereto and within 15 feet outward
from the exterior walls thereof.
BOARDING HOUSE — Shall mean any dwelling, whether furnished or
unfurnished, with one or more independent lodging units in which there
are sleeping accommodations occupied by, or available for occupancy by,
four or more persons and where meals are regularly served by the owner or
operator of said dwelling.
DWELLING — Shall mean a building, structure or enclosure, which is
wholly or partly, or intended to be, used for living or sleeping by human
occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used
or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the square area measured from the interior
walls of a habitable room excluding that part of any room where the ceiling
is less than five feet from the floor.
HABITABLE ROOM — Shall mean a room or enclosed floor space within a
dwelling unit used, or designed to be used, for living, sleeping, or eating
purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries,
pantries, foyers or communicating corridors, closets, and storage spaces.
LODGING HOUSE — Shall mean a building or that part of any building
containing one or more lodging units, each of which is rented by one or
more persons not related to the owner.
LODGING UNIT — Shall mean a rented room or group of rooms containing
no cooking facilities used for living purposes by a separate family or a group
of persons living together or by a person living alone within a building.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person in actual possession of and living in
the building or dwelling unit including the owner.
OWNER — Shall mean any person properly authorized to exercise the
power of or for an owner of property for purposes of its purchase, sale, use,
occupancy or maintenance.
PLUMBING FIXTURES — Shall mean and include all installed receptacles
or devices which are supplied with water or which receive or discharge
c. Adequate protection of public health, safety and welfare therefore
requires the establishment and enforcement of minimum housing
standards.
§ 12-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-8.3
1:229
liquid waste or sewage into the drainage system with which they are
directly or indirectly connected.
§ 12-8.4. Compliance Required as a Prerequisite to Occupancy.
[1978 Code § 9-2.4]
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant or permit another to occupy
any dwelling, dwelling unit or lodging unit which does not comply with the
minimum standards set forth in this section.
§ 12-8.5. Water Supply. [1978 Code § 9-2.5; Ord. No. 07-14 § IX]
§ 12-8.6. Plumbing Fixtures. [1978 Code § 9-2.6; Ord. No. 07-14
§ IX]
a. Every dwelling unit and lodging house shall be provided with a safe
supply of potable water meeting the standards set forth in "Potable
Water Standards" as published by the New Jersey State Department of
Health. The source of such supply shall be approved by the New Jersey
State Department of Health or the Sussex County Health Department.
b. Every kitchen sink, lavatory, bathtub, or shower required by this section
shall be connected to both hot and cold water lines. The hot water lines
shall be connected with supplied water heating facilities which are
installed and maintained in good and safe working condition and which
are capable of delivering water at a minimum temperature of not less
than 120° F. even when the heating facilities required by this section
are not in operation. The minimum rate of flow of hot or cold water
issuing from a faucet or a fixture shall not be less than one gallon per
minute.
a. The following plumbing fixtures and facilities shall be required:
1. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink of non-absorbent
impervious material, at least one flush type water closet, a lavatory,
and a bathtub or shower, available only for the use of the occupants
of that dwelling unit.
2. Every lodging house shall be provided with a minimum of one flush
type water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower for every eight
persons or fraction thereof (including the owner and the members
of his family) in occupancy.
3. Every water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower required
hereby shall be accessible from within the building without passing
through any part of any other dwelling unit or lodging unit. In a
lodging house they shall be located not further than one floor above
or below the lodging units served. These facilities shall be located
in a room or rooms which are separated from all other rooms by
walls, doors or partitions that afford privacy.
§ 12-8.3 SPARTA CODE § 12-8.6
1:230
§ 12-8.7. Heating Equipment. [1978 Code § 9-2.7]
§ 12-8.8. Use and Occupancy of Space. [1978 Code § 9-2.8]
4. Every plumbing fixture shall be connected to water and sewer
systems approved by the Sussex County Health Department and
the fixtures and systems shall be maintained in good working
condition.
b. The foregoing provisions of this section shall be binding upon all
dwellings first occupied after June 15, 1964, and upon lodging houses,
boarding houses, and multiple dwelling units from that date, all other
types of dwellings on and after June 15, 1969.
a. The following heating equipment and facilities shall be furnished:
1. Where a dwelling is occupied between October 1st and May 1st, or
any portion of such time, heating facilities which are capable of
safely heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closets
therein shall be installed and maintained in a good and safe
working condition. Such heating facilities shall be installed and
maintained so that they are capable of heating the interior of such
rooms so that the temperature at a height of three feet above the
floor level at the center of the room is at least 70° F. when the
outside temperature is 0° F.
2. Every space heater except electrical heaters shall be properly
vented by a chimney or duct leading to the outdoors.
b. The foregoing provisions of this section shall be binding upon all
dwellings first occupied after June 15, 1964, and upon all lodging
houses, boarding houses, and multiple dwelling units from that date,
and upon all other types of dwellings on and after June 15, 1969.
a. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof. The floor space shall
be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
b. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet
of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for
each occupant thereof. In every lodging unit and boarding house unit,
every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 80 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least
60 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
c. In every dwelling unit at least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable
room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet.
§ 12-8.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-8.8
1:231
§ 12-8.9. Notice of Violation; Vacation of Premises; Compliance.
[1978 Code § 9-2.9]
When the Sanitarian determines that any premises which are being
occupied for dwelling purposes, or which are covered in any other manner
by this section, are occupied in violation of this section, he shall serve a
notice upon the owner and occupant or occupants of such dwelling. The
notice shall specify a date not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days from
the date of this notice, when the premises shall be vacated or brought up to
the standards set forth in this section. The notice shall also specify in what
respect the premises are deficient under this section. The notice shall be
served personally or by certified mail addressed to the premises in question
or to the owner's address appearing on the tax records of the Township.
§ 12-8.10. Request for Hearing; Notices. [1978 Code § 9-2.10]
§ 12-8.11. Violations and Penalty. [1978 Code § 9-2.11; New]
d. No basement room in a dwelling may be used as a sleeping room unless
the walls and floor thereof in contact with the earth have been dampproofed
in accordance with a method provided by the Township
Building Code or approved by the Township Sanitarian and provided
further that the windows thereof are at least 15 feet from the nearest
building or wall.
a. In the event the owner or occupant of any such premises contends that
the application of this section is unreasonable as applied to the
premises in question or involves excessive hardship, the owner or
occupant may file a notice with the Township Manager requesting a
hearing upon such grievance within 10 days from the date of such
notice.
b. The provisions of Chapter 2, Administration, shall be applicable to the
requested hearing.
c. Prior to such hearing, the appellant shall serve upon all persons who
own property within 200 feet of the premises affected, five days' notice
of the time, place and purpose of the hearing. This notice may be served
personally or by certified mail mailed to the address of the said owner
as reflected by the Township's tax records.
d. At the hearing, the appellant shall have the opportunity and
responsibility of submitting any evidence which bears upon the subject
matter of the appeal.
a. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
b. No complaint shall be made in the municipal court for an alleged
violation of this section which is the subject of a notice served pursuant
to Subsection 12-8.9 or an appeal pursuant to Subsection 12-8.10,
§ 12-8.8 SPARTA CODE § 12-8.11
1:232
§ 12-9. BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION, OCCUPANCY
OR USE.
§ 12-9.1. Definitions. [1978 Code § 9-3.1]
As used in this section:
BUILDING — Shall mean any building, or structure, or part thereof,
whether used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any
outhouses, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed
therewith.
OWNER — Shall mean the holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Shall mean all individuals, associations and
corporations who have interests of record in a building and any who are in
actual possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Shall mean any housing authority or any officer
who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the
Township, County or State relating to health, fire, building regulations, or
to other activities concerning buildings in the Township.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the sanitarian, or such other employee as
may be hereafter designated by the Township Council, who is authorized by
this section to exercise the powers hereinafter prescribed for him.
§ 12-9.2. Declaration of Public Necessity. [1978 Code § 9-3.2]
It is hereby found and declared that there exists in the Township, buildings
or parts thereof which are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use,
due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitation facilities, or due to other
conditions rendering such building or buildings, or part thereof, unsafe, or
unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise
inimical to the welfare of the residents of the Township. It is therefore
necessary to exercise the police powers of the Township to repair, close or
demolish, or cause or require the repairing, closing or demolition of such
buildings or part thereof in the manner provided, pursuant to the statute
applicable thereto.
§ 12-9.3. Designation of Sanitarian. [1978 Code § 9-3.3]
The sanitarian is hereby designated and appointed as the public officer to
exercise the powers prescribed by this section. The Township Council may,
by resolution at its discretion, transfer to some other Township employee or
employees, the duties and functions of such public officer.
during the period allowed for compliance or the determination of the
appeal.
§ 12-8.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-9.4
1:233
§ 12-9.4. Complaint and Notice of Hearing. [1978 Code § 9-3.4]
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority or
by at least five residents of the Township charging that a building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to the public
officer that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use,
the public officer shall make a preliminary investigation. If the investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, he shall issue and cause to be served,
upon the owner and parties in interest of such building, a complaint stating
the charges in that respect. The complaint shall also contain a notice that
a hearing will be held before the public officer or his designated agent at
a place therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the
serving of the complaint. The notice shall state that the owner and parties
in interest have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not
be controlling in hearings before the public officer. The complaint shall be
served in the manner provided in Subsection 12-9.7.
§ 12-9.5. Conditions for Determination. [1978 Code § 9-3.5]
After notice and hearing, the public officer may determine that the building
under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use if he
finds that conditions exist in such building which are dangerous or injurious
to the health or safety of the occupants of such building, the occupants of
neighboring buildings or other residents of the Township. Such conditions
may, among other things, include the following:
§ 12-9.6. Findings of Fact Required; Issuance and Service of Orders
to Repair, Close and Demolish the Building. [1978 Code § 9-3.6]
a. Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other
calamities;
b. Lack of adequate ventilation, toilet facilities and running water, light or
sanitary facilities;
c. Dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
a. If, after the notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such
determination. He shall then issue and cause to be served, upon the
owner thereof and parties in interest, an order. The order shall require
the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be made by the
owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
order, and it shall give the option to the owner to vacate or have the said
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
b. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner
§ 12-9.4 SPARTA CODE § 12-9.6
1:234
§ 12-9.7. Manner of Serving Complaints, Notices and Orders. [1978
Code § 9-3.7]
Complaints, notices and orders issued by the public officer pursuant to this
section shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail.
If the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
and he shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such
complaint, notice or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper printed
and published in the Township, or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one
printed and published in the County and circulating in the Township. A copy
of such complaint, notice or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on the premises affected by the complaint, notice or order. A copy of such
complaint, notice or order shall be duly recorded with the County Clerk.
§ 12-9.8. Failure to Comply. [1978 Code § 9-3.8]
§ 12-9.9. Cost to Become Lien; Sale of Materials; Disposition of
Proceeds. [1978 Code § 9-3.9]
fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified
in the order described in paragraph a hereof, then the owner shall be
required by a further order to remove or demolish the building within a
reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
c. The orders referred to in paragraphs a and b of this section shall be
served upon the owner and parties in interest in the manner provided in
Subsection 12-6.7.
a. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance to any building so
closed a placard with the following words, "This building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this
building is prohibited and unlawful."
b. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished, or he may contract for the removal or demolition thereof
after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
a. The amount of the cost of:
1. Filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search fees and
advertising charges in the course of any proceeding taken under
this section determined in favor of the Township; and
2. Such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing,
or removal or demolition, as the case may be, shall be a municipal
lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. If
§ 12-9.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-9.9
1:235
§ 12-9.10. Additional Powers of Public Officer. [1978 Code § 9-3.10]
The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this section, including the following powers, in addition to
others herein granted:
Chapter 13
(RESERVED)
Chapter 14
the building is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall
sell the materials of such building. The proceeds of any sale of such
materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building shall be credited against the cost of the
removal or demolition thereof. If there are no such credits, or if the
total sum of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be
filed as a lien certificate with the Township Tax Collector and a copy
thereof shall be sent forthwith to the owner by registered mail.
b. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance remaining
shall be deposited by the public officer in the Superior Court of New
Jersey and shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such
court. The proceeds shall be disbursed according to the order or
judgment of such court to the persons found entitled thereto by final
order or judgment of the court. Any owner or party in interest may,
within 60 days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed
in a summary manner in the Superior Court of New Jersey to contest
reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in
the lien certificate.
a. To investigate building conditions in the Township in order to determine
which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use;
b. To administer oaths and affirmations; examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations;
provided, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause
the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
d. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this section;
e. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this section to such
assistants and other employees as he may require in the performance of
his duties.
§ 12-9.9 SPARTA CODE § 12-9.10
1:236
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 14-1. TITLE. [1978 Code § 22-1; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-1]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Property
Maintenance Code of the Township of Sparta."
§ 14-2. FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY. [1978 Code
§ 22-2; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-2]
It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the Township lands and
premises with and without structures situate thereon which are, or are
likely to become, substandard as a result of the inadequate care, upkeep,
or maintenance thereof, and that such conditions, including but not limited
to deterioration and decay of structures, essential utilities and sanitary
facilities, and the accumulation of brush, weeds, dead and dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris, create
or are likely to create fire hazards, infestation and unsanitary conditions
menacing the public health, safety, general welfare and reasonable comfort
and repose of the citizens and inhabitants of the Township.
It is further found and declared that the inadequate care, upkeep and
maintenance of lands and premises situate in the Township and the
resulting deterioration thereof causes, or is likely to cause, blighting
conditions initiating and fostering slums, and that, if such conditions are
not controlled, curtailed and removed, the same shall develop and spread,
necessitating the eventual expenditure of large sums of public moneys
to correct or eliminate the same, and that, by virtue of the timely
implementation of the regulations herein contained, the development and
spread of such conditions may be prevented with the public health, safety
and welfare being thereby promoted and preserved.
§ 14-3. PURPOSE. [1978 Code § 22-3; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-3]
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare and to preserve property values by establishing minimum standards
governing the maintenance, appearance and condition of premises; to
establish minimum standards governing utilities, sanitary facilities and
other physical components and conditions essential to rendering such
premises fit for human habitation, occupancy and use; to fix certain
responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators of such premises
and distinct and separate responsibilities and duties upon the occupants
thereof; to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of
premises; to fix penalties for the violation of this chapter; to provide for
the right of access across adjoining premises to permit repairs required
hereunder; and to provide for the repair and maintenance of such premises
and the abatement of nuisances by the Township. This chapter does not
apply to commercial farms to the extent it conflicts with the farmer's rights
under the New Jersey "Right to Farm Act" (N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.).
§ 12-9.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-3
1:237
This chapter is hereby declared to be remedial in promoting the public
interest and is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose as stated
herein.
§ 14-4. DEFINITIONS. [1978 Code § 22-4; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-4]
As used in this section:
BATHROOM — Shall mean any enclosed space which contains one or more
of the following: bathtub, shower, water closet, lavatory, water closet
compartment, washbowl, sink or fixtures serving similar purposes.
BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof, whether
used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outbuildings and
appurtenances, belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DETERIORATION — Shall mean the condition or appearance of a building
or part thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking,
peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use. Deterioration does not apply to building
materials which are expected to "weather" naturally.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS — Shall mean all officials, officers or
employees entrusted with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Shall mean any premises or any part thereof
which may be lawfully viewed by the public or any member thereof from
a sidewalk, street, alleyway, public or private, open air parking lot or any
adjoining or neighboring premises.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Shall mean those portions of a building
which are exposed to public view and the open space of any premises
outside of any building erected thereon.
EXTERMINATION — Shall mean the control and elimination of insects,
rodents, bats, birds, pigeons and vermin by eliminating their harborages; or
by removing or making inaccessible material that may serve as their food;
or by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or any other approval means
of pest elimination.
FIRE HAZARD (ALSO SEE NUISANCE) — Shall mean anything or any act
which increases or may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of
fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by
persons in the public service of preventing, suppressing or extinguishing
fire; or which may obstruct, delay or hinder or may become the cause of any
obstruction, delay, a hazard or a hindrance to the prevention, suppression
or extinguishments of fire.
GARBAGE (SEE ALSO REFUSE, RUBBISH) — Shall mean putrescible
animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
HARD SURFACE — Shall mean anything consisting of asphalt, concrete
and/or compacted stone.
§ 14-3 SPARTA CODE § 14-4
1:238
INFESTATION — Shall mean the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard.
NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Shall mean all properties used for
industrial or commercial purposes, provided that multiple dwelling
residential buildings or project containing more than four dwelling units
shall be treated as nonresidential properties for purposes of this chapter.
NUISANCE — Shall mean:
OCCUPANCY UNIT — Shall mean any room or group of rooms or part
thereof forming a single usable unit (used or intended to be used, or
designed to be used, for residential and nonresidential purposes) and
located within a building used or intended to be used or designed to be
used, in whole or in part, for residential, commercial business, industrial or
any other nonresidential occupancy.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of
a premises, or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and
consent of the owner.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person, persons or entity who has charge,
care, or control, of a premises, or part thereof, with or without the
knowledge, consent or authority of the owner.
OWNER — Shall mean any person who alone or jointly or severally with
others shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
Any public nuisance known as common law or in equity jurisprudence
as provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey or the ordinances
of the Township of Sparta.
a.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of persons, whether in a building, on the premises of a building,
or upon an unoccupied lot. This shall include, but is not limited to:
abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes,
refrigerators, motor vehicles, signs, any structurally unsound fences or
structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris, garbage, or vegetation such
as poison ivy, oak or sumac.
b.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health for
persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist.
c.
d. Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this chapter.
Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation of
Township ordinances.
e.
Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous
to health in violation of this chapter.
f.
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the
health of human beings.
g.
h. Fire hazards.
§ 14-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-4
1:239
accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or
control of any dwelling or dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner, or
as fiduciary, including, but not limited to: executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate, or as a
mortgagee in possession regardless of how such possession was obtained.
Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part or all of any
dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor
and/or assigned by said lessee.
PARKING AREA — Shall mean that area of a property used in connection
with the main use for the temporary leaving of vehicles.
PERSON — Shall include any natural person, association, partnership, firm
or corporation.
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings
or structures thereon.
PRIVATE STREET — Shall mean that area of a nonresidential, nonpublic
property used in connection with the main nonresidential use as a
thoroughfare for ingress and egress, including alleys and driveways.
REFUSE (SEE ALSO GARBAGE, RUBBISH) — Shall mean all putrescible
and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes) including, but not
limited to: garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
REGISTERED MAIL — Shall mean registered mail or certified mail.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Shall mean any property used for residential
purposes, less than four units or not covered under the nonresidential
property definition.
RUBBISH (SEE ALSO GARBAGE, REFUSE) — Shall mean nonputrescible
solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes,
such as papers, wrappings, cigarettes, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean any combination of any materials, whether fixed
or portable, forming a construction, including buildings.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — Shall mean the Township Manager of the
Township of Sparta and such other officials as the Township Manager may
designate to act in his behalf.
VENTILATION — Shall mean the supply and removal of air to and from any
space by natural or mechanical means.
WEATHERING — Shall mean the deterioration, decay or damage caused by
exposure to the elements.
§ 14-4 SPARTA CODE § 14-4
1:240
Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "accessory structure,"
"building," "dwelling," "premises" or "structure" are used in this code, they
shall be construed, unless expressly stated to the contrary, to include the
plurals of these words and as if they were followed by the words "or any
part thereof." The word "shall" shall be applied retroactively as well as
prospectively.
§ 14-5. APPLICABILITY.
§ 14-5.1. Compliance. [1978 Code § 22-5.1; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-5.1]
All buildings and the premises on which they are situated in the Township,
used or intended to be used for residential, commercial, business or
industrial occupancy, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter,
whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered or
repaired before or after the enactment of this chapter, and irrespective
of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or
occupancy of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or
facilities prior to the effective date of this chapter. This chapter establishes
minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of
all such buildings, and does not replace or modify standards otherwise
established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building,
equipment or facilities contained therein.
§ 14-5.2. Higher Standard to Prevail in Cases of Conflict with other
Laws or Ordinances. [1978 Code § 22-5.2; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-5.2]
In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard
than set forth in any other ordinances of the Township or under the laws of
the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail,
but if the provisions of this chapter impose a lower standard than any other
ordinances of the Township or of the laws of the State of New Jersey, then
the higher standard contained in any such other ordinance or law shall
prevail.
§ 14-5.3. Issuance and Renewal of Other Permits and Licenses.
[1978 Code § 22-5.3; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-5.3]
After the date of enactment hereof, all licenses and permits shall be issued
upon compliance with this chapter as well as compliance with the
ordinances under which such licenses and permits are granted.
§ 14-5.4. Enforcement of and Compliance with Other Ordinances.
[1978 Code § 22-5.4; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-5.4]
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this chapter
shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the
Township applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision
herein relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any
§ 14-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-5.4
1:241
such other provision, or any official of the Township from enforcing any such
other provisions.
§ 14-6. RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER, OPERATOR AND
OCCUPANT INDEPENDENT OF EACH OTHER.
§ 14-6.1. Owner and Operator. [1978 Code § 22-6.1; Ord. No. 02-06
§ 14-6.1]
Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed in this chapter and the regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from any such duty
and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge or violation
thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also responsible therefore
and in violation thereof.
§ 14-6.2. Occupant. [1978 Code § 22-6.2; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-6.2]
Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in §
14-8 and all the regulations promulgated thereto, and the occupant shall not
be relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend
against any charge or violation thereof by reason of the fact that the owner
or operator is also responsible therefore and in violation thereof.
§ 14-7. MAINTENANCE OF EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES.
§ 14-7.1. Nuisances and Hazards to be Removed and Abated. [1978
Code § 22-7; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-7]
The exterior of the premises shall be kept free of litter (including without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, discarded, windblown, deposited,
dropped or strewn paper, wrappings, cardboard, bottles, cans, boxes and
broken glass) and all nuisances and hazards to the safety of tenants,
occupants, pedestrians and other persons having access to the premises,
and free of unsanitary conditions; and any of the foregoing shall be promptly
removed and abated. Failure to meet the following standards shall
constitute a "hazard." The list is not exclusive.
§ 14-5.4 SPARTA CODE § 14-7.1
1:242
Chimneys and flue and vent attachments thereto shall mean chimneys and
flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained, structurally sound,
free from defects and so maintained as to capably perform at all times the
functions for which they were designed and constructed. Chimneys, flues,
gas vents and other draft producing equipment shall provide sufficient
draft to develop the rated output of the connected equipment, shall be
structurally safe, durable, smoke tight, and capable of withstanding the
action of flue gases. (See Article 10, BOCA).
Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs, and fire escapes shall mean
exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be
provided with banisters or railing properly designed and maintained,
structurally sound, in good repair, well painted or otherwise provided with
a protective treatment to prevent deterioration, and free from defects.
Foundation walls shall mean foundation walls shall be kept structurally
sound, free from defects and damage and capable of bearing imposed loads
safely. (See Article 7, BOCA).
Freedom from accumulations and obstructions shall mean no accumulation
or obstruction from garbage, refuse or rubbish shall be permitted on
exterior stairways, areaways, balconies, porches, alleyways, except that
garbage stored in proper containers may be set out for removal. (See
Chapter 22, § 22-2, Garbage).
General property maintenance shall mean the premises shall be
maintained in an orderly state, free from becoming overgrown, littered
and unsightly where such would constitute a blighting effect on adjoining
and nearby property. Open areas shall be maintained to avoid unsightly or
unsafe conditions.
Ground surface hazards or unsanitary conditions shall mean holes,
excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, icy conditions and
uncleared snow on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas
and other parts of the premises (e.g. exterior porches, landings, balconies,
stairs and fire escapes) which are accessible to be used by persons on
the premises. All such holes and excavations shall be filled and repaired,
walks and steps replaced and other conditions removed where necessary to
eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions with reasonable dispatch upon
their discovery.
Natural growth shall mean dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural
growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm
damage constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees shall
be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions.
Overhanging shall mean loose and overhanging objects, and accumulations
of ice and snow which by reason of location above ground level constitute
a danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof.
§ 14-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-7.1
1:243
Recurring accumulation of storm water shall mean adequate runoff drains
shall be provided and maintained in accordance with Township ordinances
to eliminate any such recurrent or excessive accumulation of storm water.
Leaders and gutters shall be maintained in good condition and capable of
performing their functions.
Refuse shall mean brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, rubbish, refuse and debris.
Storage of commercial and industrial materials for nonresidential
properties shall mean there shall not be stored or used at a location visible
from the sidewalk, street or other public areas, equipment and materials
relating to commercial or industrial uses unless permitted under the zoning
ordinance for the premises. (See Article 6, BOCA).
§ 14-8. APPEARANCE OF EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES AND
WINDOW DISPLAY AREAS.
§ 14-8.1. Maintained by Owner or Operator. [1978 Code 22-8; Ord.
No. 02-06 § 14-8.1]
The exterior of the premises shall be maintained by the owner or operator
so that the appearance thereof shall reflect a level of maintenance in
keeping with the standards of the neighborhood or such higher standards as
may be adopted by the Township and such that the appearance thereof shall
not constitute a blighting effect upon neighboring properties nor an element
leading to a progressive deterioration and downgrading of neighboring
properties with an accompanying diminution of property values, including
the following:
a. Landscaping. Where exposed to public view, the landscaping of
premises shall be maintained in an orderly state with lawns and bushes
trimmed and free from becoming overgrown, littered and unsightly
where such would constitute a blighting effect, depreciating adjoining
and nearby properties. Open areas shall be graded evenly to eliminate
holes, depressions, gullies, mounds, accumulations of debris, excavated
material or other unsightly or unsafe conditions.
b. Signs and Billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to
public view permitted by the Zoning Ordinance and regulated by the
Building Code or other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use
shall be maintained in good repair. Any sign or billboard which has
weathered excessively or on which the paint has excessively peeled or
cracked shall, with the supporting members, be removed forthwith or
put into a state of good repair. All inoperative or broken electrical signs
shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting members, be removed
forthwith.
c. Repair and Painting of Exteriors of Buildings. The front and exterior of
all buildings shall be kept in good repair, painted where required or
otherwise provided with protective treatment sufficient to prevent
§ 14-7.1 SPARTA CODE § 14-8.1
1:244
§ 14-9. STRUCTURAL SOUNDNESS AND GENERAL MAINTENANCE
- EXTERIOR.
§ 14-9.1. Requirements. [1978 Code 22-9.1; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-9.1]
The roof of every building shall be maintained watertight and the exterior
of every building, including gutters and leaders, shall be maintained in good
repair, and all exterior surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or otherwise
provided with a protective treatment where necessary for purposes of
preservation and appearances. All exterior surfaces thereof shall be
maintained free from broken glass, loose shingles or siding, crumbling
masonry, excessively peeling paint or other condition reflective of
deterioration and shall not constitute a safety hazard nor nuisance. In
the event repairs to the store front become necessary, such repairs shall
be made in harmony with the original design with the same materials
or materials of appearance similar to those used in the construction of
the store front in such a manner as to permanently repair the damaged
area or areas.
d. Signs or Advertisements Removal for Nonresidential Properties. Except
for "for rent" signs, any temporary sign or other advertising material
glued or otherwise attached to a window or otherwise exposed to public
view shall be removed (a) at the expiration of the event or sale for which
it was erected or posted, or (b) within 90 days after it was erected or
posted, whichever shall have occurred sooner. Except during the course
of repairs or alterations, not more than 33 1/3% of the square footage of
any single window or single window display area shall be devoted to
temporary signs or other advertising material attached thereto or
otherwise exposed to public view.
e. Awnings and Marquees for Nonresidential Properties. Any awning or
marquee and its accompanying structural members which extend over
any street, sidewalk or other portion of the premises shall be
maintained in good repair and shall be so maintained as to not
constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event any such awning
or marquee is not properly maintained in accordance with the
foregoing, it shall, together with its supporting members, be removed
forthwith. In the event any such awning or marquee is made of cloth,
plastic, or similar materials, said materials, where exposed to public
view, shall be maintained in good condition and shall not show evidence
of excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing, or other
deterioration. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment of an awning, marquee or its accompanying structural
members on streets, sidewalks, or other parts of the public domain.
f. Scaffolding. No temporary painting scaffold or other temporary
equipment used for construction, repair or maintenance shall be
permitted to remain in place beyond a period of 90 days after erection
or placement thereof without permission of the enforcement officer.
§ 14-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-9.1
1:245
deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the building itself
may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated, and adjoining
properties and the neighborhood from blighting influences.
§ 14-10. GENERAL SANITATION AND SAFETY AND INTERIOR
MAINTENANCE.
§ 14-10.1. Floors, Walls and Ceilings. [1978 Code 22-10.1; Ord. No.
02-06 § 14-10.1]
Floors, interior walls and ceilings of every structure used for human
habitation shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair and in
a clean and sanitary condition. Floors shall be considered to be structurally
sound when capable of safely bearing normally imposed loads. Walls and
ceilings shall be considered to be in good repair when clean, free from
cracks, breaks, loose plaster, excessive blistering paint and similar
conditions.
§ 14-10.2. Standards. [1978 Code 22-10; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-10.2]
The enforcement officer may order the owner to clean, repair, paint,
whitewash or paper such walls, floors or ceilings when a wall, floor or
ceiling within a building has deteriorated as to provide a harborage for
rodents or vermin, or the plaster wallboard or other covers have become
loose or badly cracked or missing. Nothing in this subsection shall be
so construed as to place upon the nonresident owner responsibilities for
cleanliness contained in Subsection 14-12.1b.
a. Bathroom and water closet compartment floors, walls and ceilings,
where deemed necessary by the enforcement officer, shall be surfaced
with water resistant material and shall be kept in a dry, clean and
sanitary condition at all times.
b. Supporting structural members shall be kept structurally sound, free
from deterioration and capable of safely bearing imposed loads.
c. Responsibility for Receptacles. In buildings containing not more than
four occupancy units, it shall be the responsibility of each of the
occupants. In buildings containing more than four occupancy units, it
shall be the responsibility of the owner and operator to furnish such
receptacles as are needed for the proper storage of garbage and
rubbish until removal thereof and to provide for the periodic removal of
all garbage and rubbish from the premises in accordance with the
regulations and ordinances of the Township.
d. Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for the storage of
accumulated garbage and rubbish unless:
1. Such rubbish or garbage is stored in watertight receptacles of
metal or other material approved by the enforcement official and
covered with tight fitting lids.
§ 14-9.1 SPARTA CODE § 14-10.2
1:246
§ 14-11. STREET MAINTENANCE.
§ 14-11.1. Standards. [1978 Code 22-11; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-11.1]
2. Such storage bins, rooms and areas are of smooth, easily cleanable
construction and are kept in a sanitary condition.
3. When rubbish and garbage are stored inside the building, the room
or area containing said rubbish and garbage shall be so
constructed or protected as to prevent the spread of fire to other
parts of the building or buildings.
4. When rubbish and garbage are collected or stored outside any
nonresidential building, the receptacles for the collection of such
rubbish and trash shall be, when visible from any public walk,
street, or public parking area, constructed in such a manner as to
harmoniously blend with the general facade of the building.
e. Rubbish and garbage shall be readily accessible for collection, stored in
such manner as to constitute the least likelihood of becoming a fire
hazard and shall be placed or kept on the property within the building
located thereon or not nearer to the street line than the building line or
nearer to the street line than the face of the building, whichever
distance from the street line is the greater, except during any "cleanup
week" proclaimed by the Township Council.
f. Flammable or combustible liquids or other materials shall not be stored
on the premises unless they are of a type approved for storage by
regulation of the Fire Department and then only in such quantities and
in such fireproof storage containers as may be prescribed by the Sparta
Township Fire Prevention Code as contained in the National Fire Code.
g. Every occupant of a single occupancy unit in a building comprising a
single occupancy unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises. Whenever
infestation exists in one or more of the occupancy units in any building
or in the common parts of any building containing two or more
occupancy units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the
owner and operator. Extermination must be performed by a person
holding State pesticide applicator's license issued by New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, Pesticide Control.
a. No person owning or occupying any property within Sparta Township
shall permit any parking area or private street to become deteriorated
and shall maintain said parking area and private street in good repair,
smoothly graded, hard-surfaced and adequately drained. All dangerous
parking areas and private streets within the terms of this chapter are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be repaired and
maintained as hereinafter provided.
§ 14-10.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-11.1
1:247
§ 14-12. OCCUPANTS.
§ 14-12.1. Duties and Responsibilities of Occupants. [1978 Code
22-12.1; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-12.1]
§ 14-13. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
§ 14-13.1. Construction Official Designated Supervisor. [1978 Code
22-13.1; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-13.1]
Construction Official to supervise administration of inspections,
regulations, enforcements and hearings on violations. The Construction
Official is hereby designated to supervise and direct all inspections,
regulations, enforcements and hearings on violations of the provisions of
this chapter, unless expressly stated to the contrary. Other public officials or
employees of the Township may be designated by ordinance or the Township
Manager to perform duties as may be necessary to the enforcement of this
chapter, including the making of inspections and holdings of hearings.
b. The following standards shall be followed in substance by the
Construction Code Official in ordering repairs and maintenance.
1. If a dangerous parking area or private street can reasonably be
repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of
this chapter, it shall be ordered repaired.
2. Restoration and repair shall be in accordance with the
specifications of the Township.
3. The surface shall conform to proper grade for entrance and exit
onto the public thoroughfares.
4. Owner or occupier shall notify the Township Construction Official
before the repair work is commenced.
5. During repair work, every reasonable and necessary precaution
shall be taken by the owner or occupier to keep the area free of
safety hazards.
a. Upon discovery by an occupant of any condition on the premises which
constitutes a violation of this chapter, the occupant shall report the
same to the enforcement officer.
b. All parts of the premises under the control of an occupant shall be kept
in a clean, sanitary and safe condition by the occupant and the occupant
shall refrain from performing any acts which would render other parts
of the premises unclean, unsanitary or unsafe, or which would prevent
the owner or operator from performing any duty required hereunder.
§ 14-11.1 SPARTA CODE § 14-13.2
1:248
§ 14-13.2. Inspections. [1978 Code 22-13.3; Ord. No. 02-06
§ 14-13.2]
When inspections are to be made. All buildings and exterior premises are
subject to inspections from time to time by the enforcing officer of the
Township. At the time of such inspections, parts of the exterior premises
must be available and accessible for such inspections, and the owner,
operator and occupant are required to provide the necessary arrangements
to facilitate such inspections. All inspections, as provided for herein, shall
be with the permission of the owner, operator or occupant. When requesting
such permission, the enforcement officer shall advise the owner, operator
or occupant of his right to refuse such permission. In the event that such
permission is denied, upon request, the enforcement officer is hereby
authorized and empowered to apply to any court of competent jurisdiction
for a search warrant for any building or premises subject to this chapter
whenever necessary to inspect such building or premises. Such inspections
shall be made during daylight hours or during hours when the building
or premises are open to the public, unless there is reason to believe a
violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or
safety, requiring inspection and abatement without delay.
§ 14-13.3. Service of Violation Notice. [1978 Code 22-13.3; Ord. No.
02-06 § 14-13.3]
Procedure where violation is discovered. Where a violation of this chapter
or the regulations hereunder is found to exist, a written notice from the
enforcing official shall be served on the person or persons responsible for
the correction thereof.
§ 14-13.4. Contents of Notice. [1978 Code 22-13.4; Ord. No. 02-06
§ 14-13.4]
The notice shall specify the violation or violations committed, what must
be done to correct same, a reasonable period of time not to exceed 32
days to correct or abate the violation, the right of the person served to
request a hearing, and that the notice shall become an order in 10 days after
service unless a hearing is requested pursuant to Subsection 14-13.6. The
notice shall also advise the recipient that, if the violation is not corrected or
abated, the municipality may do the same, the cost of which shall become a
lien on the subject property.
§ 14-13.5. Methods of Serving Notice. [1978 Code 22-13.5; Ord. No.
02-06 § 14-13.5]
Notice shall be deemed to be properly and sufficiently served if a copy is
sent by certified or registered mail to the last known address of the person
or entity upon which this notice is to be served as shown on the most recent
tax records of the Township; or a copy is handed to the person or persons
or copies left at the usual place of abode or office of the person to be served
with a family member or other person authorized to accept service over the
§ 14-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-13.5
1:249
age of 14 years old. If the last known address cannot be ascertained then
notice may be posted at the outside entrance of the building. The enforcing
officer shall file and provide notice to any owner, operator or occupant of
any violation at an address other than the last known address provided
hereunder if such other address is available to the enforcing officer. Date of
service of the notice shall be determined where service is by mail as of the
third day following the day of mailing. Where the day of service would fall
upon a Sunday or other day when mail is not ordinarily delivered, then the
day of service shall be the next regular delivery day.
§ 14-13.6. Notice to Become an Order Unless Hearing Requested.
[1978 Code 22-13.6; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-13.6]
Within 10 days of the date of service of a notice, the notice shall constitute
a final order unless any person affected by the notice requests an
administrative hearing thereon, serves a written request within the tenday
period in person or by registered mail on the Township Manager. Such
request for a hearing shall set forth briefly the grounds or reasons on which
the request for a hearing is based and the factual matters contained in the
notice of violation which are to be disputed at the hearing. The Township
Manager, upon receipt of the request, shall within 30 days therefrom and
upon five days' notice to the party aggrieved set the matter down for
hearing.
§ 14-13.7. Determination at Hearing. [1978 Code 22-13.7; Ord. No.
02-06 § 14-13.7]
At any hearing provided hereunder, the Township Manager shall be vested
with all the powers provided by law to compel the attendance of witnesses
and parties in interest by issuance and service of subpoena, to require by
subpoena the production of books, records or other documents at any such
hearing which may be pertinent to matters to be determined by him and to
enforce any such subpoena or secure any order for the enforcement of any
such subpoena 10 days from the completion of the hearing. The Township
Manager shall issue an order either incorporating the determinations and
directions contained in the notice, modifying the same or withdrawing of
the notice.
§ 14-13.8. Extensions of Time. [1978 Code 22-13.8; Ord. No. 02-06
§ 14-13.8]
The Township Manager may extend the time for correction or abatement of
the violations for an additional period of time not to exceed 30 days, except
where major capital improvements or renovations are involved, in which
instance the time for completion may be extended for a period not to exceed
90 days beyond the expiration date of the original notice.
§ 14-13.5 SPARTA CODE § 14-13.9
1:250
§ 14-13.9. Summary Abatement in Emergency Notice and Hearing
Not Required. [1978 Code 22-13.9; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-13.9]
Where the violation or condition existing on the premises are of such
nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life and limb unless abated
without delay, the Township Manager may either abate the violation or
condition immediately or order the owner, operator or occupant to correct
the violation or condition within a period of time not to exceed three days,
and upon failure to do so, the Township Manager shall abate the condition
immediately thereafter.
§ 14-13.10. Cost of Any Abatement to be a Lien Against Premises.
[1978 Code 22-13.10; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-13.10]
Where abatement of any nuisance as defined herein, correction of a defect
in the premises or the maintenance of the premises in a proper condition so
as to conform to the municipal ordinances or State law applicable thereto
requires expending Township monies therefore, the enforcing officer shall
present a report of work proposed to be done to accomplish the foregoing
to the Township Manager with an estimate of the cost thereof along with a
summary of the proceedings undertaken by the enforcing officer to secure
compliance including notices served upon the owners, operators, lessors
or agents, as the case may be, and hearing and orders of the Township
Manager with reference thereto. The Township Manager may thereupon
order the abatement of the nuisance and correction of the defect or work
necessary to place the premises in proper condition and in compliance with
ordinances of the Township and laws of the State. The enforcing officer
may thereafter proceed to have the work performed in accordance with said
order to Township expense, not to exceed the amount specified in the order,
and shall upon completion thereof submit a report of the monies expended
and costs to the Township Manager. After review of the same, the Township
Council may approve the expenses and costs whereupon the same shall
become a lien against the premises, collectible as provided by law. A copy
of the resolution approving the expenses and costs shall be certified by the
Township Clerk and filed with the Tax Collector of the Township who shall
be responsible for the collection thereof, and a copy of this resolution shall
be sent by certified mail to the owner.
§ 14-13.11. Extension of Time Where Dispossess Action
Undertaken. [1978 Code 22-13.11; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-13.11]
Where there exists a violation of this chapter, an owner or operator, upon
receipt of a notice of violation, if unable to eliminate the violation by
peaceable means within the period of time specified in said notice, may
commence within such period legal action to dispossess, evict or eject the
occupants who cause the violation. No further action hereunder shall then
be taken against the owner or operator so long as the action aforesaid is
pending in the court and is prosecuted expeditiously and in good faith.
§ 14-13.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-13.12
1:251
§ 14-13.12. Accumulation of Snow and Ice on Walks and Parking
Areas. [1978 Code 22-13.12; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-13.12]
No notice shall be required on the enforcement of Subsection 14-13.11
hereof, as to the removal of accumulated snow or ice from paths, walks,
driveways, parking lots and parking areas used by pedestrians and
automobiles where such snow or ice remain uncleared within 24 hours
after the termination of the snowfall. Where the Township Manager after
hearing shall determine that there was a violation and a notice was served
upon the owner, operator or occupant, whether or not said violation was
abated prior to the issuance of an order, if thereafter within the space of
one year there shall be a second violation by the same owner, operator
or occupant of the same provision of this chapter discovered on the same
premises, the offender may be prosecuted on the second violation without
the enforcing officer first giving notice and opportunity for a hearing to the
owner, operator, or occupant by the filing of a complaint by the enforcing
officer in the municipal court. Where the Township Manager has on two
different occasions found violations by the same owner, operator, or
occupant on the same premises and has issued notices on each and has
held at least one hearing and issued an order thereon, upon discovering
a third or subsequent violation by the same owner, operator or occupant
on the same within the space of one year, whether the same sections or of
any other sections of this chapter, he may thereupon prosecute the offender
by filing a complaint in the municipal court for the third or subsequent
violation occurring within the period of one year without first providing
notice and opportunity for a hearing by the Township Manager.
§ 14-13.13. Effect of Notice on Owner. [1978 Code 22-13.13; Ord.
No. 02-06 § 14-13.13]
For the purposes of enforcement of this chapter, the service of a notice on
an owner, whether or not the owner is also the operator, shall constitute
notice of violations set forth therein until said violations are abated in
conformity with this chapter and the other applicable ordinances of the
Township.
§ 14-13.14. Further Appeal. [Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-13.14]
In the event an aggrieved party seeks further review of the decision of the
Township Manager after a hearing pursuant to § 14-13.7, the party shall
have the right to file an appeal with a court of competent jurisdiction with
venue in Sussex County, New Jersey.
§ 14-14. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
§ 14-14.1. Fines for Violations. [1978 Code § 22-14.1; Ord. No.
02-06 § 14-14.1]
A violation of any section or subsection of this chapter shall be subject
to enforcement before a court of competent jurisdiction, including the
§ 14-13.12 SPARTA CODE § 14-14.1
1:252
Sparta Township Municipal Court. Violators shall be subject to the penalties
provided for in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 14-14.2. Meaning of "Each Violation." [1978 Code 22-14.2; Ord.
No. 02-06 § 14-14.2]
Each violation of a section or subsection of this chapter shall constitute
a separate and distinct violation independent of any other section or
subsection or any order issued pursuant to this chapter. Each day's failure
to comply with any such section or subsection shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 14-14.3. Second Violations. [1978 Code 22-14.3; Ord. No. 02-06
§ 14-14.3]
Where an owner, operator or occupant has been convicted of a violation of
this chapter and within 12 months thereafter has been found by the Judge
of the Municipal Court to be guilty of a second violation, the Court may, if
it finds that the second offense was willful and inexcusable, sentence the
offender in addition to or in lieu of the fine set forth in Subsection 14-14.1
to imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days.
§ 14-14.4. Application to Officers or Agents. [1978 Code 11-14.4;
Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-14.4]
Where the defendant is other than a natural person or persons, Subsections
14-14.2 and 14-14.3 shall also apply to any agent, superintendent, officer,
member or partner who shall alone or with others have charge, care or
control of the premises.
§ 14-14.5. Fine as a Lien. [1978 Code 22-14.5; Ord. No. 02-06
§ 14-14.5]
In the event of the imposition of a fine or penalty by the Municipal Court
or any other court of competent jurisdiction against the owner, operator or
lessor of any building or structure in the Township required to be registered
for violation of any Township ordinance or any State law applicable to
the Township, the fine or penalty shall be collectible as a lien against the
premises, in addition to any other remedies now provided by law.
§ 14-14.6. Existing Offenses and Violations Not Discharged. [1978
Code 22-14.6; Ord. No. 02-06 § 14-14.6]
The repeal of any provisions of any other ordinances by this chapter shall
not affect any action for prosecution or abatement under any such
ordinance or any notice, complaint or order issued by any officer or agency
of the Township prior to the effective date hereof or concerning which
any prosecution or other steps of enforcement have been taken or are
being taken within any administrative agency or in the municipal court for
enforcement thereof.
§ 14-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-15
1:253
§ 14-15. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 14-15.1. Township Manager. [1978 Code 22-15.1; Ord. No. 02-06
§ 14-15.1]
The Township Manager, with the advice of the Construction Official, is
hereby authorized and empowered to promulgate such written rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the proper interpretation and
administration of the provisions of this chapter, provided that such rules
and regulations do not conflict with this chapter and conform to the general
standards prescribed by this chapter. The Township Manager shall file
copies of such rules and regulations with the Township Clerk which shall
be available during regular business hours. Such rules and regulations shall
have the same force and effect as the provisions of this chapter if approved
by the Township Council by resolution, and the violations thereof shall be
enforced as violations of the express provisions of this chapter, as herein
provided.
§ 14-16. REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF VACANT AND
ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES AND VACANT AND
ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES IN FORECLOSURE.
[Added 11-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-15]
a. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CREDITOR — A state chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan
association or credit union, any person or entity required to be licensed
under the provisions of the "New Jersey Residential Mortgage Act," P.L.
2009, c. 53 (N.J.S.A. 17:11C-51 et seq.), any foreclosing entity subject
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, Sec. 17, as
amended from time to time) and any entity acting on behalf of the
creditor named in the debt obligation including, but not limited to,
servicers.
OWNER — The titleholder, any agent of the titleholder having authority
to act with respect to the vacant property, or any other entity
determined by the Township of Sparta to act with respect to the
property.
VACANT AND ABANDONED — Residential property means, consistent
with Section 1 of P.L. 2012, c. 70 (N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73), residential real
estate, where a notice of violation has been issued pursuant to
Subsection e1 of this section and Subsection B of Section 1 of P.L. 2014,
c. 35 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s), or property which any condition on its own
or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable
person to believe that the property is or has been vacant for three or
more months. Residential property shall further be deemed vacant and
abandoned where a mortgaged property is not occupied by a mortgagor
or tenant. Such evidence would include, but is not limited to, evidence
§ 14-15 SPARTA CODE § 14-16
1:254
of the existence of two or more of the following conditions at the
property:
1. Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the
property;
2.
3. Disconnected gas, electric, or water utility services to the property;
The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances
or materials on the property;
4.
5. The accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or
shutters;
6.
7. The absence of furnishings and personal items;
Statements of neighbors, association management, delivery
persons, or government employees indicating that the residence is
vacant and abandoned;
8.
Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or
closed off or multiple window panes are damage, broken and
unrepaired;
9.
Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off,
unhinged, or continuously unlocked;
10.
A risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining
or adjacent property owners, existing due to acts of vandalism,
loitering, criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or
deterioration of the property;
11.
An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing, or
similar code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal
authorities declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to
remain vacant and unoccupied;
12.
The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized
the property due to the property being deemed vacant and
unprotected or in danger of freezing;
13.
A written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear
intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property;
14.
15. Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
b. Registration of Vacant and Abandoned Properties.
1. A creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose
on a vacant and abandoned property, or a creditor who has
previously filed a summons and complaint to foreclose on a
§ 14-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-16
1:255
residential property which subsequently becomes vacant and
abandoned, or the owner of a vacant and abandoned property, shall
within 30 calendar days after the building becomes vacant and
abandoned or within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of
the vacant and abandoned property, whichever is later; or within 10
calendar days of receipt of notice from the Township, and annually
thereafter, file a registration statement for such vacant and
abandoned property with the municipal clerk on forms provided by
the Township for such purposes. Any failure to receive notice from
the Township shall not constitute grounds for failing to register the
vacant and abandoned property.
2. Each vacant and abandoned property having a separate block and
lot number as designated in the official tax maps of the Township
shall be registered separately.
3. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of a person 21
years or older, designated by the creditor or the owner as the
authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations and for
receiving process in any court proceeding or administrative
enforcement proceeding on behalf of such creditor in connection
with the enforcement of any applicable code.
4. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of the firm and
the actual name(s) of the owner of the vacant or abandoned
property or the firm's individual principal(s) responsible for
maintaining the vacant and abandoned property. The owner or the
individual or representative of the firm responsible for maintaining
the vacant and abandoned property shall be available by telephone
or in person on a twenty-four-hour-per-day, seven-day-per-week
basis. The two entities may be the same or different persons. In the
case of a creditor, both entities shown on the statement must
maintain offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the
State of New Jersey.
5. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration except for the initial registration which shall be valid
through December 31 of the year in which it was filed. The owner of
the property or the creditor shall be required to renew the
registration annually as long as the building remains vacant and
abandoned and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in the
amount prescribed in Subsection c of this section for each vacant
and abandoned property registered.
6. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1 each year. The
initial registration fee shall be pro-rated for registration statements
received less than 10 months prior to that date.
§ 14-16 SPARTA CODE § 14-16
1:256
7. The owner of the property or the creditor shall notify the municipal
clerk within 30 calendar days of any change in the registration
information by filing an amended registration statement on a form
provided by the municipal clerk for such purpose.
8. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Township against
the creditor.
c. Fee Schedule. The initial registration fee for each vacant and
abandoned property under the provisions of this section shall be $500.
The fee for the first annual renewal shall be $1,500 and the fee for the
second annual renewal shall be $3,000. The fee for any subsequent
annual renewal beyond the second renewal shall be $5,000.
d. Responsibility for Vacant and Abandoned Properties.
1. The owner of the property or a creditor filing a summons and
complaint in an action to foreclose on a residential property within
the Township shall be immediately responsible for the care,
maintenance, security and upkeep of the exterior of the property,
after the property becomes vacant and abandoned as defined in
this section.
2. Where a creditor is located out-of-state, the creditor shall be
responsible for appointing an in-state representative or agent to
act on the creditor's behalf for the purpose of satisfying the
requirements of Subsection d1 of this section. Notice of said
representative or agent shall be provided to the municipal clerk
pursuant to Subsection b3 and 4 of this section and pursuant to
Paragraph (1) of Subsection a of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127
(N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51).
e. Notice.
1. The enforcement officers designated in this section shall be
authorized to issue a notice to the owner of the property, or a
creditor that has filed a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a residential property within the Township, if the
enforcement officer determines that the owner of the property, or
creditor that has filed a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a residential property within the Township, has
violated this section by failing to provide for the care, maintenance,
security, and upkeep of the exterior of a vacant and abandoned
property. Where a creditor is an out-of-state creditor, the notice
shall be issued to the representative or agent that has been
identified by the creditor pursuant to Subsection d2 of this section
and Paragraph (1) of Subsection a of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127
(N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51).
§ 14-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-16
1:257
2. The notice referenced in Subsection e1 of this section shall require
the owner or creditor to correct the violation(s) within 30 days of
receipt of the notice, or within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the
violation presents an imminent threat to public health and safety.
3. The issuance of a notice pursuant to Subsection e1 of this section
shall constitute proof that a residential property is vacant and
abandoned for the purposes of this section.
f. Enforcement Officers. The duty of administering and enforcing the
provisions of this section is conferred upon the municipal clerk,
construction official, zoning officer, housing officer, health officer, and
any other duly appointed representatives.
g. Violations and Penalties.
1. The owner of a property, or a creditor subject to this section that is
found by the municipal court of the Township, or by any other court
of competent jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to
correct a care, maintenance, security, or upkeep violation cited in a
notice issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to a fine of
$1,500 for each day of the violation. Any fines imposed pursuant to
this subsection shall commence 31 days following the receipt of the
notice, except if the violation presents an imminent risk to public
health and safety, in which case any fines shall commence 11 days
following receipt of the notice.
2. An out-of-state creditor subject to this section that is found by the
municipal court of the Township, or by any other court of
competent jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to
appoint an in-state representative or agent pursuant to this section
shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day of the violation. Any
fines imposed on a creditor for the failure to appoint an in-state
representative or agent shall commence on the day after the tenday
period set forth in Paragraph (1) of Subsection a of Section 17
of P.L. 2008, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51) for providing notice to the
municipal clerk that a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
3. The owner of a property, or a creditor subject to this section, that is
found by the municipal court of the Township, or by any other court
of competent jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to
register a vacant and abandoned property pursuant to Subsection b
of this section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000. Any
fines imposed on a creditor under this subsection shall commence
11 days following receipt of notice from the Township pursuant to
Subsection b1 of this section.
4. No less than 20% of any money collected by the Township pursuant
to this section shall be utilized by the Township for municipal code
enforcement purposes.
§ 14-16 SPARTA CODE § 14-16
1:258
Chapter 15
(RESERVED)
Chapter 16
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
§ 16-1. UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY CODE ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 16-1.1. Local Enforcement. [1978 Code § 13-1.1; Ord. No. 694 § 1]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, Ch. 383)
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Township
of Sparta.
§ 16-1.2. Agency Designation. [1978 Code § 13-1.2; Ord. No. 694
§ 2]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the
Sparta Township Fire Department.
§ 16-1.3. Duties. [1978 Code § 13-1.3; Ord. No. 694 § 3]
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Township of Sparta,
other than owner-occupied one and two family dwellings, and shall faithfully
comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the
Uniform Fire Code.
5. Nothing in this section is intended to nor shall be read to conflict or
prevent the Township from taking action against buildings found to
be unfit for human habitation or unsafe structures as provided in
the applicable provisions of the Code of the Township and/or the
Uniform Construction Code. Further, any action taken under any
such Code provision other than the demolition of a structure shall
not relieve the owner from its obligation under this section.
6. Municipal powers to rehabilitate abandon property. The Township
hereby grants to itself all such powers granted to municipalities by
the State of New Jersey for the rehabilitation of abandoned
property. Such powers are set forth, inter alia, in the "Abandoned
Properties Rehabilitation Act" (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.) and in
applicable portions of the "New Jersey Urban Development
Corporation Act" (N.J.S.A. 55:19-1 through 77). These statutory
powers are collectively referred to as the "Enabling Statutes."
§ 14-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.4
1:259
§ 16-1.4. Life Hazard Uses. [1978 Code § 13-1.4; Ord. No. 694 § 4]
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall carry out the periodic inspections
of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the
Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 16-1.5. Organization. [1978 Code § 13-1.5; Ord. No. 694 § 5]
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be a part of the Sparta Township Fire
Department.
§ 16-1.6. Appointments, Term of Office, Removal. [1978 Code
§ 13-1.6; Ord. No. 694 § 6; Ord. No. 02-02 § 1]
§ 16-1.7. Board of Appeals. [1978 Code § 13-1.7]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Sussex.
§ 16-1.8. Certificate of Smoke Detector, Carbon Monoxide Alarm
and Fire Extinguisher Compliance. [1978 Code § 13-1.8; Ord. No.
694 § 8; Ord. No. 842 § 1; Ord. No. 08-04 § 1; Ord. No. 08-24 § 5;
Ord. No. 2016-19 § 3]
The application fees for a certificate of smoke detector, carbon monoxide
and fire extinguisher compliance are as follows:
a. Appointment of Fire Official. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be
under the direct supervision of a Fire Official hereinafter known as the
Fire Marshal who shall be appointed by the Township Manager. This
appointment shall be based upon consultation with the Fire Department
Chief and selection shall be made from three candidates recommended
from the Fire Department.
b. Term of Office. The Fire Marshal shall serve for a term of one year, after
which he may be reappointed by the procedures established in
paragraph a. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
c. Inspectors and Employees. Such inspectors and other employees as
may be necessary for the Bureau of Fire Prevention to properly carry
out its responsibilities shall be appointed by the Township Manager
upon the recommendation of the Fire Marshal.
d. Removal from Office. The Fire Marshall, Inspectors and other
employees of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be subject to removal
by the Township Manager for inefficiency or misconduct. The Fire
Marshal, each inspector or employee to be so removed shall be afforded
an opportunity to have a public hearing if he/she so desires.
a. Inspection applications filed prior to 10 calendar days before the
closing date, the inspection fee is $50.
§ 16-1.4 SPARTA CODE § 16-1.8
1:260
§ 16-1.9. Permit Fees. [1978 Code § 13-1.9; Ord. No. 694 § 9; Ord.
No. 842 § 2; Ord. No. 02-02 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-19 § 3]
§ 16-1.10. Technical Amendments. [1978 Code § 13-1.10; Ord. No.
694 § 10]
The National Fire Codes of the National Fire Protection Association shall be
used for any fire safety hazard or condition not specifically addressed by the
B.O.C.A. Fire Prevention Code or the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
§ 16-1.11. Annual Registration Fees. [1978 Code § 13-1.11; Ord. No.
694 § 11]
The State Division of Fire Safety shall collect and account for the annual
registration fees. They shall annually bill for and take such steps as may be
necessary to collect these annual fees. 65% of these fees shall be remitted to
the Township of Sparta in accordance with the provisions of the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code.
§ 16-2. FIRE LANES.
§ 16-2.1. Parking, Stopping, Standing or Otherwise Obstructing
Designated Fire Lanes and Areas Prohibited.
No person shall park, stop, stand a vehicle or otherwise obstruct a fire lane
or area which has been established in the Township of Sparta pursuant to
the Uniform Fire Safety Act of the State of New Jersey.
b. Inspection applications that are filed within 10 calendar days prior to
the closing, the inspection fee is $100.
c. Exceptions:
1. Short sales where the buyer is responsible for paying for the
inspection, the fee for the inspection will be $50.
2. Foreclosure sales where the buyer is responsible for paying for the
inspection, the fee for the inspection will be $50.
a. The permit fees for Life Hazard Inspections shall be as provided in the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
b. For all commercial occupancies that do not meet the criteria for Life
Hazard Inspection as defined in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code,
inspection fees are based on the square footage of the occupancy as
follows:
Size Fee
20 to 500 square feet $25
501 to 11,999 square feet $50
§ 16-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2.1
1:261
Chapter 17
(RESERVED)
Chapter 19
WATER
§ 19-1. WATER SUPPLY CODE FOR INDIVIDUAL WELLS.
§ 19-1.1. Establishment of Code. [1978 Code 11-1.1; New]
A Code regulating the location, construction, alteration, use and supervision
of public non-community and non-public water systems requiring certain
permits, providing for the inspection of such supplies, the fixing of fees and
prescribing penalties for violations thereof is hereby established pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 69.6. A copy of the Code is annexed hereto and made
a part hereof without the inclusion of the text herein.
§ 19-1.2. Title of Code. [1978 Code 11-1.1; New]
The Code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as Standards for the Construction of Public Non-
Community and Non-Public Water Systems (1978).
§ 19-1.3. Public Records. [1978 Code 11-1.1; New; Ord. No. 07-14
§ X]
Three copies of the Standards for the Construction of Public Non-
Community and Non-Public Water Systems (1978) have been placed on file
in the office of the secretary of the Sussex County Health Department for
the use and examination of the public.
§ 19-1.4. Permits Required. [1978 Code § 11-1.3; Ord. No. 662; Ord.
No. 796 § 1; Ord. No. 07-14 § X]
a. No person shall locate, construct or alter any water supply until a
permit for the location, construction or alteration of the water supply
shall have been issued by the Department of Health.
b. No person shall locate, construct or alter any pump and storage tanks
for the purpose of supplying water to a non-public or public noncommunity
water system until a permit for the location, construction or
alteration of the pump and/or storage tank shall have been issued by
the Sussex County Health Department.
c. All permits to locate, construct or alter a non-public or public noncommunity
water system shall expire one year from the date of
issuance.
§ 16-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 19-1.5
1:262
§ 19-1.5. Certificate of Compliance Required. [1978 Code § 11-1.4]
New private water supplies shall not be placed in operation, nor shall
new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto which must rely on such
a supply for water be sold or occupied until the Sanitarian shall have
issued a certificate indicating that the water supply has been located and
constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit issued and the
requirements of the aforesaid Code. Issuance of such certificate shall not be
required for alteration to an existing water supply.
§ 19-1.6. Fees and Charges. [1978 Code § 8-13; § 11-1.5; Ord. No.
638; Ord. No. 662; Ord. No. 663; Ord. No. 796 § 2; Ord. No. 798;
Ord. No. 03-08 § 5]
The following fees and charges are hereby established:
§ 19-2. WATER SUPPLY CODE FOR CENTRAL WATER SUPPLY
SYSTEM.
§ 19-2.1. Water Systems Serving More than 15 Families. [New; Ord.
No. 04-17 §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 2017-01 § 1]
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Code, wherever a water system
is being installed which will serve more than 15 families, the following
requirements shall apply to such system:
a. The fee for the issuance of a permit to locate, construct or alter nonpublic
or non-community water system $150.
b. The fee for the filing of an application and plans and issuance of a
permit to locate, construct or alter a pump and/or storage tank for the
purpose of supplying water to a non-public or public non-community
water system $40.
c. The fee for each reinspection of a water supply system or part thereof,
caused by the failure of the permittee to locate and construct or alter
the same in accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the terms
of the aforesaid Code shall be for each house or building to be served
$50.
d. The fee for the review of an application and plans to locate, construct or
alter a non-public or public non-community water system $40.
e. The fee for the review of an application and plans to locate, construct or
alter a non-public or public non-community water system, after the
initial review which is necessary because of applicant's failure to
submit an application and plans that conform to the required State Law
and Regulations and local ordinances shall be $25.
f. The fee for the reissuance of a permit that has expired to locate,
construct or alter a non-public or public non-community water system
$40.
§ 19-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2.1
1:263
a. Plans and specifications prepared by a competent engineer showing the
design and location of proposed facilities in accordance with the State
Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-5.3 and New
Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act Regulations; and the source of water
are to be submitted in duplicate to the Township Engineer, and Water
Superintendent and approved in writing by the Township Engineer
prior to submitting a CPI application to the Department of
Environmental Protection for construction approval. In lieu of the
application to the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP), submittal can be made to the Sparta Township Water Utility if
a Master Permit is in effect, issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to the Sparta Township Water Utility, as
authorized under the Safe Drinking Water Act Rules. A Water
Distribution Plan Review Fee shall be paid directly to Sparta Township
as defined under section 19-14u.
b. A developers agreement shall be entered into prior to the start of
construction of the intended subdivision. All water main and service
lines shall be installed in accordance with the State Residential Site
Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-5.3 and the latest construction
standards specification as prepared by the Township. All mains and
service lines shall be inspected and tested at a minimum of 200 psi and
accepted by the Township representative prior to backfilling.
c. The system shall be designed to maintain a normal minimum operating
pressure of 25 psi at the property service shut off. The maximum
pressure delivered during hours of minimum demand shall not exceed
200 psi. All properties failing to meet the 25 psi standard shall have a
booster pump and storage tank installed with a low water pressure cutoff
switch. All services exceeding 80 psi shall have pressure reducing
valves (PRV) installed prior to the meter and relief valves, if installed,
after the meter.
d. The meter location shall be determined by the Township. If an interior
meter installation is required, all valves, meter setting receivers and
necessary wiring to accommodate the meter reading equipment shall
be installed at the owner's expense. Meters will not be allowed in
garages, crawl spaces, bathrooms or kitchens and shall have a
minimum of three feet clear space on all sides for access. If meter pits
are required, the pit pressure reducing valve, meter and receiver, all
conforming with the Water Utility specifications in effect at the time of
installation, shall be obtained and installed by the owner.
e. Main valve boxes, curb valve boxes, meter pits and similar equipment
shall be installed plumb and terminated at a grade elevation with
drainage runoff. The access opening shall be centered over the
operating nut, rod or meter for easy operation or reading. No shrubs or
trees shall be planted in any manner that at maturity will restrict access
and operation of this equipment. If remote meter readouts are required
they shall be installed at a height of five feet above grade along the
front of the structure or on the side wall within five feet of the front
§ 19-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 19-2.1
1:264
§ 19-2.2. Building Plans to Indicate Water Supply; Water
Prerequisites as to Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy.
[New; Ord. No. 07-14 § X]
No residence or other building requiring water service shall be constructed
in the Township unless the plans indicate that it can and will be connected
to an adequate water supply, individual well or public water and that the
utility has confirmed the connection. No building permit will be issued
in areas where the proposed water service will not provide the pressure
specified in Subsection 19-2.1c, where a public water supply is involved
unless a privately owned/maintained booster pump system is installed.
Certificates of Occupancy shall not be issued until the Sussex County Health
Department or providing utility has signed a release indicating all required
conditions have been completed.
§ 19-2.3. Performance Guarantees. [New]
Whenever a central water system is to be constructed pursuant to the terms
of this section or the Land Subdivision Ordinance, the cost of such a system
may be bonded in accordance with the provisions of the chapter in such a
manner as to guarantee the construction of a system which complies with
N.J.A.C. 5:21-5.4 and approved design specifications. However Certificates
of Occupancy will not be granted for completed buildings until an approved
water supply is available.
§ 19-2.4. Stop Work Orders. [New; Ord. No. 07-14 § X]
The Sussex County Health Department for individual wells, or the Water
Utility for public supply, may order all further work in and about any water
supply which is being erected or installed in violation of this section to
be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary to remedy
such violation and thereafter, the work continued without any violation of
any of the provisions of this section. The stop work order will be issued on
wall. There shall be no plants or obstacles placed to impede the reading
of this equipment.
f. All new mains, pumps, tanks, wells and other facilities for handling
potable water shall be thoroughly disinfected, flushed and tested for the
total absence of coliform prior to being put into service. The method of
disinfection shall meet the approval of the State Department of
Environmental Protection and the Township. The owner/builder will be
responsible for all necessary re-disinfecting to achieve a bacteria-free
water should the test results be positive. Certificates of occupancy will
not be released until satisfactory lab results are attained.
g. When a service line is installed for a new connection or relocated for an
existing connection, the trench shall be left open and the line exposed
until it has been inspected by the utility for connection irregularity or
other defects. The meter receiver and valves shall be installed to meet
the requirements of the Plumbing Code.
§ 19-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2.4
1:265
site to any person connected with or working in and about the erection or
installation of any such water supply, or any part thereof, and no further
work shall be done thereon except as aforesaid.
§ 19-2.5. Penalty. [New]
Any person who violates any provision of this section, including the Water
Supply Code of New Jersey (1959) incorporated herein by reference, or an
order promulgated thereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 19-3. WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM.
§ 19-3.1. Established. [1978 Code § 11-2.1]
There is hereby established in the Township a public water distribution
system which shall be designated as the "Sparta Township Water
Distribution System."
§ 19-3.2. System Operated as Municipal Public Utility. [1978 Code
§ 11-2.2]
The water distribution system shall be operated by the Township as a
Municipal Public Utility as defined in and subject to the provisions of Title
40A of the New Jersey Statutes and all fees and charges received by the
Township in connection therewith shall be kept in a fund separate from
other Township revenues to be used only for the purpose of such municipal
utility.
§ 19-3.3. Inclusion of All Public Water Facilities. [1978 Code
§ 11-2.3]
The water distribution system shall include all public water facilities which
the Township may construct, acquire, and/or maintain for the purpose of the
distribution and treatment of water.
§ 19-3.4. Definitions. [1978 Code § 11-2.4; Ord. No. 04-17 § 4]
As used in this chapter:
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Township Water Department.
FIRE SERVICE — Shall mean any line which receives water supplied to
a fire hydrant, stand pipe, sprinkler system, or any combination of the
foregoing, located on private property.
MAIN OR MAINS — Shall mean all pipes, hydrants and valves, other than
supply pipes and service pipe, used for conveying water to or distributing
water throughout the Township.
METER RATES — Shall mean rates or prices to be charged for water, based
upon the quantity consumed as measured by an approved water meter.
§ 19-2.4 SPARTA CODE § 19-3.4
1:266
NORMAL BUSINESS WORKING HOURS — Shall mean 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m., or as may be modified by the Township Manager, Monday through
Friday, exclusive of Township recognized holidays.
ONE PHYSICAL UNIT — Shall mean a property not divisible for sale or
ownership by more than one owner or group of owners.
OWNER — Shall mean any person owning any property or premises which
is, or prospectively can be, supplied with Township water, or the owner's
duly authorized agent or contractor.
PREMISES — Shall mean a building together with appurtenant land used
for either business or residential purposes, or both, together with any
outbuildings used exclusively in connection with it, or any part of a building
with the land appurtenant to it, when sold as a separate unit.
RESALE OF WATER — Shall mean any resale of Township water by any
person. This shall exclude the sale of metered water by landlords to a
tenant.
SERVICE PIPE — Shall mean a pipe extending from the curb valve into
privately-owned property for supplying water.
SUPPLY PIPE — Shall mean a pipe connected to the main and extending to
the curb valve at the curbline of the street.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township water utility or any of the
Township's authorized agents.
WATER UTILITY — Shall mean the water utility of the Township of Sparta.
§ 19-4. APPLICATION FOR WATER SERVICE.
§ 19-4.1. Application Required. [1978 Code § 11-2.4]
The owner of any premises desiring to use Township water or to make a
change in any existing water supply shall make an application in writing to
the Township for water service upon forms provided by the Department. All
connections from the water main to the curb shall be done at the expense
of the property owner as allowed under § 19-6 of this chapter.
§ 19-4.2. Content of Application. [1978 Code § 11-2.5]
The application for a water service shall provide the following information:
The name of the plumber who will prepare for the connection applied
for, the tax map page, block, lot, address of the premises, size of the
water meter, purpose of the connection and the street address and mailing
address, if different, of the owner. The application shall be signed by the
owner of the property for which the connection is being applied for, or by his
authorized agent, and shall be accompanied by the consent of the applicant
to be bound by all the provisions of this section and rules and regulations
adopted by the Township.
§ 19-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-4.3
1:267
§ 19-4.3. Inspection. [1978 Code § 11-2.5]
Upon receipt of an application for services, the Township may make an
inspection of the premises.
§ 19-4.4. Bond Required. [1978 Code § 11-2.5]
Every plumber shall provide evidence that he/she is licensed by the State
of New Jersey, Department of Community Affairs, whereby protection is
afforded against all damages and costs from any injury which might occur
to persons or property by reason of neglect or carelessness on the part
of the plumber during the process of any work. Be it further stated that
the plumber will pay for and protect the Township against all damage and
cost occasioned by any injury, damage, or obstruction which may have been
done or caused to have been done to any of the water mains of the water
distribution system of the Township.
§ 19-4.5. Payment of Fees. [1978 Code § 11-2.5]
No water service shall be made to any premises until all charges due to the
water utility are paid.
§ 19-4.6. Water for Building Purposes. [1978 Code § 11-2.5]
§ 19-4.7. Inspection. [1978 Code § 11-2.5]
Authorized agents of the Township, upon presentation of credentials
provided by the Township, shall have access at any reasonable time to
any premises supplied with Township water for the purpose of making any
desired inspection. This inspection shall include the examination of the
entire water supply and plumbing system upon the premises. Any person
who refuses to admit a duly authorized agent for the purpose of inspection,
or hinders or interferes with an inspection, shall be guilty of a violation of
this section.
§ 19-5. WATER METERS.
a. Application. Where it is desired to use Township water service in
connection with the construction or repair of a building, application
shall be made to the Township by the owner of the building on forms
furnished by the water utility. The character of the work contemplated
and the estimated quantity of water to be used shall be specified in the
application.
b. Fees. No permit for temporary water service during construction or
repair shall be issued unless the fees prescribed in § 19-14 are paid in
advance.
c. Metering. The water utility, at its option, may install a water meter
during the construction or repair of a building upon payment of the fee
prescribed in § 19-14.
§ 19-4.3 SPARTA CODE § 19-5.1
1:268
§ 19-5.1. Required; Duty of Owners; Installation; Maintenance.
[1978 Code § 11-2.6; Ord. No. 580 § 1; New; Ord. No. 04-17 § 5]
a. Meter Required. All Township water used on any premises, except for
fire service lines, must pass through a meter furnished or approved by
the Township.
b. Duty of Owners. All owners of property using water supplied by the
Township shall have the duty of determining that all of the water
supplied passes through a water meter furnished or approved by the
Township, except as provided in Subsection 19-5.1a. Failure to do so
shall not relieve any person from liability for water supplied, and in
such case, the Township shall determine the amount of water used and
the rates to be charged.
c. Meter By-Passes Prohibited. All meter by-passes are outlawed. If a
meter by-pass is used, both the owner and the plumber shall be guilty of
a violation of this section. The only time a jumper may be used is to test
the lines. After the test if finished, the water is to be shut off at the curb
and only turned on by the Township. After the tap has been installed,
the water shall be shut off at the curb and shall be turned on only by the
Township after construction water has been paid for in advance.
d. Meter Installations. In all cases where meters are to be installed, the
Township shall determine or approve the proper location and manner in
which the meter shall be installed and protected. One water meter per
premises shall be installed by the Township. If additional meters are
desired by the owner, they shall be installed after the Township's meter
and paid for and maintained by the owner. Valves shall be provided and
installed by the property owner on each side of and directly adjacent to
the Township meter in compliance with the Plumbing Code. Where high
pressure requires the installation of a PRV, it shall be installed between
the valves prior to the meter. In all installations where booster pumps
are required the pump shall be installed after the meter and the pump
shall be protected with a low water pressure cut-off switch. All new
meters being installed are required to have a technological feature
which allows the meter to be read without access to the premises. The
owner shall be responsible to install the meter yoke to house and hold
the meter and all communication wiring required for remote meter
reading. The inside meter is the master recording instrument to be used
in determining the amount of water delivered to the premises whenever
reading discrepancies occur.
e. Meter Yokes.
1. Meter yokes shall be installed in a manner that provides easy
removal, replacement, inspection and reading of the meter.
2. Meter yokes shall be installed in a manner that will prevent
unauthorized removal or tampering with a meter.
§ 19-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-5.1
1:269
§ 19-6. WATER MAIN AND SUPPLY LATERAL PIPE INSTALLATION
REQUIREMENTS AND FEES.
§ 19-6.1. Individual Installation Approval; Cost to Owner. [1978
Code § 11-2.7; New]
The Department shall supply all of the material to complete a supply lateral
from the main to the property line. The curb valve at the property shall
be 3/4 inch copper minimum. Larger sizes will be installed if requested
3. Meter yokes shall be placed in a free and clear space at least three
feet by three feet.
4. The decision of the Department in regard to meter yokes shall be
final.
f. Care and Protection of Meters.
1. The meter shall remain the property of the Township. The owner
shall be held responsible for the meter, including its care and
protection from damage, freezing, hot water or similar causes. The
owner shall be responsible for preventing unauthorized persons
from tampering with the meter.
In the case of damage to the meter, its stoppage, or improper
working, the owner shall immediately notify the Township and the
Township shall repair the meter.
2. Where replacements, repairs or adjustments of any meter, whether
owned by the Township or not, become necessary due to any willful
negligent act by the owner or occupant of any premises, the owner
shall be responsible to the Township for any expense which it
incurs as a result.
3. Meters shall be sealed by the Township. No person shall
disconnect, remove, break, injure or in any way tamper with the
seal. The seal can only be disconnected, removed, serviced or
installed by the Township or an agent of the Township.
g. Testing of Meters. The Township shall test the accuracy and condition
of any meter upon the written request of the owner or occupant of the
premises served by the meter. The owner must pay for the prescribed
test in advance. If the meter is found to register over 2% fast, it shall be
repaired by the Township or another meter installed and the test fee
refunded. The Township may apply a credit to the water bill upon
whatever basis it deems to be just and reasonable. If the meter is found
to register over 2% slow, it shall be repaired by the Township or another
meter installed and the Township may apply a charge to the water bill
upon whatever basis it deems to be just and reasonable. If the meter is
inoperative and fails to register, the customer will be charged on the
basis of the average daily consumption shown by the meter when it was
operative. The Township may make periodic tests of all meters.
§ 19-5.1 SPARTA CODE § 19-6.1
1:270
and justified. If a water main extension is required to achieve serving
the property, the owner may contract the installation with a reputable
contractor with the approval of the Township. All costs plus unusual
expenses for rock removal or site restoration shall be at the expense of the
property owner.
§ 19-6.2. Maintenance. [1978 Code § 11-2.7; Ord. No. 2017-01]
Supply lateral pipes and water and curb valves mains installed shall be
maintained by the water utility and shall remain the property of the
Township.
§ 19-6.3. Installation. [1978 Code § 11-2.7; New; Ord. No. 04-17 § 6;
Ord. No. 2017-01]
All water main extensions and supply laterals shall be installed in complete
conformance to the Township standards in effect at the time. In the event of
a main extension, the Township may allow the actual tap to be installed by
the contractor, whereas all supply lateral installation only will be tapped by
the Township. The curb valve will be sized for k-copper tubing but if other
material, as allowed under the Plumbing Code and approved by the Water
Utility, is to be used for the service line, it will be the responsibility of the
property owner to provide suitable adaptors. Service line work performed
on the exterior of the property from the curb valve to the structure is
the jurisdiction of the Water Utility. All interior work shall be the property
owner's responsibility to be performed under a plumbing permit as issued
by the Building Department and is not the responsibility of the Water Utility.
Should an alternate service line material be approved, the Water Utility
may require, as a condition of the approval, that the meter be moved to an
exterior pit location in accordance with Township Code Subsection 19-2.1d.
§ 19-6.4. Water Main Extensions. [1978 Code § 11-2.7; New; Ord.
No. 04-17 § 7]
a. All major extensions of the water distribution system shall be done in
conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:21-5.3 and Township standards and D.E.P.
approval. However, in the event that any person may hereafter desire to
lay and construct any extension for the purpose of providing potable
water to their individual property, the extension shall be done and paid
for by the person desiring such extension. Approval for such extension
shall be given only after plans and specifications have been reviewed
and approved by the Department.
b. All mains which are laid at the cost and expense of any person within
the Township shall be inspected by the Township and shall upon
acceptance become the property of the Township. The Township shall
thereafter assume all responsibility for the care, maintenance and
repair of the mains.
§ 19-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-6.5
1:271
§ 19-6.5. Change in Piping Between Curb and Premises; Expense.
[1978 Code § 11-2.7; New; Ord. No. 2017-01]
Any necessary changes in the piping between the curb and the premises
which are due to corrosion or otherwise must be made by the property
owner at the owner's expense. This would also include valves and meter
yokes within the premises and all other material to replace and/or increase
water supply. All exterior work requires approval and inspection by the
Water Utility. All remaining work requires a plumbing permit and shall be
performed subject to inspection and approval by the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 19-6.6. Supplying Several Premises from Single Lateral Supply
Pipe Prohibited. [1978 Code § 11-2.7]
Permission will not be granted to supply two or more buildings from a single
lateral supply pipe.
§ 19-6.7. House Connections. [1978 Code § 11-2.7]
Excavating work, supplies and materials for finishing the installation of
the service line connection to the premises shall be the responsibility of
the owner. The excavation and installation shall be at the expense of the
property owner and shall be performed by the owner's contractor.
§ 19-6.8. Protection of Service Pipes. [1978 Code § 11-2.7; New;
Ord. No. 04-17 § 8]
§ 19-6.9. Maintenance Requirements. [1978 Code § 11-2.7; New;
Ord. No. 2017-01]
a. Service pipes between the curb valve and foundation shall be
maintained with a minimum of 3 1/2 feet of cover for frost protection.
All interior pipes that are likely to be exposed to freezing temperatures
shall be effectively protected from freezing by the property owner.
b. Pipes shall be installed in a manner that will prevent any possible
damage resulting from external heat from boilers, heaters, etc.
c. Service pipes shall be installed in a manner that will prevent any
damage resulting from falling objects, corrosive products, paint
sprayers and similar causes.
d. Service pipes shall be installed in a manner that will prevent any hot
water or other destructive product from returning to the meter.
e. Water conditioning equipment, when installed, shall be done in a
manner such as the installation of a check valve to prevent
conditioners' contents from being displaced in the event of a negative
pressure condition.
a. Property Owner's Responsibility. The property owner shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the building service line, providing
§ 19-6.5 SPARTA CODE § 19-6.9
1:272
§ 19-6.10. Private Well Conversion to Water Utility System. [Ord.
No. 04-17 § 9]
§ 19-7. DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
§ 19-7.1. Request by Property Owner. [1978 Code § 11-2.8; New]
When requested by the owner or its agent, the Department shall discontinue
service to a property. The owner will arrange to have the house open at
free access to the curb valve and protecting the structural condition of
the curb valve box. The property owner shall keep the line and valve
box in good working order or condition, and shall be held liable for any
damage or loss of water from failure to do so.
b. Leaks. All leaks in the house service line shall be reported promptly to
the Department and then repaired by the property owner. If repairs are
not so made, the water shall be shut off by the Department and not
turned on again until the line is placed in serviceable condition and
until all charges for damage or loss of water have been paid.
c. Replacement. Any necessary changes in the piping of the house service
line due to corrosion or otherwise, must be made by the property owner
at the owner's expense. This would also include valves, connections,
material and labor used to increase the water supply or efficiency.
Exterior service line changes are subject to the inspection and approval
by the Water Utility. Any and all other changes are subject to the
approval by the Plumbing Inspector.
a. An existing premises serviced by a private well for potable supply that
connects the premises to the water utility central distribution system
shall remove all interior components of the well system, including but
not limited to the storage tank, controls, well supply line and lawn
irrigation discharge line from the interior of the building.
b. The existing well shall be sealed by a licensed well driller, certified in
sealing wells or may be utilized for other purposes. Maintaining the
existing well for irrigation purposes shall require the relocation of the
well system components to a location exterior to the building, such as a
shed. An unheated section of the premises such as the garage, which is
also remote from any internal water supply lines shall be acceptable
subject to the approval of the water utility and Sparta Plumbing Code
Official.
c. The well can be connected to an underground lawn sprinkling head or
hose bib, but no connection to house mounted hose bibs shall be
allowed.
d. The existing well utilized for irrigation shall be repermitted with the
State of New Jersey. A permit and approval shall also be obtained from
the Sparta Health Department.
§ 19-6.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-7.1
1:273
the time of shut off to confirm that the water is off. A turn-off charge
as allowed under § 19-14 shall be made for discontinuing the service.
Whenever service shall have been shut off at the curb for a period of
time, the minimum service charge hereinafter established shall not continue
against the premises for the elapsed time. No adjustment of water charges
due to failure of the Department to disconnect or restore water service as
requested by an owner shall be made unless the request for discontinuance
or restoration is made in writing and filed with the Department. The owner
will arrange to have the premises open when water is restored and a turnon
charge shall be applied as allowed under § 19-14.
§ 19-7.2. Rebates Prohibited. [1978 Code § 11-2.8]
Where the premises are left vacant, no rebate or adjustments will be
allowed for water registered by the meter unless the water was turned off
by the Department at the curb valve.
§ 19-7.3. Discontinuance by Township. [1978 Code § 11-2.8; New]
Service may be discontinued by the Township after notice for any of the
following causes:
§ 19-8. DROUGHT AND WATER SHORTAGE.
a. The use of water for any property or purpose other then described in
the application.
b. For waste of water through improper or defective pipe or fixtures.
c. For failure to protect the water meter and connections from injury or
damage, or failure to properly maintain the service line and fixtures
owned by the person being served.
d. For tampering with any service pipe, meter, curb box and valve, seal or
other appliance of the Township.
e. Nonpayment of sewer charges as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq.
f. Nonpayment of any charges or fees for water service.
g. For refusing to permit the duly authorized representatives of the
Township to have access to the property for reasonable inspections.
h. In no case shall the water service be restored until the defects have
been remedied and any bills, fines, or penalties imposed have been
paid. Furthermore the owner of the premises shall be liable for any loss
sustained by the Department as a result of such defects. A fee as
allowed under § 19-14 must be paid to cover the cost of shutting off and
turning on the water.
§ 19-7.1 SPARTA CODE § 19-8.1
1:274
§ 19-8.1. Declaration of Emergency. [1978 Code § 11-2.9]
Upon independent investigation or documented requests from the Water
Department, the Township Manager may certify that an emergency exists in
the water supply. The Township Manager may proclaim a water emergency
and prescribe regulations to do the following:
§ 19-8.2. Effect on Regulations. [1978 Code § 11-2.9]
The proclamation of an emergency shall be conclusive as to the fact of the
existence of an emergency and shall be binding on all persons upon its
filing in the Office of the Township Clerk and publication in a newspaper
circulating in the Township. Any regulations included in the proclamation
and any regulations subsequently promulgated shall have the same force
as if specifically set forth in this section. Every owner, lessee, tenant and
occupant of any building or premises served by Township water shall, upon
a proclamation of regulations, become bound by them and shall conform to
them in the use of water and the maintenance of water service connections
and equipment.
§ 19-9. WATER WASTE.
§ 19-9.1. Owners Required to Maintain Pipes, Fixtures and
Connections. [1978 Code § 11-2.10]
Every owner of buildings and premises connected to the municipal water
supply shall maintain the water isolation valves, service pipes, fixtures and
connections in good order and repair in order to ensure that there shall be
no waste of water, and shall immediately make necessary repairs to prevent
the waste of water.
§ 19-9.2. Duties of Occupants and Tenants. [1978 Code § 11-2.10]
Every lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or premises connected to
the municipal water supply shall immediately notify the owner or his or her
agent and the municipality of any defective water service pipes, fixtures and
connections causing waste of water.
§ 19-9.3. Duty of Owner. [1978 Code § 11-2.10]
Upon receiving notice of any waste of water due to defective pipes, fixtures
or connections, the owner of any premises served by the municipal water
supply shall immediately make all necessary repairs.
a. Prohibit the use of water for any purpose not necessary to the health
and safety of the public.
b. Allocate the available water supply.
c. Reduce consumption of water.
d. Provide water for the period of the emergency.
§ 19-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-9.4
1:275
§ 19-9.4. Repairs by Township. [1978 Code § 11-2.10]
Whenever an owner shall fail or refuse to make repairs to external service
lines to prevent the waste of water, the Township may elect to make the
repairs and charge the cost to the owner in the same manner as other water
charges are made.
§ 19-10. PERMANENT WATER CONSERVATION RESTRICTIONS
AND GUIDELINES. [Ord. No. 02-10 § 1]
§ 19-11. through § 19-12. (RESERVED)
a. Outdoor water of lawns, gardens or other vegetation by lawn sprinklers
of the portable type or permanent irrigation installation shall be
restricted to 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m. for hours
of operation and are requested to follow the odd/even restrictions set
forth in Subsection b2 of this section.
b. Voluntary Restrictions. During the months of April, May, June, July,
August, September and October of each year, all residential customers,
tenants and business being served by the Sparta Township Water Utility
are requested to observe the following voluntary water use restrictions:
1. Indoor conservation measures.
2. Outdoor water usage between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
shall be restricted to hand held hoses for the watering of gardens,
shrubs, flower beds, car and equipment and buildings and decks
shall be restricted to alternate days, with usage on even-numbered
days for those residents or businesses whose dwelling, building or
box number are even and on odd-numbered days for those
residents or businesses whose dwelling, building or box number
are odd. There shall be no such outdoor water usage on the 31st
day of any month within the voluntary restriction period.
c. Mandatory Restrictions. The Sparta Township Manager shall declare
the water restrictions set forth in § 19-8 of this chapter to be mandatory
whenever the Township Water Utility Operator determines that such is
appropriate based on any one of the following conditions:
1. When water production in wells falls to such a level that the well
delivery rate drops 10% below the annual rate.
2. When daily demand causes the system wells to pump for 168 hours
without a period of nonpumping.
3. When lowered aquifer conditions create a milky water, caused by
air entrainment, to be delivered for more than seven days.
4. When in the opinion of the Township Water Utility Operator these
restrictions are necessary to maintain a sufficient water level in the
storage tanks for essential domestic water use and fire safety.
§ 19-9.4 SPARTA CODE § 19-13
1:276
§ 19-13. HYDRANTS.
§ 19-13.1. Unauthorized Use of Fire Hydrants. [1978 Code
§ 11-2.11]
§ 19-13.2. Duty of Property Owners. [1978 Code § 11-2.11]
The owner of any property upon which a fire hydrant is located, including
the owner of any property which abuts upon a portion of a public street on
which a fire hydrant is located, shall have the duty of keeping the hydrant
and the area immediately surrounding it free from snow, brush, weeds,
debris or any other thing which might impede access to the hydrant.
§ 19-13.3. Private Fire Outlets. [1978 Code § 11-2.11]
Where pipes are provided for fire protection on any premises or where hose
connections for fire apparatus are provided for any pipe, each connection
or opening on those pipes, except sprinkler heads, shall have a standard
thread as specified by the Township. No water shall be taken or used
through such pipe opening for any purpose other than fire fighting or for
testing fire apparatus after obtaining a special permit from the Department
to perform a test.
§ 19-13.4. Permit to Open Hydrant. [1978 Code § 11-2.11; Ord. No.
04-17 § 10]
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township that the primary
purpose of the fire hydrants is for fire protection. However, the Township
is authorized to issue a permit to any person to open a fire hydrant for a
purpose other than fire protection. Permits shall be issued by the Township
in accordance with rules and regulations and shall take into consideration
the policy established by this section. Each permit shall specify the location
of the hydrant to be opened, the date or dates upon which they may be
opened, the time frame in which they may be opened and the purpose for
which such openings may be made.
a. No person other than a duly authorized agent or employee of the
Township or a member of an authorized fire agency, while engaged in
the performance of duties, shall open or attempt to open any fire
hydrants or valves connected with the water supply system of the
Township without obtaining written permission from the proper
Township officers.
b. No person shall obstruct or prevent free access to, tamper with, injure
or damage a fire hydrant, nor shall any person place any plants, trees,
material, debris, structure or object of any kind within a distance of 10
feet from a hydrant. Any obstruction, when discovered, may be removed
at once by the Township at the expense of the person responsible.
Removal of the obstruction shall be in addition to any penalty which
may be imposed for a violation of this section.
§ 19-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-14
1:277
§ 19-14. WATER RATES AND CHARGES. [1978 Code § 11-2.12; Ord.
No. 580; Ord. No. 660; Ord. No. 707; Ord. No. 747; Ord. No. 779;
Ord. No. 930; New; Ord. No. 00-10 § 1, 4; Ord. No. 02-10 § 2; Ord.
No. 04-17 § 11; Ord. No. 06-04 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 07-05 §§ 1 — 10;
Ord. No. 09-09 § 1; Ord. No. 09-32; Ord. No. 10-02; Ord. No. 11-02
§ 1; Ord. No. 13-05; Ord. No. 2017-01]
The following prices, annual rentals and water charges are hereby
established by the Township in accordance with the following schedule:
a. Water Use Rates. Customers shall be charged at the rate of $4.50 per
1,000 gallons of water consumption plus a minimum quarterly service
charge in accordance with the size of the service meter as follows:
Meter Size
(Inches)
Minimum Quarterly Service
Charge
5/8 x 3/4 $33.38
3/4 $44.58
1 $72.18
1 1/4 $102.88
1 1/2 $123.28
2 $194.88
3 $332.88
4 $410.88
6 $880.88
8 $1376.88
b. Unmetered Customers. Unmetered single-family residences which
would normally be provided with standard 5/8 inch by 3/4 inch service
meters, shall be charged a quarterly flat rate equal to a minimum
25,000 gallons plus service charge, or alternate usage determined by
the Utility based upon historical records. This flat rate shall also be
applicable to one inch and larger meters.
In those cases where a metered customer has equipment that is not
working properly to determine water usage and access has been denied
to the Township after repeated attempts to repair said equipment, these
accounts shall be charged a quarterly flat rate equal to 75,000 gallons
plus the applicable service charge, or alternate usage determined by
the Utility based upon historical records. This flat rate shall apply
until the metering unit can be repaired or replaced. A continued lack
of cooperation with providing a Township agent access to correct
metering functions may result in a loss of water service.
c. Hydrant and Sprinkler Systems.
§ 19-14 SPARTA CODE § 19-14
1:278
Public Hydrants — Applicable to municipalities for public fire
protection service provided by the Sparta Water Utility and fee
distributed to benefiting customers $85 per hydrant per quarter.
Private Hydrants — Applicable for private fire protection through
hydrants owned by the Sparta Water Utility or the customer, and
connected to utility-owned mains, and located in private rights-of-way
$85 per hydrant per quarter.
Private Fire Protection — Applicable for private sprinkler heads, or
other fire-fighting facilities connected to a private service connection,
with fee based upon size of service line as it enters the building.
Size of Service
(Inches) Quarterly Fee
Less than 2 $0
2 $31.25
3 $62.50
4 $106.25
6 $225
8 $375
10 or greater $575
d. Fountains. Unmetered water fountains shall be charged a quarterly flat
fee equal to 15,000 gallons consumption.
e. Temporary Water Service.
Unmetered: $100 per quarter/per service connection, minimum.
Metered: Fees charged for a metered, temporary water service shall be
in conformance with rates listed under Subsection a, "Water Use Rate,"
or at a rate of $100 per quarter per service connection, whichever is
greater.
f. Turning On or Off Water Service Line.
Turn on during normal working hours: $30.
Turn off during normal working hours: $30.
Turn off or on outside of normal working hours on emergency call basis:
$100.
Above fees shall be charged for each visit to site. (Water service curb
valves are the property of the Township. Only Utility Personnel are
authorized to access curb valves.)
g. Frozen Meter. Fee for the disconnection, repair, and reconnection of a
service shall be:
§ 19-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-14
1:279
Service provided during normal working hours: $50.
Service provided outside normal working hours on emergency call in
basis: $100.
The above fees, or actual cost incurred, whichever is greater shall be
charged.
h. Service Meter Test.
Disconnection, testing, and reconnection of service meter: $75.
The fee shall be refunded if the meter is found to register consumption
in excess of 2% fast of actual water delivered.
i. Water Meter Supply and Inspection. As requested, water meters up to
one inch in size shall be furnished and installed by the Department
provided that all valves and meter yokes have been properly installed.
Meters larger than one inch may be provided and installed by owner/
contractor and inspected by the Department. The fee for meters
provided by the Department shall be the actual meter cost incurred plus
a surcharge by meter size as follows:
Meter Size
(Inches)
Surcharge**
(%)
5/8 x 3/4 25%
3/4 and 1 20%
1 1/2 and 2 10%
Greater than or equal to 3 5%
** Surcharge equals actual cost of meter times percentage listed.
Fee for inspection or reinspection of water service meter installed by
others for each site visit shall be $25.
j. Water Meter Installation. As requested, water service meters shall be
installed outside of normal working hours for a fee of $100.
k. Supply Line Installation. Supply line installation shall be allowed at the
sole discretion and approval of the Water Utility as follows: A supply
line shall be installed by the Water Department, including all aspects of
labor, materials, and equipment for a fee (tapping fee) of $4,200 for a 3/
4-inch tap; $4,400 for a one-inch tap; and $4,800 for a two-inch tap. Any
additional costs incurred by the Water Department, above fees listed, as
a result of certain subsurface or above grade conditions or constraints,
shall be borne by the applicant. [Amended 6-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-07]
l. Thawing Privately-Owned Service Pipe. Point of contact for electrical
thawing purposes to any component of the water utility such as a curb
§ 19-14 SPARTA CODE § 19-14
1:280
box, or main line or hydrant valve requires approval by the water utility
and shall be subject to the following fees:
Inspection service within normal business working hours: $30.
Inspection service outside normal business working hours: $100.
m. Meter Readings. Request for special water meter readings other than
the routine quarterly readings obtained by water utility personnel shall
pay a fee of $40 per reading.
n. No Show Service Fee. For any service requiring entry into a building
and a prearranged appointment with the property owner or
representative to gain access by the water utility, an additional fee shall
be charged if the appointment is not met and access to the building
cannot be made by the water utility.
Within normal business working hours: $30.
Outside normal business working hours: $100.
o. Water Quality Sampling. As requested by the property owner, an
administrative handling fee of $25 shall be charged for the sampling of
the water supply at a home or business. This fee shall be in addition to
the laboratory analytical costs to be reimbursed by the property owner
to the water utility.
p. Miscellaneous Service Call Fee. A minimum fee for miscellaneous
service calls not specifically identified elsewhere within this fee
schedule shall be:
Service call within normal business working hours: $30.
Service call outside normal business working hours: $100.
q. Special Cases. In special cases not specifically identified or clearly
defined elsewhere within this fee schedule, the Township Manager is
hereby authorized to establish special rates or rentals under such
schedules or formulas as the Township Council may deem necessary to
keep and maintain the Water Department on a self-liquidating basis.
r. Inoperable and Inaccessible Meters. In those cases where the
customer's meter is not operating properly so as to be able to determine
the amount of water usage, there shall be charges each quarter at a
rate equivalent to the usage of 25,000 gallons, plus a minimum
quarterly service charge as set forth in Subsection a. In those cases
where the customer does not provide access to the Township to read or
repair the water meter, there shall be charges each quarter at a rate
equivalent to the usage of 75,000 gallons, plus a minimum quarterly
service charge as set forth in Subsection a. The 75,000 gallon rate will
apply until the meter can be required, replaced or, if deemed necessary,
water service is discontinued.
§ 19-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-14
1:281
s. Connection Fee. A connection fee shall be paid by each property
connecting to the municipal water system in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:31-11 and this subsection.
1. The procedure for the determination of connection fees shall be as
follows:
(a) The amount representing all debt service, including but not
limited to sinking funds, reserve funds, the principal and
interest on bonds, and the amount of any loans and the interest
thereon, paid by the Township to defray the capital cost of
developing the system as of the end of the immediately
preceding budget year shall be added to all capital
expenditures made by the Township not funded by a bond
ordinance or debt for the development of the system as of the
end of the immediately preceding budget year.
(b) Any gifts, contributions or subsidies to the Township received
from, and not reimbursed or reimbursable to, any Federal,
State, County or municipal government or agency or any
private person, and that portion of amounts paid to the
Township by a public entity under a service agreement or
service contract which is not repaid to the public entity by the
Township shall then be subtracted.
(c) The remainder shall be divided by the total number of service
units served by the Township at the end of the immediately
preceding budget year, and the results shall then be
apportioned to each new connector according to the number of
service units attributed to that connector. In attributing service
units to each connector, the estimated average daily flow of
water for the connector shall be divided by the average daily
flow of water to the average single-family residence in the
Township water system, to produce the number of service units
to be attributed. Estimates of water usage for other than
residential units shall be based upon commonly used
engineering standards, as approved by the Township Engineer.
This fee shall be exclusive of the supply line installation fee.
The connection fee shall be recomputed at the end of each
budget year, after a public hearing is held. The revised
connection fee may be imposed upon those who subsequently
connect in that budget year to the system.
2. Subdivisions and Site Plans. Any property receiving either
subdivision or site plan approval for development that has frontage
along a right-of-way or easement containing an existing Water
Department distribution main shall connect to this main and shall
pay a connection fee for water supply and storage in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, unless stipulated otherwise by a
developer's agreement executed with the Township.
§ 19-14 SPARTA CODE § 19-14
1:282
3. Affordable Housing Connection Fees. [Added 6-25-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-06]
(a) New connection. Public housing authorities, nonprofit
organizations building affordable housing projects, and any
other affordable housing including affordable housing units in
inclusionary projects, shall receive a 50% reduction in the
connection fees established in Subsection s1 for new
connections to the water system.
(b) Previously connected to system(s). Units previously connected
to the Township's water system that were demolished or
refurbished in order to allow for new affordable housing units
and for which a water connection or tapping fee was previously
paid shall receive a credit in the amount of the connection fee
previously paid. However, the connection fee(s) shall be the
lesser of the 50% reduced rate provided for in Subsection s3a,
or the current nonreduced rate minus the credit for the
connection fee previously paid. The affordable housing
developer is responsible to provide evidence of the previously
paid connection fee; failure to provide such proof of payment
shall result in the developer paying the reduced rate provided
for in Subsection s3a.
t. Bulk Water Purchase. A 10% surcharge will be added to the current
water rate per 1,000 gallons of water consumption for bulk water
purchase, with no hookup fee or a quarterly service charge, if a hydrant
meter is utilized at a Water Utility-authorized location other than the
bulk water station. Non-metered activities will require the issuance of a
temporary water permit at a flat rate of $100 for up to 15,000 gallons
used. A truck using the Germany Flats Bulk Filling Station shall pay a
flat rate of $55 per visit for a truckload up to 8,000 gallons. All rules and
regulations for the Filing Station are set forth in a Bulk Purchase
Agreement, which must be executed between the purchaser and the
Water Utility prior to accessing the facility.
u. Water Distribution Plan Review. As a condition of the Township's Master
Permit, if in effect with the New Jersey Department of Environment
Protection (NJDEP), for each permit to construct a water distribution
system, the permit application review fee payable to the Township shall
be the greater of the amounts calculated based on the number of
service connections or the water main length in accordance with the
following table:
Service
Connections
Water Main Length
(feet) Fee Required
2 to 5 Less than or equal 100 feet $250
6 to 15 101 feet to 500 feet $1,500
16 to 49 501 feet to 1,500 feet $2,500
§ 19-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-14
1:283
§ 19-15. CHARGES, BILLINGS, INTEREST AND SHUTOFF.
§ 19-15.1. Special Cases. [1978 Code § 11-2.13]
In special cases not specifically identified or clearly defined elsewhere
within this fee schedule, the Township Manager is hereby authorized to
establish special rates or rentals under such schedules or formulas as the
Township Council may deem necessary to keep and maintain the Water
Department on a self-liquidating basis.
§ 19-15.2. Billings, Interest and Shutoff. [1978 Code § 11-2.13; Ord.
No. 11-06 § 1]
The Water Utility of Sparta Township will prepare bills setting forth water
charges and send them to its customers through the US Postal System. Bills
that are not delivered by the US Postal System shall, nevertheless, remain
due and owing. The payment, or non-payment of utility bills is the sole
responsibility of the customer.
Service
Connections
Water Main Length
(feet) Fee Required
50 to 100 1,501 feet to 3,000 feet $3,000
101 to 250 3,001 feet to 7,500 feet $3,500
251 to 500 7,501 feet to 15,000 feet $4,000
More than 500 More than 15,000 feet $5,000
a. All payments of water rents shall be made no later than the due date on
the bill. All bills not paid by the due date will be subject to a 10%
penalty, which shall be added to the amount of the bill and collected as
other charges.
b. All bills shall be due no later than the due date set forth on said bill. To
avoid additional charges such as on and off fees, payments for
delinquent water/sewer accounts must be paid before 4:30 p.m. on the
scheduled shut-off day. If the payment is not received by this time and
date, the water will be shut off in accordance with Subsection 19-15.2d
and any subsequent fees will be imposed.
c. Charges for both connection and use shall be payable to the Township
of Sparta Water Sewer Utility. The Township shall have the same
remedies for the collection charges with penalties and costs as the
collection of taxes upon real estate.
d. In the event that a bill remains unpaid for 30 days or more after the due
date of such bill, the Department may discontinue water service to the
property for which the water bill is due, provided that the Department
has complied with the following procedure:
§ 19-14 SPARTA CODE § 19-15.2
1:284
§ 19-16. LIABILITY FOR CHARGES, FEES AND FINES; LIEN. [1978
Code § 11-2.14]
The owner of any house, tenement, building or lot shall be liable for the
payment of the price or rent fixed herein for the use of water, and for
installation, purchase price, repair and testing of any water meter(s), or
water service(s), connection, appliances or parts, and renewals thereof,
heretofore or hereafter furnished or made by the Department in or upon
such house, tenement, building or lot, and the interest and penalties
charged. Such price or rent or other costs, expenses, interest and penalties
as fixed herein shall be a lien upon the house, tenement, building or lot until
the same shall be paid and satisfied.
Chapter 20
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 20-1. INDIVIDUAL SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
§ 20-1.1. Statutory Authority. [1978 Code § 12-1; Ord. No. 797; Ord.
No. 833]
The State Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems
Code of New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq. adopted by this section is
intended for use where a public sewage disposal system is not available.
§ 20-1.2. Definitions. [1978 Code § 12-1.1; Ord. No. 797; Ord. No.
833; Ord. No. 07-14 § XI]
As used in this section:
1. A delinquent notice shall be sent to the account stating that service
will be discontinued because the bill remains unpaid for 30 days.
This notice shall be deemed satisfactory if sent as follows:
(a) The Township may also deliver this notice to the physical
address or phone the account if that number has been provided
to the Utility Collector.
(b) The notice must be postmarked at least 10 days prior to the
date of the discontinuation of service; and
(c) In the event that the delinquent account is that of a landlord/
tenant situation, then the tenant will have the option of paying
the delinquent bill.
a. The State Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems Code of New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq., hereinafter
referred to as the "State Code" shall mean and refer to that certain
State Code approved by the State of New Jersey on July 28, 1989 for
§ 19-15.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1.2
1:285
§ 20-1.3. Adoption of State Standards Individual Sewage Disposal
System Code of New Jersey (1989). [1978 Code § 12-1.2; Ord. No.
797; Ord. No. 833; Ord. No. 07-14 § XI]
§ 20-1.4. Changes and Modifications to State Code. [1978 Code
§ 12-1.3; Ord. No. 797; Ord. No. 833]
§ 20-1.5. Permit Required to Locate, Construct or Alter System;
New Building Construction Requirements. [1978 Code § 12-1.4;
Ord. No. 797; Ord. No. 833; Ord. No. 07-14 § XI]
adoption by reference by the municipalities in accordance with law,
being a code regulating:
1. The location, construction, use, maintenance and method of
emptying or cleaning, individual sewage disposal systems; and
2. The issuance of licenses or permits to locate, construct, empty or
clean said systems.
b. As used in the State Standards Individual Sewage Disposal System
Code of New Jersey (1989):
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — Shall mean and refer to the Sussex
County Health Department.
BOARD OF HEALTH — Shall mean and refer to the Sussex County
Health Department.
a. Pursuant to law there is hereby established and adopted as the
Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of the Township of Sparta, the
whole of the State Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems Code of New Jersey (1989), N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq.,
as defined in Subsection 20-1.2a, same and except such portions
thereof as are changed or modified by the provisions of Subsection
20-1.4.
b. The State Standards for Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems Code of New Jersey (1989) is hereby incorporated in this
section by reference and made a part hereof as fully as though it had
been set forth herein at length.
c. In accordance with law, 10 printed copies of the State Standards for
Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems Code of New Jersey
(1989) have been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and
in the office of the Sussex County Health Department and shall remain
on file in these offices for the use and examination of the public so long
as this section shall remain in effect.
a. Blasting. No blasting will be permitted in the proposed disposal area.
a. No person shall locate, construct or alter any sewage disposal system
until a permit for the location, construction or alteration of said sewage
§ 20-1.2 SPARTA CODE § 20-1.5
1:286
§ 20-1.6. Hearing on Denial of License, Permit or Certificate. [1978
Code § 12-1.5; Ord. No. 797; Ord. No. 833]
In case any permit, license or certification required by this section is denied
by the Sussex County Health Department, a hearing shall be held thereon
before the Township Manager.
§ 20-1.7. Stoppage and Other Control of Work in Case of Violations.
[1978 Code § 12-1.6; Ord. No. 797; Ord. No. 833; Ord. No. 07-14
§ XI]
If the Sussex County Health Department finds that any individual sewage
disposal system is being erected or installed in violation of the State Code
or this section, he may order that:
§ 20-1.8. Fees and Charges. [1978 Code § 12-1.7; Ord. No. 797; Ord.
No. 833; Ord. No. 03-08 § 6; Ord. No. 07-14 § XI]
The fees and charges under this chapter shall be as follows:
disposal system shall have been issued by the Sussex County Health
Department.
b. Where new construction is involved, no building permit shall be issued
for the construction of any building requiring a sewage disposal system
until a permit is obtained pursuant to the terms of this section. In no
case shall construction of a building be begun until such permit is
obtained.
c. All permits to construct, alter or repair an individual sewage disposal
system shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
a. All further work be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be
necessary to remedy such violation; and
b. After the violation has been remedied, the work may be continued not in
violation of any of the provisions of the State Code.
After issuance of any such order and the service of a copy thereof upon any
person connected with or working in or about the erection or installation of
any such individual sewage disposal system, or any part thereof, no further
work shall be done thereon except in compliance with and as authorized by this
order.
a. Application:
1. For the filing of an application for each soil log/soil test required for
the construction, alteration or repair of an individual sewage
disposal system, to be witnessed and recorded by a representative
of the Sussex County Health Department, the fee shall be $40 per
hole.
§ 20-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1.8
1:287
§ 20-2. HOUSE CONNECTIONS AND RATES.
§ 20-2.1. Definitions. [1978 Code § 12-2.1; Ord. No. 02-27 § 1]
As used in this section:
AGENT — Shall mean any duly authorized representative of the owner.
BUILDING SEWER — Shall mean that part of a sewerage drainage system
which begins at the inner wall surface of a building and extends five feet
therefrom to the outside of the building.
MAIN — Shall mean all pipes or conduits other than service connections
connecting with the sanitary sewer system.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean a person other than the owner occupying or in
possession of premises within the area of the sewer region.
OWNER — Shall mean a person owning or listed as owner in the tax records
of the Township of premises in the sewer district.
2. For the review of an application and plans to construct, alter or
repair an individual sewage disposal system the fee shall be $40.
3. For the review of an application and plans to construct, alter or
repair an individual sewage disposal system, after the initial
review, which is necessary because of applicant's failure to submit
an application and plans that conform to the required State Law
and Regulations and local ordinances the fee shall be $25.
b. Permits:
1. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct an individual
sewage disposal system the fee shall be $150.
2. For the issuance of a permit to alter an existing individual sewage
disposal system the fee shall be $100.
3. For the reissuance of a permit that has expired to construct, alter
or repair an individual sewage disposal system the fee shall be $40.
4. For the issuance of a permit to repair an existing individual sewage
disposal system the fee shall be $40.
c. Reinspection. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal
system, or part thereof, caused by the failure of the permittee to locate
and construct or alter the same in accordance with the terms of the
permit issued or the terms of the aforesaid State Code, the fee shall be
$50.
d. License. For the issuance of a license to operate subsurface sewage
disposal system in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9-3.14, the fee shall be
$15.
§ 20-1.8 SPARTA CODE § 20-2.1
1:288
PLAZA SEWAGE DISTRICT — Shall mean all of those properties located
within the Plaza Sewage District as established on a map on file in the office
of the Township Clerk and Township Engineer.
PRIVATE MAIN — Shall mean a main not owned by the Township running on
private property and used to collect sewerage from two or more premises.
SERVICE CONNECTION — Shall mean pipes connected from a building
sewer to a main.
SEWER REGION — Shall mean the area designated on a map prepared
by the Township Engineer and approved by the Township Council where a
sanitary sewer system is available.
TOWN CENTER SEWAGE DISTRICT — Shall mean all of those properties
located within the Town Center Sewage District as established on a map on
file in the office of the Township Clerk and Township Engineer. Said map
is dated July 1998 and entitled "Sparta Township Wastewater Management
Plan Plate VI-B Selected Wastewater Management Plan - Supplemental Map
for Sparta Town Center Sewer Service Area," as the same shall be from time
to time hereafter amended and supplemented.
§ 20-2.2. Sewer Districts Established. [Ord. No. 02-27 § 2]
There are hereby established two sewer districts in the Township of Sparta
which shall be designated the Plaza Sewage District and the Town Center
Sewage District. Connection fees and user charges for properties receiving
sewer service within each sewage district shall be as established in this
chapter.
§ 20-2.3. Application. [1978 Code § 12-2.3; Ord. No. 02-27 § 3]
Where a sewer connection is to be made or replaced, an application shall be
filed with the Township Engineer stating:
a. Name and address of the owner;
b. Name and address of any occupants of the premises where the owner is
not the sole occupant;
c. Address or location of the premises;
d. Type of business or occupancy planned on the premises;
e. Estimate of the amount of sewage to be discharged from the building
during a year;
f. Plan for the proposed work;
g. Name and address of the contractor doing the work.
h. For those properties located in the Town Center Sewage District, proof
of payment to the SCMUA of all currently applicable connection fees
and charges to the Sussex County Municipal Utilities Authority.
§ 20-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2.4
1:289
§ 20-2.4. Regulations. [1978 Code § 12-2.4; New]
a. All taps into mains must be made by the Township under the
supervision of the Township Engineer but the owner shall make such
excavations as are required.
b. All other work must be done under the supervision of a licensed
plumber or sewage disposal contractor licensed by the Township.
c. The service connection will be installed at the expense of the owner.
d. Building sewers and service connections must be a minimum of four
inches in diameter and constructed of heavy or medium heavy cast iron,
PVC (polyvinyl chloride), ductile iron, or other material as approved by
the Township Engineer. The Township Engineer may require a larger
diameter under special circumstances.
e. The service connection must be buried at least two feet below the
surface of the ground and must be laid with a fall of 1/4 inch to the foot.
f. A standard cleanout must be installed inside the building wall to make
the service connections accessible from the building to the main.
g. The owner and the occupant must repair any damage to or leak in a
service connection or remove any stoppage therefrom within three days
after notification by the sanitarian and in the event of failure to do so,
the Township may make necessary repairs and charge the cost thereof
to the owner and occupant, such charges to be collected as provided for
other charges herein.
h. No storm water, or water from air conditioners shall be discharged in
the sanitary sewer system.
i. If in the judgment of the Township Engineer, a new connection will
dangerously overload the sewer system, a building permit involving the
proposed connection shall not be granted.
j. No person shall discharge nor permit any other person to discharge
into the sewer system any acid, poisonous, explosive, or other volatile
or dangerous material which is liable to damage the service
connections, mains or sewage treatment plant.
k. No trench shall be backfilled with rock or other material which may
damage the service connection or mains involved and a street opening
permit must be obtained where required.
l. No septic tanks shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system.
m. All existing users shall file an application showing where applicable the
data required by Subsection 20-2.3.
n. The Township Sanitarian, the Township Engineer and other employees
designated by the Township Manager shall have the right to enter
§ 20-2.4 SPARTA CODE § 20-2.4
1:290
§ 20-2.5. Sewer Rates. [1978 Code § 12-2.5; Ord. No. 02-27 § 4; Ord.
No. 09-15 § 1]
The following Township schedule of charges for the use of sewer utility
facilities shall apply:
§ 20-2.6. Measurement of Charges. [1978 Code § 12-2.5; Ord. No.
02-27 § 5]
Sewer charges in the Plaza Sewer District shall be based upon the
consumption of water measured by the water meter of the Sparta Township
Water Utility installed on the premises. Where other water sources are
connected to the sewer system, the consumer shall install a separate
approved meter on the building sewer at his own expense. Any consumer
may, at his own expense, install such a meter with the approval of the
Township. Such installations shall be made under the supervision of the
Township.
§ 20-2.7. Nonpayment of Charges; Disconnection. [1978 Code
§ 12-2.5; Ord. No. 02-27 § 6; Ord. No. 11-8 § 1]
The Sewer Utility of Sparta Township will prepare bills setting forth sewer
charges and send them to its customers through the US Postal System.
Bills that are not delivered by the US Postal System shall, nevertheless,
remain due and owing. The payment, or nonpayment of utility bills is the
sole responsibility of the customer.
premises using sewer facilities for the purposes of making inspections,
repairs, or reading water meters.
o. The sewer main and sewer lateral from the main to and including the
cleanout shall be owned and operated by the Sparta Municipal Sewer
Utility. The cleanout shall be located within the Township right-of-way.
All sewer facilities upstream of this cleanout shall be under the
ownership and operation of the property owner.
a. For those properties located in the Plaza Sewer District: $17.44 per
1,000 gallons of water consumption, plus a minimum quarterly fee of
$100.
b. For those properties located in the Town Center Sewage District:
$17.44 per 1,000 gallons of water consumption, plus a minimum
quarterly fee of $100.
c. All user charges shall be prorated from the date of connection
commencing as of the first day of the month following the actual
connection of the property to the municipal sewer system.
d. Those properties located in the Town Center Sewage District shall also
pay all currently applicable fees and charges to the Sussex County
Municipal Utility Authority.
§ 20-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2.7
1:291
§ 20-2.8. New Tap Fee; New Service Fee.
Where a tap is required into an existing sewer main, a tap-in application
fee of $100 shall be charged. The applicant shall also pay the service
connection construction cost fee of $1,800. Any additional costs incurred
by the Sparta Sewer Utility, above the fees listed, as a result of certain
subsurface or above grade conditions or constraints, shall be borne by
the applicant. The service connection construction cost fee shall be for
the service connection from and including the fitting at the main to and
including the cleanout, located in the vicinity of the property line or edge
of pavement, as determined by the Township Engineer. The applicant shall
have the option to install the service connection with their means at their
cost.
a. All payments of sewer rents shall be made no later than the due date on
the bill. All bills not paid by the due date will be subject to a 10%
penalty, which shall be added to the amount of the bill and collected as
other charges.
b. All bills shall be due no later than the due date set forth on said bill. To
avoid additional charges such as on and off fees, payments for
delinquent water/sewer accounts must be paid before 4:30 p.m. on the
scheduled shut-off day. If the payment is not received by this time and
date, the sewer will be disconnected in accordance with Subsection
20-2.7d and any associated fees will be imposed.
c. Charges for both connection and use shall be payable to the Township
of Sparta Water/Sewer Utility. The Township shall have the same
remedies for the collection charges with penalties and costs as the
collection of taxes upon real estate.
d. In the event that a bill remains unpaid for 30 days or more after the due
date of such bill, the Department may discontinue sewer service to the
property for which the sewer bill is due, provided that the Department
has complied with the following procedure:
1. A delinquent notice shall be sent to the account stating that service
will be discontinued because the bill remains unpaid for 30 days.
This notice shall be deemed satisfactory if sent as follows:
2. The Township may also deliver this notice to the physical address
or phone the account if that number has been provided to the
Utility Collector.
3. The notice must be postmarked at least 10 days prior to the date of
the discontinuation of service; and
4. In the event that the delinquent account is that of a landlord/tenant
situation, then the tenant will have the option of paying the
delinquent bill.
§ 20-2.7 SPARTA CODE § 20-2.9
1:292
§ 20-2.9. Nonreadable Meter; Assessment of Consumption. [1978
Code § 12-2.5]
Where a meter is out of order or cannot be read for any other reason, the
owner or occupant shall be billed at the average of his consumption for the
four preceding quarters.
§ 20-2.10. Damage to Plant or Mains. [1978 Code § 12-2.5]
The parties responsible shall be liable for any damage to mains or the
sewage treatment plant caused by a violation of regulations.
§ 20-3. PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
§ 20-3.1. Established. [1978 Code § 12-4.1]
There is hereby established in the Township a public sanitary sewer system
which shall be designated as the "Sparta Township Sanitary Sewer System."
§ 20-3.2. Operated as Municipal Public Utility. [1978 Code § 12-4.2]
The said sewer system shall be operated by the Township as a Municipal
Public Utility as defined in and subject to the provisions of Title 40A of the
New Jersey Statutes and all fees and charges received by the Township in
connection therewith shall be kept in a fund separate from other Township
revenues to be used only for the purpose of such municipal utility.
§ 20-3.3. Includes All Public Sanitary Sewer Facilities. [1978 Code
§ 12-4.3]
The sanitary sewer system shall include all public sanitary sewer facilities
which the Township may from time to time construct, acquire and/or
maintain for the purpose of the collection, treatment and disposal of
sewage.
§ 20-3.4. Definitions. [1978 Code § 12-4.4]
As used in this section:
AGENT — Shall mean (in the absence of instruction from the owner of
any property or premise, or his duly authorized agent, to the contrary)
the occupant of any property or premises insofar as his relations to the
Department may be concerned, with respect to sanitary sewer uses and
existing services.
ANNUAL SERVICE CHARGE — Shall mean the annual charge herein
imposed for the use and service of the system upon the owners of the
building served thereby.
BUILDING CONNECTION — Shall mean that portion of service line which
runs from the curb vent or cleanout through the meter to the same buildings
as exist on the consumer's property.
§ 20-2.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3.4
1:293
CONSUMER — Shall mean parties contracting for service to a property as
herein classified.
CURB VENT OR CLEAN-OUT — Shall mean the area along the service line
where a lateral connects with a line running from the consumer's premises.
Said point is the area where municipal responsibilities end and consumer
responsibilities begin. The curb vent or clean-out shall usually be located
adjacent to the curb abutting a street servicing the consumer's premises.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Sparta Township Sanitary Sewer System
and such employees as there are employed therein.
GARBAGE — Shall mean solid waste from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
Properly shredded garbage shall mean garbage which has been shredded
so that no garbage particles will be greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR (GREASE TRAP) — Shall mean a receptacle
designed to separate and retain grease, oil and other fatty substances from
wastes.
INDIVIDUAL SEWERAGE DISPOSAL FACILITY — Shall mean a subsurface
disposal system designed and constructed to treat sewage in a manner that
will retain most of the settleable solids in a watertight tank and to discharge
the liquid portion to an adequate disposal bed. The term shall include septic
tanks, cesspools, and seepage pits.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial
processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
METER RATES — Shall be construed to mean rates or charges to be
assessed for sewer based upon either the quantity of water used as
measured by an approved water meter or alternatively, the quantity of
sewage flow measured by an approved sewage flow meter.
OWNER — Shall be construed to mean any person, persons, firm,
corporation, or association actually owning any property or premises or his
or their duly authorized agent, which is or can be prospectively supplied
with sanitary sewer service.
A building under one roof owned by one party in common enclosure,
occupied by one family or business, or;
a.
A combination of buildings owned by one party in common enclosure,
occupied by one family or business, or;
b.
The one side of a double house owned by one party having a solid
vertical partition wall, or;
c.
A building owned by one party having more than one apartment and
using in common one hall and one entrance, or;
d.
A building owned by one party having a number of apartments, stores,
and offices and using in common one hall and one or more means of
entrance.
e.
§ 20-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 20-3.4
1:294
PRETREATMENT — Shall mean any sewage process or processes that
are required to provide a discharge to sewers that will conform to the
requirements of these rules and regulations promulgated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — Shall mean a person licensed to practice
professional engineering in the State of New Jersey.
SERVICE LINE — Shall mean a line used to supply a single physical unit
which is nondivisible and no consumer shall be supplied by more than one
service line unless agreed upon between the consumer and the Department.
A service line consists of the lateral and the building connection as defined
in this section.
SEWER LATERALS — Shall mean that portion of the service line which runs
from the main line to the curb vent or clean-out.
SEWER MAIN — Shall mean the lines laid in and along the streets and
through private rights-of-way.
§ 20-3.5. Administration. [1978 Code § 12-4.5]
The Sparta Township Sewer Department shall have complete supervision
and control of the construction, operation and maintenance of the sanitary
sewer system of the Township.
§ 20-3.6. Connection Requirements. [1978 Code § 12-4.6; Ord. No.
834; Ord. No. 02-03 § I; Ord. No. 02-27 §§ 7, 8; Ord. No. 06-01 § 1;
Ord. No. 14-01; Ord. No. 2015-04; Ord. No. 2016-06]
a. Owners Bounding System and in Proximity to System. Owners of
premises located within the Plaza Sewage District or the Town Center
Sewage District and bounding on a municipal sanitary sewer main or
located within 350 feet of an existing main may connect said premises
with the sanitary sewer system under the following circumstances:
1. For those properties located within the Plaza Sewage District, if
there is currently sufficient unallocated sewage treatment capacity
to service the property.
2. For those properties located within the Town Center Sewage
District, if said property has reserved sewage treatment capacity
pursuant to § 20-6 of this chapter, upon written notice from the
Township that the sewer line fronting said property is ready for
use.
b. Owners of New Construction. Before occupancy of any new
construction, the owner of said premises shall connect said premises
with the sanitary sewer system existing at the time of any such
occupancy, provided that the subject premises bounds on a sanitary
sewer main or is within 350 feet of an existing main. In the case of
premises not bounding on a main but within 350 feet thereof, such
§ 20-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3.6
1:295
owner may avoid connection if, in the opinion of the Township Engineer,
the physical circumstances would make an extension impractical.
c. Health Protections.
1. Unused buildings. An unused building connection shall not be
connected with the sewer system until the Sewer Department has
inspected the same, and has found it to be clean and to conform
with the requirements of this section.
2. Demolished building. Upon the demolishing and razing of a
building, the connection shall be sealed in a manner to be approved
by the Department, at the expense of the property owner.
d. Connection Fee. All premises required to be connected to the Sparta
Township Municipal Sanitary Sewer System pursuant to Subsection
20-2.2 and Subsection 20-3.6, shall pay a wastewater treatment facility
connection fee as determined and set forth in accordance with
Subsection e below.
e. Procedure for Connection Fees.
1. The procedure for determination of connection fees shall be as
follows:
(a) The amount representing all debt service, including principal
and interest paid by the utility for all capital improvements for
the Plaza Sewage District shall be calculated at the end of the
immediately preceding calendar year in accordance with the
provisions of the N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-11.
The amount representing all debt service, including principal
and interest paid by the utility for capital improvements to
the Town Center Sewage District shall be calculated as of the
end of the immediately preceding calendar year in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-11. For the year 2003,
there shall be no Township connection charge for any property
connecting to the Town Center Sewage District.
(b) An equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) shall be defined as a single
family residential dwelling unit. The wastewater flow
generated from a single family residential dwelling unit shall
be assigned a value of 1.00 EDU and the rate of flow in gallons
per day is as defined in Table I, below.
(c) The number of equivalent dwelling units (EDU), as of the end
of the immediately preceding calendar year, serviced by the
utility shall be calculated by dividing the average daily
wastewater flow, contributed by its users, by the rate of flow
assigned to 1.00 EDU.
(d) The connection fee for the subsequent calendar year shall be
calculated for a single EDU by dividing the debt service,
§ 20-3.6 SPARTA CODE § 20-3.6
1:296
defined under "a" by the total number of EDU, defined under
Subsection e1(c).
(e) The connection fee for a single family residential dwelling unit
shall be that for 1.00 EDU.
(f) For connectors, other than single family residential dwelling
units, the number of EDU attributed to that connector shall be
calculated by dividing the estimated average daily flow of
sewage for the connector by the average daily flow of sewage
from an average single family residential dwelling unit, as
defined in Subsection e1(b) and Table I.
(g) The estimated average daily flow of sewage for the connector
shall be based upon metered water usage for the prior two
years. If metered water usage is not available, sewage flow
shall be calculated based upon Table I. If the specific type of
use is not covered in Table I, the sewage flow shall be
estimated (based upon sound engineering criteria and
judgment) by the Township Engineer.
(h) The connection fee for connectors, other than single family
residential dwelling units, shall be calculated by multiplying
the unit price (cost per EDU), as defined under Subsection
e1(d) by the number of EDU attributed to the connector, as
defined under Subsection e1(f).
2. Calculation of connection fees. Connection fees shall be calculated
according to the procedure established in Subsection 20-3.6e1
above, pursuant to Table I, below.
TABLE I
SEWAGE GENERATION AND ASSIGNED EDU'S BY USE CALCULATION OF CONNECTION
FEES
Use
Unit
Measurement
Gallons Per
Day No. of EDU
RESIDENTIAL
Single Family Private Dwelling Per dwelling 250 1.00
Multiple Dwellings (Condos, Townhouses, etc.)
1 bedroom per dwelling Per dwelling 140 0.60
2 bedrooms per dwelling Per dwelling 200 0.80
3 bedrooms per dwelling Per dwelling 250 1.00
Deed Restricted Adult Communities
1 bedroom per dwelling Per dwelling 110 0.44
2 bedrooms per dwelling Per dwelling 170 0.68
3 bedrooms per dwelling Per dwelling 225 0.90
§ 20-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3.6
1:297
TABLE I
SEWAGE GENERATION AND ASSIGNED EDU'S BY USE CALCULATION OF CONNECTION
FEES
Use
Unit
Measurement
Gallons Per
Day No. of EDU
TRANSIENT DWELLING UNIT
Hotels Per bedroom 75 0.30
Lodging Houses & Tourist Homes Per bedroom 60 0.24
Motel & Tourist Cabins Per bedroom 60 0.24
Boarding Houses (resident) Per bedroom 50 0.20
CAMPS
Trailer Camps (Private bath) Per site 200 0.80
Trailer Camps (Central bath, etc.) Per site 100 0.40
Luxury Camps (Private bath) Per person 50 0.20
Children's Camps (Central bath, etc.) Per person 50 0.20
Labor Camps Per person 40 0.16
Day Camps (No meals) Per person 15 0.06
RESTAURANTS
(Including washrooms)
Average Type Per seat 35 0.14
Bar & Cocktail Lounges Per seat 20 0.08
Fast Food Restaurant Per seat 15 0.06
24-Hour Service Restaurant Per seat 50 0.20
Curb Service/Drive-In Restaurant Per car space 50 0.20
CLUBHOUSES
Residential Type Per member 75 0.30
Nonresidential Per member 35 0.14
Golf Course (including related facilities) Per person 35 0.14
Racquet Club Per court/hour 80 0.32
Pool/Beach Bathhouse (w/shower) Per person 25 0.10
Pool/Beach Bathhouse (w/o shower) Per person 10 0.04
INSTITUTIONAL
Hospitals Each bed 175 0.70
Other Institutions Each bed 125 0.50
SCHOOLS
§ 20-3.6 SPARTA CODE § 20-3.6
1:298
TABLE I
SEWAGE GENERATION AND ASSIGNED EDU'S BY USE CALCULATION OF CONNECTION
FEES
Use
Unit
Measurement
Gallons Per
Day No. of EDU
Elementary (No showers/cafeteria) Per person 10 0.04
W/cafeteria Per person 15 0.06
W/cafeteria & showers Per person 20 0.08
W/cafeteria, showers & laboratories Per person 25 0.10
Boarding Per person 75 0.30
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
Additive Per filling
position
125 0.50
Service Bays Per bay 50 0.20
Minimarket Per square foot 0.100 *
MISCELLANEOUS
Stores, Shopping Centers & Office Buildings
(Gross area)
Per square foot 0.100 *
Factories (Sanitary, per 8 hr. shift) Per person 25 0.10
Factories (Sanitary, per 8 hr. shift) w/showers Per person 40 0.16
Car Washing (without recycling) Standard 1,500 6.00
Car Washing (with recycling) Standard 750 3.00
Laundries Per washer 580 2.32
Bowling Alley Per alley 200 0.80
Picnic Parks (restrooms only) Per person 10 0.04
Picnic Parks (w/showers) Per person 15 0.06
Fairgrounds (Based on avg. attendance) Per person 5 0.02
Assembly Halls Per seat 3 0.01
Airports Per passenger 3 0.01
Churches Per seat 3 0.01
Theatre Per seat 3 0.01
Dinner Theatre Per seat 20 0.08
Catering/Banquet Hall Per person 20 0.08
Sports Stadium Per seat 3 0.01
Visitor Center Per visitor 5 0.02
§ 20-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3.6
1:299
§ 20-3.7. Application; Permit; Fees. [1978 Code § 12-4.7]
*Note: 250 gallons per day = 1 EDU; the number of EDU shall be determined by multiplying the area of
the building (in square feet), by 0.100 gpd/square feet, and dividing the resulting product by 250 gpd/
EDU.
UTILITY CAPITAL CONNECTION FEES
The Sparta Township Sewer and Sewage Disposal Ordinance, Chapter 20, Subsection 20-3.6d
and e requires the payment of connection fees for properties that connect to the Township's
sewer systems.
The Township Engineer and the Utility Superintendent have reviewed the fees and
recommended that the fees for the year 2016 be amended as provided for in this ordinance.
The Utility Capital Connection Fees as provided for in the Township Code Subsection 20-3.6d
and e and Appendix A-20.4 are set for the year 2019 as follows: [Ord. No. 2016-06; amended
5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 19-01]
Cost Per EDU*
Town Center Sanitary Sewer Collection System Sparta Local
Connection Fee
$6,780
White Deer Plaza Treatment Municipal Utility Connection Fee $13,394
Sparta Township Water Utility Capital Connection Fee $8,436
* EDU = Equivalent Dwelling Unit = 250 gpd
3. Affordable Housing Connection Fees. [Added 6-25-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-06]
(a) New connection. Public housing authorities, nonprofit
organizations building affordable housing projects, and any
other affordable housing, including affordable housing units in
inclusionary projects, shall receive a 50% reduction in the
connection fees established in § 20-3.6e1 for new connections
to the sewer system.
(b) Previously connected to system(s). Units previously connected
to the Township's sewer system that were demolished or
refurbished in order to allow for new affordable housing units
and for which a sewer connection or tapping fee was
previously paid shall receive a credit in the amount of the
connection fee previously paid. However, the connection fee(s)
shall be the lesser of the 50% reduced rate provided for in
§ 20-3.6e3(a) or the current nonreduced rate minus the credit
for the connection fee previously paid. The affordable housing
developer is responsible to provide evidence of the previously
paid connection fee; failure to provide such proof of payment
shall result in the developer paying the reduced rate provided
for in § 20-3.6e3(a).
§ 20-3.6 SPARTA CODE § 20-3.7
1:300
a. Sewer lateral connection/sewer main extension application procedure.
1. The owner of any premises desiring to be connected to the sanitary
sewer system and/or construct a sewer extension or to make a
change in any existing connection to the sanitary sewer system
shall make an application in writing to the Sewer Department upon
forms provided by the Department.
2. All connections from the sewer main to the curb and from the curb
to the premises shall be done at the expense of the property owner
and by a plumber duly licensed by the State of New Jersey. The
application shall provide the following information: The name of
the plumber who is to install the connection applied for, the tax
map page, block, lot, the address of the premises, and the purpose
of the connection.
3. An application for a sewer main extension shall be accompanied by
four sets of plans and specifications prepared and sealed by an
engineer, licensed by the State of New Jersey.
4. The application for a sewer connection and/or sewer extension
shall be signed by the owner of the property, or by his authorized
agent, and shall be accompanied by the consent of the applicant to
be bound by all the provisions of this section along with the rules
and regulations adopted by the Township.
b. Sewer connection permit and sewer main extension permit fees.
1. All applications for a sewer connection to be made to the Sparta
Township Municipal Sanitary Sewer System shall be accompanied
by a permit fee of $100.
2. All applications for a sanitary sewer extension, as required in
accordance with Subsection a above entitled Sewer Lateral
Connection/Sewer Main Extension Application Procedure, shall
require the filing of four sets of plans and specifications to the
Township Engineer for review and approval. All costs, fees, etc.
associated with municipal, county, State, and Federal plan reviews,
including approvals and inspections, shall be the responsibility of
the applicant in addition to the sewer connection permit fees. In no
instance shall the Department issue a sewer connection permit
until concurrent approvals from State, county, and Federal
regulatory agencies have been received by the Department.
c. Street opening permit required.
1. All excavations, trench work and tunneling work must be done by
or under the supervision of a licensed plumber. Permits for road
openings, where applicable, must be made to the Township before
the issuance of a sewer connection permit and/or a sewer main
extension permit in accordance with § 21-1, Street Openings and
Excavations.
§ 20-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3.7
1:301
§ 20-3.8. Individual Sewage Disposal Facility. [1978 Code § 12-4.8;
Ord. No. 07-14 § XI]
§ 20-3.9. Disposal of Community Waste. [1978 Code § 12-4.9; Ord.
No. 05-29]
2. The cost of this permit is not included in the sewer connection and/
or sewer main extension permit.
Additions to the foregoing charges shall be made where applicable, as
follows:
(a) On State highways there shall be an added charge for any fees
that may be charged by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation. The applicant shall be responsible for paying
the fees or charges and the cost thereof shall be in addition to
the sewer connection and/or sewer main extension charge as
defined in this section.
(b) On County roads, the owner, or his designated agent, shall be
responsible for obtaining a County road opening permit and
any charges for excavation, inspection and repair of pavement
as determined by the Sussex County Engineering and Highway
Department. Permits shall be secured directly from the County
and fees paid directly to the county when required.
a. Where a public sanitary sewer system is not available, the building's
sewer shall be connected to a septic tank or other individual sewerage
disposal facility and shall conform to the requirements of the Sussex
County Health Department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any public or private sewer system or natural
outlet.
b. At such time as the Department's sewer system becomes available to a
property serviced by an individual sewage disposal facility, direct
connection shall be made in compliance with these rules and
regulations and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar individual
sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material as required by the Sussex County Health Department.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to prohibit the spilling,
dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) operated by Sparta
Township so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
§ 20-3.7 SPARTA CODE § 20-3.9
1:302
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The work "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
1. MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) – Shall
mean a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is owned or
operated by the Township of Sparta or other public body, and is
designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
2. PERSON – Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
3. STORMWATER – Shall mean water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is
transmitted to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm
sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by
snow removal equipment.
c. Prohibited Conduct. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system
operated by Sparta Township is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or
disposal of materials other than stormwater in such a manner as to
cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system is also prohibited.
d. Exceptions to Prohibitions.
1. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
2. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters).
3. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact
cooling water).
4. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
5. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water
reservoirs discharges and diverted stream flows.
6. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
7. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
8. Flows from fire fighting activities.
9. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water.
§ 20-3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3.9
1:303
§ 20-3.10. Building Connections. [1978 Code § 12-4.10]
All connections with a sewer lateral shall be made in a careful and
workmanlike manner and shall consist of at least four-inch diameter cast
iron pipe, minimum requirements medium weight, polyvinyl chloride (PVC),
ductile iron, or other material as approved by the Township Engineer.
Except as herein provided, the Plumbing Code of the Township shall in all
cases prevail, and application for plumbing permit to install the lateral shall
be made to the Plumbing Subcode Official of the Township.
§ 20-3.11. Bond Required. [1978 Code § 12-4.11]
Every plumber, who shall be licensed as a plumber, as provided for in the
preceding subsection, shall submit a bond to the Township, in the sum
of $5,000 with sufficient surety to be approved by the Township Attorney,
conditioned that he will indemnify and save harmless the Township against
all damage and costs from any injury which may occur to persons or
property, by reason of any neglect or carelessness on his part during the
process of said work, and further conditioned that he will indemnify and
save harmless the Township against all damage and costs occasioned by any
injury, damage, or obstruction which he may do or cause to be done to any
of the sewers or sewer system of the Township, in any manner whatsoever.
§ 20-3.12. Installation Requirements. [1978 Code § 12-4.12]
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use
for their intended purposes; and
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited
to exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does not
apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
e. Enforcement. This subsection shall be enforced by the Registered
Environmental Health Specialist of the Sparta Township Health
Department.
f. Penalties. Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the
provisions of this subsection, after being duly notified, shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
a. Grease traps and other appliances. Grease traps or other appliances
necessary to properly protect the sewer system from stoppage, shall be
installed by the owner or occupant of the property, at its or their
§ 20-3.9 SPARTA CODE § 20-3.12
1:304
§ 20-3.13. Regulation of Sewer Use. [1978 Code § 12-4.13]
Permitted uses. The sanitary sewer system shall be used only for the
discharge of fluid refuse from sinks, bath, house, laundry tubs, shower
baths, urinals, and waste from toilets, and shall hereafter be referred to as
domestic waste, and such other wastes as the Department may, by special
permission, allow to enter said sewer system.
§ 20-3.14. Limited Uses. [1978 Code § 12-4.14]
§ 20-3.15. Industrial Wastes. [1978 Code § 12-4.15]
expense, upon notification by the Department, in writing, to make such
installation. Upon failure or neglect of any such owner, or occupant, to
comply with such notice, in addition to the penalty hereinafter provided
for violation of this section the permit to connect said property with the
sewer system may be revoked by the Department.
a. Generally. No person, firm or corporation, either owner, user or tenant
of any land and premises shall cause to be drained, permit to flow, or
deposited into any part of the sewer system, the following matter:
1. Gasoline, naphtha, or other explosive materials, acids, matter
having antiseptic properties, garbage, offal, animals, vegetable
parings, ashes, cinders, rags, wax, oils or other articles or things
which are liable to injure said sewer system, or any part thereof, or
obstruct the flow of sewerage therein.
2. Exhaust from any steam engine boilers.
3. Any storm, roof, surface water or drainage.
a. Disposal of industrial wastes into the sewer systems operated by the
Department is unlawful except compliance with Federal standards
promulgated pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 (FWPCAA) and the requirements and standards
as set forth in these rules and regulations.
b. It is the purpose of these rules and regulations to set uniform
requirements for discharges into the sewer systems operated by the
Department and to enable the Department to comply with the
administrative provisions of State and Federal law and in particular
with the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (PL 92-500) and any
amendments thereto; as well as any guidelines, limitations and
standards promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to the Act and to derive the maximum public benefit by
regulating the quality and quantity of wastewater discharged for
treatment at wastewater treatment plants operated by the Department
or other agencies with whom it has contracted for wastewater
treatment. Any user who, by the nature of his discharge, is classified as
a major contributing industry (as defined in 40 CFR 128.124 of the
§ 20-3.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3.15
1:305
§ 20-3.16. Pretreatment Facilities. [1978 Code § 12-4.16]
Federal Register) shall comply fully with all pretreatment standards
and any other applicable requirements promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 (FWPCAA). In cases where the limitations and
standards established in the rules and regulations are more stringent
than those established by Federal limitations and standards, these
established herein shall govern.
c. Any provisions by ordinance, standards, rules or other regulatory acts
which are now or will be in the future established by the Governing
Body of the Township or of any agency with which the Department has a
contractual agreement and which are more stringent than these rules
and regulations and the standards established by State and Federal
Authority, shall take precedence.
d. Disposal of industrial wastes into public sewer; permit required.
1. No user shall discharge industrial wastes into the sewer system
without a Wastewater Discharge Permit duly issued by the
Department.
2. A separate permit will be required for each physical location where
wastewater is now, or is proposed to be, discharged to said sewers.
3. Any current or future user who is notified by the Department that a
wastewater discharge permit is required under these rules and
regulations shall, within 30 days of such notification, submit an
application, along with all required supporting data, to the
Department.
4. Application for a wastewater discharge permit shall be submitted
on forms furnished by the Department or on such forms as are
approved by the Department.
a. Users shall make wastewater acceptable under the limitations and
regulations established by the Department before discharging into the
sanitary sewer system. Any facilities required to pretreat sewage to a
level acceptable to the Department shall be provided, operated and
maintained at the user's expense.
b. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Department for review and shall
be acceptable to the Department before construction of the facility. The
review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve
the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to
produce an effluent acceptable to the Department under the provisions
of these rules and regulations. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or methods of operation shall be reported to and
be acceptable to the Department. Pretreatment facilities shall also be
§ 20-3.15 SPARTA CODE § 20-3.16
1:306
§ 20-3.17. Adoption of Sussex County Municipal Utilities Authority
Service Rules.37 [Ord. No. 02-27 § 9]
Notwithstanding the provision of any other section of this chapter to the
contrary, the service rules of the Sussex County Municipal Utilities
Authority (SCMUA) concerning the discharge of wastes into the municipal
sewer system shall be controlling. The SCMUA service rules are hereby
adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set forth at length in
this subsection. Three copies of the service rules of SCMUA controlling
the quantity of and quality of discharges into the municipal sewer system
shall be kept on file with the Township Clerk and Township Engineer for
inspection by the public.
§ 20-3.18. Enforcement Provisions. [1978 Code § 12-4.18; Ord. No.
02-27 § 10]
approved by all local, State and Federal regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction thereover.
c. At all premises where wastes or substances specified to be excluded
from public sewers by these regulations are present and liable to be
discharged directly or indirectly into said sewers, suitable and
sufficient piping layouts, oil, grease, sand and flammable waste traps or
separators, screens, settling tanks, diluting devices, storage or
regulating chambers, treatment, cooling or other equipment and
devices shall be provided by owner.
d. Such facilities for pretreatment of waste or waters discharged to public
sewers shall be approved by the Department and by any or all State
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction. The Department or State
agencies may require of an owner to install pretreatment facilities.
a. Discontinuance of Sewer Service. Sewer service as provided for under
the provisions of this section may be discontinued by the Department
for the nonpayment of bills for the said sewer and for fines and
penalties imposed under the provisions of this section or for any similar
reasons which cause or tend to cause a loss to the Department.
b. Revocation; Effect. In the event the Township Council shall revoke any
portion provided for under the provisions of this section, said
revocation may occur for any reason set forth in this section or for any
applicable reason set forth in Subsections 20-3.14 and 20-3.15 as it
shall apply to sewer service provided that said revocation shall be in
accordance with the standards required by law. The discharge of
sewerage into the sewer system shall be immediately discontinued; and
any person, firm or corporation, or occupant of any premises who shall
continue to discharge sewage into the sewer system after said
37.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 20-3.17, Rates; Fees; Charges, previously codified herein
and containing portions of 1978 Code § 8-10.1, 12-4.17; Ordinance Nos. 623, 661 and 813
was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 02-27.
§ 20-3.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3.18
1:307
§ 20-3.19. Moratorium on Issuance of Sewer Connection Permits to
the Plaza Sewerage Treatment Plant and Restriction on Existing
Users of the Plaza Sewerage Treatment Plant. [1978 Code § 12-4.19;
Ord. No. 693 § 1]
§ 20-4. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.38 [Ord. No. 02-27 § 11]
Except as may otherwise be specifically provided in this chapter, any person
violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable
by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or any
combination thereof. Each and every day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 20-5. SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM IN THE LAKE MOHAWK
SEPTIC MANAGEMENT DISTRICT.
revocation, shall be deemed to have violated this section. Each day's
continuation shall constitute a separate violation thereof.
c. Liability for Charges, Fees and Fines; Lien. That the owner of any
house, tenement, building, or lot shall be liable for the payment of the
price or rent fixed herein for sewerage service and for such other
charges heretofore or hereafter made by the Department in or upon
such house, tenement, building or lot, and the interest and penalties
charged; such price or rent or other costs, expenses, interest and
penalties as fixed herein shall be a lien upon said house, tenement,
building or lot until the same shall be paid and satisfied.
a. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other section of this chapter, no
new or additional public sewer connection permits shall be issued in the
Township for connection to the Township of Sparta Plaza Sewerage
Treatment Plant, except as herein provided.
b. Public sewer connection permits may issue for all existing structures
that presently have permits for connection to the Sparta Township
Plaza Sewerage Treatment Plant provided there is sufficient gallonage
available to authorize a connection permit to the applicant and further
provided that the amount of gallonage to be utilized by the applicant
annually does not exceed 110% of the previous annual gallonage
utilized by the structure.
c. If and in the event it is determined subsequent to the issuance of a
permit that the annual gallonage does exceed 110% as set forth in
Subsection b above, the public sewer connection permit shall be
revoked upon 10 days' notice to the holder of said permit.
38.Editor's Note: Former § 20-4, Sewer Rates, previously codified herein and containing
portions of 1978 Code § 12-5.2 and Ordinance Nos. 755 and 770 was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance. No. 02-27.
§ 20-3.18 SPARTA CODE § 20-5.1
1:308
§ 20-5.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 986, Preamble]
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) has
amended regulations regarding the standards for individual subsurface
sewage disposal systems pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq. The purpose
of the DEP's amended regulations is to:
§ 20-5.2. Title. [Ord. No. 986 § 1]
This section shall be known as the Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal
Systems Maintenance Ordinance of the Township of Sparta, Lake Mohawk
Septic Management District.
§ 20-5.3. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. 986 § 2]
The purpose and intent of this section is to establish a management
program for the pumping of the individual subsurface sewage disposal
systems in the Township of Sparta, Lake Mohawk Septic Management
District, the metes and bounds of which are recorded in the Office of the
Clerk of Sussex County in Book 372, Pages 24 and c. This section requires
existing, new and proposed individual subsurface sewage disposal systems
to be pumped out at least once every three years in order to minimize future
malfunctions of such systems.
a. Prevent pollution of the water in the State as a result of improper
location, design, construction, installation, alteration, operation or
maintenance of individual subsurface sewage disposal systems.
b. Provide standards for the proper location, design, construction,
installation, alteration, operation, and maintenance of individual
subsurface sewage disposal systems;
c. Protect public health and safety for potable water supplies; and
d. Safeguard of fish and aquatic life and ecological values.
The Township of Sparta has the authority to regulate the design, construction,
alteration, operation, and maintenance of individual subsurface sewage
disposal systems, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-31 and N.J.S.A. 26:1A-9. The
subsurface sewage disposal systems malfunction even when the systems have
been designed, constructed, and sited in accordance with the applicable
standards and these malfunctions adversely effect public health, safety, welfare
and the environment. The malfunctioning of an individual subsurface disposal
system is often caused by improper operation and maintenance of the system
by owners or persons being served by such system.
A determination that the area of Lake Mohawk should be designated as septic
management district has been made by the Governing Body of the Township of
Sparta and the Lake Mohawk Country Club, the corporation which regulates
the Lake. Lake Mohawk Country Club has agreed to participate in the
regulation of subsurface sewage disposal systems.
§ 20-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-5.4
1:309
§ 20-5.4. Definitions. [Ord. No. 986 § 3; Ord. No. 07-14 § XI]
All definitions in subchapter 2 of the DEP standards for the construction of
individual subsurface sewage disposal system, N.J.A.C. 7:9A-1.1 et seq. And
all amendments are hereby incorporated into this section with the following
additions:
§ 20-5.5. Requirement for Permit to Operate an Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal System: Application Procedure Permit;
Term; Automatic Transfer of Permit. [Ord. No. 986 § 4]
a. NOTICE OF REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMIT RENEWAL – Shall mean a
notice issued by the Township to an owner/operator that the permit to
operate the individual subsurface sewage disposal system will expire on
a given date and that proof is required to be furnished to the Township
that either pump out has occurred within the effective period of the
permit, or that the homeowner has voluntarily had the individual
subsurface sewage disposal system inspected by a licensed professional
who certified that pumping is not required before the permit may be
renewed.
b. OPERATION PERMIT – Shall mean a permit issued pursuant to this
section and the DEP regulations for the operation of an individual
subsurface sewage disposal system.
c. OWNER/OPERATOR – Shall mean the person, corporation or
partnership who owns or leases the realty on which the individual
subsurface sewage disposal system is located and this entity is a
property owner within the Lake Mohawk Country Club. The owner of
the dwelling is liable for the obligations imposed by this section.
d. PLOT PLAN – Shall mean a sketch drawn by the homeowner or agent on
the homeowner's behalf, showing the type (if known) and location of the
individual subsurface sewage disposal system servicing the property, as
well as the location and type of any on-site water supply servicing the
property. All plots should be drawn to scale listing the dimensions used.
Alternatively, plot plan means a copy of an existing survey which
delineates the system.
e. TOWNSHIP – Shall mean the Township of Sparta and its authorized
agents, including but not limited to, the Sussex County Health
Department and Health Officer.
f. SYSTEM – Shall mean and refer to individual subsurface sewage
disposal systems, as defined by law, including all of the component
parts of the system.
a. Requirement for Permit. On and after November 1, 1998, no owner or
occupant of a property in the Lake Mohawk Septic Management
District upon which an individual subsurface sewage disposal system is
located shall use or operate the system unless a currently valid permit
§ 20-5.4 SPARTA CODE § 20-5.5
1:310
§ 20-5.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 986 § 5]
to operate the system has been issued by the Township in accordance
with the provision of this section.
b. Application. Every application for a permit to operate a system and
every renewal of such a permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Township. The date for the initial application for permit will be provided
to each affected property owner.
1. Every application for an initial permit shall be accompanied by
documentation establishing that the entire contents of the septic
tank for the system (both liquids and solids) have been pumped and
removed by a solid waste hauler registered with the New Jersey
State DEP. A permit will be issued which will expire three years
from the date of the documented pumpout, or from the approval
date of a new septic system installation.
2. Every application for an initial permit shall be accompanied by a
plot plan.
c. Initial Permit. The initial permit issued by the Township in accordance
with this section shall include a copy of this section and a copy of the
DEP's Operation and Maintenance manual for each owner/operator
within the Lake Mohawk Septic Management District.
1. The initial Operator's permit shall expire three years after
issuance, or three years from the date of the documented pumpout,
whichever comes first. The Township shall notify the Owner/
Operator that the permit is about to expire and direct the Owner/
Operator to apply for renewal.
d. Renewal. The Township shall not renew the permit unless the Owner/
Operator has submitted to the Township proof that the system has been
pumped out or proof that a waiver has been granted by the Township.
e. Waiver. A waiver shall be granted upon submission of certification by a
licensed professional certifying that pumping is not required. Such
certification will be renewed annually until pumping is required and
performed, at which time the three-year permitting period
recommences.
f. Automatic Transfer of Permit. In the event a change in the ownership to
a property to which a permit to operate a system has been issued, the
permit shall be considered transferred to the new owner.
a. Any person who shall willfully violate any provisions of this section or
any person who shall use or operate a system within the Lake Mohawk
Septic Management District without a currently valid Operator's Permit
to operate such system or any person who shall violate any part of this
section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $100 for each violation
§ 20-5.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-5.6
1:311
§ 20-6. SEWER CAPACITY RESERVATION.
§ 20-6.1. Sewer Service Area. [Ord. No. 01-13 § I]
The Sewer Service Area in the Township of Sparta is hereby established in
accordance with a map prepared by the Township Engineer dated July 1998
entitled, "Sewer Service Area." Copies of said map shall be kept on file with
the Township Clerk and Township Engineer and shall be available for public
inspection.
§ 20-6.2. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 01-13 § II]
No sewer connection permit shall be issued to a property owner by the
Township unless a sewer allocation permit has been previously issued by the
Township Council or its designated agent in accordance with the provisions
of this section. For purposes of the implementation of this section, the
Township Engineer is hereby designated the agent of the Township Council.
§ 20-6.3. Applications for Improved Properties. [Ord. No. 01-13
§ III]
On or before 90 days from the date of the adoption of this section, the
Township shall forward to each property owner owning improved property
within the Sewer Service Area a sewer allocation permit application form
containing such information as shall be required by Subsection 20-6.7
hereof. Said permit application form shall be completed and returned by the
property owner to the Township within 90 days of the date of mailing by the
Township. All owners of improved properties shall return the form to the
Township Engineer's Office within 90 days as provided for herein regardless
of whether or not the owner of the improved property is applying for a
sewer allocation permit. In the event that the property owner is not applying
for a sewer allocation permit, the fee provided for Subsection 20-6.6 hereof
shall be waived.
§ 20-6.4. Applications for Unimproved Properties. [Ord. No. 01-13
§ IV]
On or before 90 days from the date of the adoption of this section, the
Township shall forward to each property owner owning unimproved
property within the Sewer Service Area a sewer allocation permit
application form containing such information as shall be required by
and an additional penalty of $25 a day for each particular violation that
continues after notice of the violation issued by the Township.
b. Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the remedies of
the Township for violations of this section. The Township may proceed
under any other remedy available at law or equity for any violation of
this section, or any term or condition of any permit issued by the
Township, or for any failure to comply with any notice or order issued
by the Township pursuant to this section.
§ 20-5.6 SPARTA CODE § 20-6.4
1:312
Subsection 20-6.7 hereof. The property owner may, but is not required,
to complete and return to the Township the sewer allocation permit form.
If said permit application form shall be completed and returned by the
property owner to the Township, it shall be returned within 90 days of the
date of mailing by the Township.
§ 20-6.5. Subsequent Applications. [Ord. No. 01-13 § V]
Any application for a sewer allocation permit submitted more than 90 days
after the time provided for in Subsections 20-6.3 and 20-6.4 hereof shall
be considered for any remaining unallocated sewage treatment capacity in
accordance with the provisions of § 20-6.9 hereof.
§ 20-6.6. Application Fees. [Ord. No. 01-13 § VI]
Each property owner filing for a sewer allocation permit shall pay the
following permit fees:
§ 20-6.7. Application Requirements. [Ord. No. 01-13 § VII]
The owner of any property seeking a sewer application permit shall file with
the Township Engineer in accordance with Subsections 20-6.3 and 20-6.4
hereof an application for a sewer allocation permit on forms prescribed by
the Township Council, as follows:
a. Single family residential dwellings - $50.
b. Multifamily residential dwellings - $100.
c. All commercial properties - $100.
d. All nonprofit properties - $50.
e. All properties owned by Sparta Township or Sparta Township Board of
Education - exempt.
a. For improved properties, the application shall contain the following
information:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The address of the property and the tax lot and block designation.
3. The dimensions and total area of the property.
4. For residential properties, whether the property is single family
residential or multifamily. For all properties other than single
family and two family residential dwellings, a certification by the
property owner's engineer as to the number of gallons per day of
sewage that will be generated by the property expressed in EDUs
and the method of calculation and schedules used in computing
said amount shall be submitted as part of the application.
§ 20-6.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-6.7
1:313
§ 20-6.8. Escrow Fees. [Ord. No. 01-13 § VIII]
For all properties requiring eight or more EDUs, the applicant shall also
submit an escrow fee of $500 per project with the application to offset the
5. For all nonresidential properties, the total square footage and type
of building and its use.
6. For all nonresidential properties, a certification by the property
owner's engineer as to the number of gallons per day of sewage
that will be generated by the property expressed in EDUs and the
method of calculation and schedules used in computing said
amount shall be submitted as part of the application.
7. The number of EDUs required by any property shall be calculated
in accordance with Table I (Subsection 20-3.6e) of the Codified
Ordinances of the Township of Sparta.
8. Any other information deemed necessary by the Township Council
or its designated agent.
b. For unimproved properties, the application shall contain the following
information:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The address of the property and the tax lot and block designation.
3. The dimensions and total area of the property.
4. For single family residential dwellings to be constructed, the total
square foot area of the dwelling and number of bedrooms.
5. For multifamily residential dwellings to be constructed, a
preliminary sketch plan showing the number of units and the
number of proposed bedrooms in the units to be constructed.
6. For all nonresidential uses, a preliminary site plan shall be
submitted with the application showing the total square footage of
the proposed building and the proposed use of the building.
7. For all properties other than single family residential dwellings, a
certification by the property owner's engineer as to the number of
gallons per day of sewage that will be generated by the property
expressed in EDUs and the method of calculation and schedules
used in computing said amount shall be submitted as part of the
application.
8. The number of EDUs required by any property shall be calculated
in accordance with Table I (Subsection 20-3.6e) of the Codified
Ordinances of the Township of Sparta.
9. Any other information deemed necessary by the Township Council
or its designated agent.
§ 20-6.7 SPARTA CODE § 20-6.8
1:314
Township's costs in evaluating and processing the application. In the event
that the entire escrow is not utilized by the Township in processing the
application, any unused escrow shall be returned to the applicant within 90
days of the processing of the application. In the event that additional funds
are necessary to complete the review of the application, the applicant will
be required to replenish the escrow account in an amount sufficient to cover
said costs.
§ 20-6.9. Standards for Approval. [Ord. No. 01-13 § IX; Ord. No.
02-08 § I]
The following shall apply in the Township's determination of the application
in the following order:
a. The amount of sewage allocation available from the Sussex County
Municipal Utilities Authority.
b. The presence and extent of any public health hazard.
c. The current and future usage of existing public properties within the
Township's sewer service area.
d. The current and future usage of existing and proposed housing units
comprising a part of the Township's COAH housing obligation within
the Township's sewer service area.
e. The Township's need for an easement from the property owner or any
sewer main or sewer system appurtenance.
f. The current and future usage of existing residential properties within
the Township's sewer service area.
g. The current and future usage of existing nonresidential properties
within the Township's sewer service area.
h. The proposed use of the unimproved properties.
i. The Township's Master Plan for the sewer service area.
j. Availability of alternate sewage disposal methods and the estimated
cost thereof to the property owner.
k. The amount of sewage gallonage requested as a percentage of the total
unused allocation of the Township of Sparta.
l. The reasonableness of the total gallonage requested by the property
owner.
m. The nature and type of effluent to be generated by the property owner.
n. Any other matter that may affect the general health and welfare of the
residents of the Township of Sparta and the overall reasonable
development of the vacant or unused lands of the Township of Sparta.
§ 20-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-6.10
1:315
§ 20-6.10. Issuance of Sewer Allocation Permit. [Ord. No. 01-13 § X]
Upon the receipt of said application and required fee, the Township
Engineer shall review said application and determine whether or not there
is sufficient gallonage available to authorize a sewer allocation permit to
the property owner. In the event that the application is approved, a sewer
allocation permit will be issued by the Township for the number of EDUs,
or part thereof, set forth in the application in accordance with Subsection
20-6.12 hereof. The Township shall issue written notice to the property
owner of the approval of the sewer allocation permit. In the event that
the application is denied, written notice thereof shall be provided to the
property owner by the Township.
§ 20-6.11. Hearing. [Ord. No. 01-13 § XI]
In the event of a denial of a sewer allocation permit, the property owner
may request a hearing by filing a written request with the Township Council
within 10 days of the date of notice of denial of the application. The
Governing Body shall then hold a hearing within 45 days from the date of
the request. The applicant shall bear all costs and professional fees incurred
relative to the hearing and, if required, shall post an escrow fee prior to the
hearing. The Township Council shall render its decision within 30 days of
the hearing.
§ 20-6.12. Sewer Allocation Permit Fees. [Ord. No. 01-13 § XII; Ord.
No. 10-06]
Upon approval and prior to the issuance of a sewer allocation permit,
the property owner shall pay to the Township a nonrefundable allocation
reservation fee of $260 per EDU for any improved property or $515 per
EDU for any unimproved property. Fractional portions of EDUs shall be
paid proportionately. No sewer allocation permit shall be issued unless all
application permit fees and escrow fees have been paid-in-full and all real
property taxes for the property are current. The property owner shall pay
the allocation permit fee within 90 days of notification by the Township of
Sparta of the granting of the allocation or the allocation shall lapse.
§ 20-6.13. Connection Requirements. [Ord. No. 01-13 § XIII]
Approval of a Sewer Allocation Permit shall not authorize the property
owner to connect to the Township's municipal sewer system. The property
owner must secure a Connection Permit from the Township, pay all
applicable fees and charges and provide proof of payment of SCMUA
hookup fees, as well.
§ 20-6.14. Expiration of Sewer Allocation Permits. [Ord. No. 01-13
§ XIV; Ord. No. 02-08 § II]
a. All sewer allocation permits granted to improved properties shall expire
one year from the date of issuance by the Township of Sparta of a notice
to the property owner that the sewer line to which the property is to be
§ 20-6.10 SPARTA CODE § 20-6.14
1:316
connected is ready for use. The property owner shall connect the
property to the municipal sewer system prior to the expiration of the
sewer allocation permit, or any extension thereof. Failure to do so shall
result in the expiration of the sewer allocation permit. Upon expiration
of a sewer allocation permit, the sewage allocation shall revert to the
Township.
b. Except as provided in Subsection c below, all sewer allocation permits
granted to unimproved properties shall expire one year from the date of
issuance by the Township of Sparta of a notice to the property owner
that the sewer line to which the property is to be connected is ready for
use. The Township Council may grant extensions of a sewer allocation
permit for a period not exceeding one year at a time based upon the
original expiration date at the Township's discretion. As a condition for
approval of the extension of a sewer allocation permit, the property
owner shall pay the annual user charge for the one-year period based
upon the number of EDUs reserved for the property owner in the sewer
allocation permit. Except as provided in Subsection d below, the
property owner shall receive no credit or other benefit for the payment
of the sewer user charge other than the extension of the sewer
allocation permit. The property owner shall connect the property to the
municipal sewer system prior to the expiration of the sewer allocation
permit, or any extension thereof. Failure to do so shall result in the
expiration of the sewer allocation permit. Upon expiration of a sewer
allocation permit, the sewage allocation shall revert to the Township.
c. For all unimproved properties for which preliminary subdivision or site
plan approval has been granted by the Planning Board and which will
consist of multiple subdivided lots or multiple building or building unit
connections to be made to the municipal sewer system, the property
owner shall have the right to renew its initial sewer allocation permit
for two consecutive one year periods by notifying the Township, in
writing, of its intent to so renew its sewer allocation permit prior to the
expiration of the permit and by paying the required fee set forth in
Subsection b above for extensions of sewer allocation permits. For all
multiple subdivided lots or multiple building or building unit
connections to be made to the municipal sewer system, as each lot,
building or building unit is connected, the Township shall deduct from
the sewer allocation permit the number of gallons required for each
such connection based upon the number of EDUs attributable to each
such connection.
For all properties comprising a part of the Township's COAH housing
obligation, the property owner shall have the right to renew its initial
sewer allocation permit for four consecutive one year periods by
notifying the Township, in writing, of its intent to so renew its sewer
allocation permit prior to the expiration of the permit and by paying
the required fee set forth in Subsection b above for extensions of sewer
allocation permits. For all multiple subdivided lots or multiple building
or building unit connections to be made to the municipal sewer system,
§ 20-6.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-6.14
1:317
§ 20-6.15. Assignment or Transfer of Sewer Allocation Reservation
Permits. [Ord. No. 01-13 § XV]
The sewer allocation reservation permit may be assigned or transferred by
the property owner upon transfer of the property to the new owner on the
following conditions:
as each lot, building or building unit is connected, the Township shall
deduct from the sewer allocation permit the number of gallons required
for each such connection based upon the number of EDUs attributable
to each such connection.
d. Upon the connection of any property to the municipal sewer system, the
Township shall credit a portion of the sewer allocation permit fee
against the actual sewer user fee to be billed by the Township to the
property owner upon connection of the property to the municipal sewer
system. The credit shall be determined by the dividing the sewer
allocation permit fee paid on an EDU basis by 12 and crediting to the
property owner said amount multiplied by the number of months
remaining, rounded to the nearest month, on the sewer allocation
permit subsequent to the month in which the building or unit is
connected to the municipal sewer system. For purposes of this section,
the word "connection" shall be defined to mean the date on which the
Township issues a final approval under the Uniform Construction Code
of the work required to connect the property to the municipal sewer
system.
a. The use for which the sewer allocation reservation permit was granted
remains the same.
b. The number of EDUs allocated remains the same.
c. The property owner to whom the permit was granted notifies the
Township Engineering Department 30 days in advance of the transfer of
the property.
d. In the event the transferee of the property elects to change the use or
otherwise alter, amend or modify the subdivision or site plan, the
transferee must make a new application for sewer allocation and pay
the application fee to the Township. The transferee shall be entitled to a
credit against the permit fee for the new or revised project for the
allocation reservation permit fee paid by the transferrer, provided the
permit has not lapsed.
e. Sewer allocation reservation permits cannot be sold or transferred to
another parcel. No sewer allocation reservation permit shall be
assigned or transferred to a property other than the property approved
in the sewer allocation reservation permit without the written
permission of the Township.
f. The transferee shall obtain any approvals required by SCMUA.
§ 20-6.14 SPARTA CODE § 20-6.15
1:318
§ 20-6.16. Repurchase of Sewer Allocation Reservation Permits.
[Ord. No. 01-13 § XVI]
The Township of Sparta shall have the right to repurchase sewage allocation
permits from property owners under the following conditions:
§ 20-6.17. (Reserved)39
Chapter 21
g. Upon assignment or transfer of a sewer allocation reservation permit,
the remaining time left on the permit shall accrue to the assignee or
transferee and the permit shall expire at the end of the term of the
permit, unless it is renewed as provided for under this section.
a. The Township of Sparta reserves the right to repurchase any unused
sewer allocation reservation permits in the event there are emergency
requests for sewage by other property owners within the Township and
insufficient capacity to handle the emergency requests.
b. The Township may also elect at its sole option to repurchase any unused
sewage allocation permits. This repurchase shall be accomplished by
giving written notice to the permit holder stating the Township's
intention to repurchase three months from the date of notice. The
permit holder may request a hearing before the Township Council in
which he may provide testimony concerning the status of his project
and his reasons why the permit should not be repurchased. The criteria
for repurchasing sewage allocation permits by the Township shall
include the following (the order below does not constitute a priority for
repurchasing):
1. Inaction or unnecessary delay by the permit holder with regard to
obtaining the necessary land use and other permits to proceed with
the project.
2. The number of applications and amount of gallonage requests
pending.
3. Whether the property owner has made all of its payments for the
allocation in a timely manner.
4. Whether a project generally benefiting the Township requires a
sewage allocation.
5. Whether the applicant has obtained NJDEP approval that restricts
the Township's ability to repurchase allocation.
c. The repurchase of any unused sewer allocation permits by the
Township shall be at cost and without interest.
39.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 20-6.17, Violations and Penalties, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 01-13, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 02-27. For penalty provisions see § 20-4.
§ 20-6.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-6.17
1:319
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 21-1. STREET OPENINGS AND EXCAVATIONS.
§ 21-1.1. Definitions. [1978 Code § 14-2.1]
As used in this chapter:
ACCESS — Shall mean any means for passage of vehicles between property
abutting a street and the street. It shall include only that portion of the
driveway or access road that lies within the established right-of-way limits
of the street.
APPLICANT — Shall mean any person who makes application for a permit
under the provisions of this section.
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean the putting together, building, or placing
of any materials upon, through or over the street, curb, sidewalk or areas
within the right-of-way of any street, alley or lane within the Township
which could interfere with the public's use of said street or sidewalk.
EMERGENCY — Shall mean any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence,
the existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons
or properties.
ERECTION OF OBSTRUCTION — Shall mean the putting together, building,
or placing of any materials upon, through or over the street, curb, sidewalk
or areas within the right-of-way of any street, alley or lane within the
Township which could interfere with the public's use of said street or
sidewalk.
EXCAVATION OR EXCAVATIONS — Shall mean the digging of any trench
or excavation through or under the street, curb, sidewalk or right-of-way, or
the cutting into or opening and removal of any of the pavement surfaces,
curb or sidewalks within the right-of-way of any street, curbs or sidewalks
within the Township.
INSPECTOR — Shall mean the person designated by the Township Manager
to process applications and permits for street excavation and construction.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — Shall mean anybody incorporated and politic
created, pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey.
PERMITTEE — Shall mean any person who has been issued a permit and
has agreed to fulfill all terms of this section.
PERSONS — Shall mean and include any natural person, partnership, firm,
association, utility, corporation or authority created pursuant to an act
of the State of New Jersey. Whenever used in any section prescribing
and imposing a penalty, the term person as applied to associations shall
mean the partnership members thereof, and, as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
§ 20-6.17 SPARTA CODE § 21-1.1
1:320
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Shall mean any company subject to the
jurisdiction of and control by the New Jersey Public Utilities Commission, or
the Federal Communications Commission.
STREET — Shall mean and include any street, public easement, right-ofway,
highway, alley, way or road in the Township.
STREET OCCUPANCY — Shall mean excavation, construction, erection of
obstructions or the establishment of any access from abutting property to
a street, which access will be used by vehicles as a driveway or means of
egress or ingress to said streets.
STREET OPENINGS — Shall mean any excavation, construction or erection
of obstructions within the right-of-way of Township streets which do not fall
within the definition of street occupancy.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Sparta, County of Sussex, State
of New Jersey.
§ 21-1.2. Road Opening Permit Required; Emergency Work. [1978
Code § 14-2.2 a]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any street opening, which shall
include any excavation, any construction or erection of any obstruction of
any kind upon, in, under or over the right-of-way of any street, or to make
any street occupancy, without first securing a permit from the Township
for each separate undertaking; however, any person maintaining pipe, lines
or other underground facilities in or under the surface of any street may
proceed with opening without a permit when emergency circumstances
demand the work be done immediately, provided that the permit could
not reasonably or practically have been obtained beforehand. The person
shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day on
which the Township offices are opened for business and said permit shall
be retroactive to the date when the work was begun. In all cases where
emergency openings are necessary, the Township Police Department shall
be notified prior to such openings.
§ 21-1.3. Application. [1978 Code § 14-2.2b]
Any person desiring to tear up, open or make excavation of a right-of-way
in the Township shall first submit an application to the Public Works Official
in quadruplicate for a permit therefor, together with plans indicating and
describing in detail the work to be performed, the estimated length of time
required to perform the same, and the estimated cost thereof.
§ 21-1.4. Fees and Deposits. [1978 Code § 8-14; § 14-2.2 c; New]
a. Applications for permits referred to herein shall be accompanied by
deposits of money sufficient to cover the fees for said openings, which
fees may be amended from time to time, and any escrow which may be
required to defray inspection costs. The Public Works Department,
upon receipt of a properly completed application, shall determine the
§ 21-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-1.4
1:321
§ 21-1.5. Conditions of Permit. [1978 Code § 14-2.2d]
Permits for excavations in any street shall be granted only upon the
following conditions, and such other conditions as may from time to time be
hereafter adopted, to wit:
amount of the deposit to be made by the permittee in accordance
with the schedule of charges established by ordinance of the Township
Council. The deposit shall be paid at the time the permit is received
and the deposit shall be used to reimburse the Township for the cost
of all necessary inspections of said work, the cost of restoration or for
any other purpose set forth in this section. The Township may elect to
waive this requirement insofar as it pertains to a public utility company
if such company files with the Township its corporate bond in a form
satisfactory to the Township Attorney, conditioned upon the payment to
the Township of all costs which would otherwise be covered by and paid
out of such a deposit. In the event any public utility company elects
to file such a bond, the Township shall bill such company monthly for
such costs as they accrue. If any deposit is less than sufficient to pay
all costs, the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the Township an
amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay
such deficiency, the Township may institute an action to recover the
same in any court of competent jurisdiction until such deficiency is paid
in full. No additional permits will be issued to such a permittee.
b. Road Opening permit, square yard: $25 - Refund upon final inspection.
Inspection/Administrative fee: $100 - Non-refundable.
a. Barriers. Any excavation shall be guarded by the permittee by the
erection of suitable barriers and notices of such excavation by day, and
sufficient and suitable lights at night, and by such other reasonable
structures or notice as the Township Public Works Official shall
prescribe.
b. Maximum Width of Excavation or Obstruction. If any construction or
excavation or obstruction or occupancy shall extend for the full width of
the road, only 1/2 of the road shall be disturbed or obstructed at one
time, which half shall be backfilled or cleared before the remaining 1/2
is excavated or obstructed in order that the public travel over said road
remain unimpeded and that it remain open at all times.
c. Additional Work Not Covered in Permit. No person to whom a permit
has been granted shall perform any of the work authorized by such
permit in any amount greater than that specified in the permit, except
that, upon approval by the Public Works Official, additional work may
be done under the provisions of the permit in such amount as the Public
Works Official shall deem appropriate and necessary to complete the
work. Any deposit or bond posted in connection with the permit shall be
reviewed to insure that any such additional work is covered and may be
approved pursuant to this section within the limits mentioned herein.
§ 21-1.4 SPARTA CODE § 21-1.5
1:322
d. Expiration of Permit; Extensions. Work for which a permit has been
issued shall be completed within 30 days after the issuance of the
permit unless otherwise specified. If not so completed, the permit shall
be automatically terminated unless the permittee applies to the Public
Works Official for an extension of time within which to perform the
work. If such an extension is granted, the original permit shall remain
in force for the period of time specified in the extension. Permittee shall
notify the Township Police Department and the Public Works Official at
least 24 hours prior to the initial commencement of work.
e. Hours of Operation. All work must be performed during time specified
in the following schedule:
Monday through Friday - 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
No work may be performed on any Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
All street excavations and openings must be closed and all obstructions
removed from the Township rights-of-way at all other times. Exceptions
are granted only in an emergency or when permission is obtained
in advance from the Public Works Official. If a street opening or
excavation is left at any incomplete stage for over 24 hours, it may be
deemed contrary to the public interest by the Township.
f. Nontransferable. Permits are not transferable from one person to
another and the work shall not be made in any place other than the
location specifically designated in the permit.
g. Insurance Requirements. Permittee shall provide prior to being issued
any permit proof of adequate insurance and in conjunction therewith
agree to protect, defend, indemnify and save harmless the Township
agents or officers thereof from all claims, suits, actions and proceedings
of every nature and description which may be brought against the
Township officers or agents thereof for or on account of any injuries or
damages to persons and/or public or private property due to any
materials or workmanship or for or on account of any accident or any
other acts of negligence or omissions of said applicant or his agents,
servants or employees and the Township shall not in any way be liable
therefor.
h. Utility and Township Excavations; Restorations. All street excavation or
construction work required by utilities owned and/or operated by the
Township shall be made and restored under the direction and/or
supervision of the Public Works Official. The permit fee, deposit and
bond requirements of this section shall not be applicable to any
openings or occupancies made by such municipally owned and/or
operated utilities. All restorations shall be made in accordance with
Township specifications as provided in the Sparta Township
Comprehensive Land Management Code.
i. Liability Insurance. Permittee shall provide the Township with an
acceptable certificate of insurance indicating that the permittee and the
§ 21-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-1.5
1:323
Township are insured against claims for damages for personal injury
as well as against claims for property damage which may arise from
or out of the performance of the work, or that such performance be by
permittee, his subcontractor or anyone directly or indirectly employed
by him. Such insurance shall cover all manner of liability, including but
not limited to collapse, explosion, hazards and underground work by
equipment on the street, and shall include protection against liability
arising from completed operations. The amount of the insurance shall
be prescribed by the Public Works Official in accordance with the
nature of the risk involved, provided, however, that liability insurance
for bodily injury in effect shall not be less than $100,000 for each
person, $300,000 for each accident and for property damages not less
than $50,000 with an aggregate of $100,000 for all accidents. A public
utility company or municipal authority may be relieved of the obligation
of submitting such a certificate if it submits satisfactory evidence that
said company or authority and the Township are insured, or it has
adequate provision for self-insurance of itself and the Township in
accordance with the requirements of this section. Public utilities and
authorities may submit annually such evidence of insurance coverage
in lieu of individual submissions for each permit.
j. Use of Streets During Work. Permits shall be granted subject to the
right of the Township or any other person to lawfully use the street for
any purpose not inconsistent with the permit. The Township shall also
have the right to require the persons using the street to allow
reasonable additional uses of said person's facilities in order to avoid
duplication of facilities and congestion of said streets.
k. Prohibition Period. [Added 9-10-2019 by Ord. No. 19-13]
1. Newly constructed or resurfaced streets shall be termed
"prohibition streets" within this chapter. Permission to excavate in
prohibition streets will not be granted for five years after the
completion of street overlays. Utilities shall plan well enough in
advance to determine alternate methods of making necessary
repairs to avoid excavating in newly resurfaced streets.
(a) Exceptions to the above policy are as follows:
(1) Emergencies that endanger life or property.
(2) Interruption of essential utility service.
(3) Work that is mandated by local, state, or federal law.
(b) The Township Engineer or his designee shall maintain a list of
all prohibition streets indicating the location limits, the date of
the completion of construction or resurfacing and the date the
prohibition expires. The list shall be made available to the
public and be kept current. If an exception is granted under
this subsection, the individual or entity obtaining the road
opening permit shall repave the entire portion of the street
§ 21-1.5 SPARTA CODE § 21-1.5
1:324
§ 21-1.6. Street List Requirements. [1978 Code § 14-2.2 e]
that is disturbed by the street opening from the edge of the
pavement to the edge of the pavement on the opposite side of
the street, unless the Township Engineer directs otherwise.
2. Approval by the Township Engineer or his or her designee shall be
obtained prior to any excavation in a prohibition street under the
exceptions listed above. To request a waiver, the applicant must
submit a written request to the Township Engineer or his or her
designee immediately or within 24 hours under an eminent hazard
condition where time is of the essence. In granting the waiver, the
Township Engineer or his or her designee shall consider the
following:
(a) The location of the excavation.
(b) Description of the work to be performed.
(c) The reason(s) the work was not performed before the street
was paved.
(d) The reason(s) the work cannot be deferred until after the
prohibition period.
(e) The reason(s) the work cannot be performed at another
location.
(f) The reason(s) it is justified as an emergency to excavate the
prohibition street.
(g) The Township Engineer or his or her designee will verify that
the applicant has analyzed all feasible alternatives to make the
necessary repairs using a trenchless method in prohibition
streets to avoid excavating a newly resurfaced street whenever
possible.
3. Any person seeking a waiver for any other reason than those listed
in the exceptions listed above shall require approval from the
Township Council. The Township Council shall only grant a waiver
after determining that the waiver is deemed in the best interest of
the Township of Sparta and that the waiver is necessary for
unforeseen circumstances not anticipated in this chapter.
a. Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes,
conduits, ducts or other structures under the surface of any street used
for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity,
communication, impulses, water or steam to or from the Township or to
or from its inhabitants, or for any other purposes, shall file with the
Public Works Official within 120 days thereafter after the adoption of
this section plans or "as-built prints" containing the names of the
Township streets wherein the aforementioned facility owned by such a
§ 21-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-1.6
1:325
§ 21-1.7. Curbs and Sidewalks. [1978 Code § 14-2.2f]
This section shall relate to curb cuts, cross-overs or other means of access
from abutting properties to the streets.
§ 21-1.8. Default in Performance. [1978 Code § 14-2.3 a]
Whenever the Public Works Official shall find that a default has occurred
in the performance of any term or condition of the permit, written notice
thereof shall be given to the applicant. Such notice shall state the work
to be done and the period of time deemed by the Public Works Official to
be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work. After the receipt
of such notice, the applicant within the time therein specified shall cause
the required work to be performed. Failure to complete this work by the
specified date will cause the Township to file a complaint against the
permittee before a Judge of the Municipal Court in a court of competent
jurisdiction for violation of this section. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist after the specified date in the notice shall constitute a
separate offense; or the applicant shall bear all costs of restoring and/or
completing the work should the Township be compelled to complete and/or
rectify a situation which is or may become a threat to the health, safety and
welfare of the public.
§ 21-1.9. Penalties. [1978 Code § 12-2.3b]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section or of any
regulations and specifications adopted thereunder relating to street
openings and occupancies shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, § 1-5 for each offense and costs of the
prosecution for each day that a violation is committed. In the event that a
person has made any street occupancy and/or excavation permit to cover
person are located. The presented prints shall show location and depth
of existing facilities.
b. Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located
under the surface of any street or the use thereof is abandoned, a
person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein shall,
within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the inspector a
statement in writing giving in detail the location of the structure so
abandoned. Whenever there are manholes or tunnels associated with
abandoned underground facilities, such manholes or tunnels shall be
filled in at the time of abandonment and the Public Works Official shall
be notified thereof in writing.
c. When the Township plans to pave or improve streets in which there are
abandoned facilities, the owners of such facilities shall be required to
remove them if, in the opinion of the Township Engineer their removal
is in the best interest of the Township. If the owner shall refuse to
remove such facilities, the Township shall remove the abandoned
facilities and the owner shall reimburse the Township for such removal.
§ 21-1.6 SPARTA CODE § 21-1.9
1:326
retroactively such work as has been performed, this previously performed
work shall be brought into compliance with all the Township regulations and
specifications pertaining to street occupancy or excavation.
§ 21-1.10. Refund of Deposit for Street Opening Permits. [1978
Code § 14-2.4]
Upon notification by the permittee that all work authorized by the permit
has been completed, and after restoration of the opening according to
specifications, the Public Works Official shall determine if an additional
deposit shall be required, which deposit shall be paid. In the event that
deposits are not required within a period of two years following restoration,
said deposit shall be returned to permittee.
§ 21-2. STREET OBSTRUCTIONS.
§ 21-2.1. Obstruction Prohibited. [1978 Code § 14-3.1; Ord. No.
05-19; Ord. No. 13-15]
No person shall deposit, place, dump, drop, throw, spill or permit the
depositing, placing, dumping, dropping, throwing or spilling of any stones,
earth, dirt, debris, ashes, rubbish or other materials or things on any street
within the Township.
Every owner or occupant of lands lying within the Township adjoining a
public roadway is prohibited from placing or allowing to be placed within
five feet of the road right-of-way any obstruction, including, but not limited
to, fences, walls, signs, and pillars. This section shall not apply to signs
installed by the Township, Federal, County or State Governments, utility
poles, fire hydrants, or mailboxes installed in accordance with this
subsection. However, under no circumstance shall a mailbox be installed in
or about a wall, pillar or other permanent structure except by a post or pole
as described below. Mailboxes shall be set on a single wood post that is not
greater than four inches square or has a diameter of 4 1/2 inches or less, or
affixed to a metal pole not greater than two inches square or has a diameter
2 1/4 inches or less. All such mailbox posts must be set back 12 inches from
the curb block. Also, all mailboxes must be installed in accordance with the
rules, regulations and standards established by the U.S. Postal Service.
Except as provided for below, any obstruction installed in a way other
than in the manner allowed by this subsection and that was installed
prior to the date this subsection is adopted may continue in existence
until such time as the obstruction is removed regardless of the cause or
reason that such obstruction is removed. In the event that the obstruction
is removed, it shall not be replaced, except however, a mailbox may be
replaced as provided for in this subsection. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
any obstruction, including a wall or fence that is deemed by the Township
Police Department or the Township Engineer to create a hazard to persons
traveling along the roadway, shall be removed by the property owner as
ordered by the Township.
§ 21-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-2.1
1:327
Any obstruction that is installed in violation of this subsection or is not
removed after notice from the Township that an obstruction is causing a
hazardous condition, may be removed by the Township at the property
owner's expense. Prior to the Township taking any action to remove an
obstruction, the property owner shall be afforded written notice of no less
than 30 days to remove the obstruction, unless an emergency situation
exists which requires the obstruction to be removed in less than 30 days.
Notice shall be given either by personal delivery or by Certified Mail/Return
Receipt Requested. Any costs incurred by the Township in removing an
obstruction found to be in violation of this subsection shall constitute a lien
against the owner's property to the extent allowed by law. Additionally, any
violation of this subsection shall be subject to the penalties provided for in
Sparta Chapter 1, § 1-5.
Any person given a notice to remove an obstruction may appeal such
decision to the Township Manager, by giving written notice to the Township
Manager within seven days of receipt of the notice to remove the
obstruction.
Should the Township, through its required maintenance activities (snow
plowing) destroy a post and/or mailbox properly placed in the right-of-way,
the Township at its option may reimburse the property owner the sum of
$50 for parts and labor, or replace and install the post and/or mailbox with
a post and/or mailbox selected by the Township. The property owner must
notify the Township within three days after the snow event.
§ 21-2.2. Roll-off Dumpsters. [Ord. No. 05-20 § 1]
§ 21-3. (RESERVED)
a. No person shall place or leave unattended any waste, refuse, or
construction debris container, commonly known as a roll-off dumpster
or roll-off container on or in or along any Township roadway or right-ofway
or public place without a written permit being issued by the Chief
of Police or the Chief's designee. Such permit shall be issued only in
circumstances where there is no practical alternative location, either
on the private property being served or by arrangement with adjacent
property owners. Said permit shall be valid and remain in effect for a
period of not more than 30 days but may be renewed by the Police
Department upon application therefor.
b. To warn the operators of vehicles of the presence of a traffic hazard,
any roll-off container parked on, in or along any Township road or rightof-
way shall be equipped with and display markers consisting of all
yellow reflective diamond shaped panels having a minimum size of 18
by 18 inches. These panels shall be mounted at the edge of the
dumpster or container at both ends nearest the path of passing vehicles
and facing the direction of oncoming traffic, these markers shall have a
minimum mounting height of three feet from the bottom of the panels to
the roadway or right-of-way surface.
§ 21-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 21-4
1:328
§ 21-4. DRAINAGE IN STREETS AND PUBLIC ROADS.
§ 21-4.1. Prohibited Discharges. [1978 Code § 14-4.1]
The discharge of waters or other liquids or semi-liquids upon any street or
public road in the Township in any manner whatever shall be unlawful, but
this shall not apply to such waters that may flow or pass upon a street by
virtue of natural drainage or because of the slope or topography of the land.
§ 21-4.2. Impedance of Drainage; Obstructions. [1978 Code
§ 14-4.2]
§ 21-4.3. Driveways Over Drainage Ditches; Permit Required; Fee.
[1978 Code § 8-14; § 14-4.3]
No person shall create, construct or put in a driveway over or across a
drainage ditch serving any street without first applying to the Township in
writing for a permit. The application shall be signed by the owner of the
property on which the driveway is to be located, and shall have annexed
thereto a simple but legible plan or sketch showing where, how and in
what manner the driveway will be constructed over or across the drainage
ditch and what materials will be used in permanently preserving drainage
space and courses underneath the point where the driveway will cross over
the drainage ditch and connect up with the right of way. A non-refundable
permit fee of $1 shall accompany each application.
No permit will be granted unless the indicated plan and specifications
reasonably show that the intended construction will keep the drainage ditch
reasonably and permanently open under the driveway and adequate to
carry away any waters therein without substantial impedance and without
backing up or flowing upon the street or upon the property of another.
§ 21-5. REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE FROM SIDEWALKS.
a. No structure, equipment or materials of any kind may be placed or
stored upon any street in the Township at any time or for any purpose,
unless expressly permitted by law or ordinance and placed in such
manner as not to impede or divert the natural flow of drainage waters
upon or along such street and the gutters or drainage ditches thereof.
b. The obstruction of any gutter or drainage ditch or any portion thereof
serving the street by filling or otherwise depositing stones, earth, dirt,
debris, or other materials or things therein or by any other means shall
be unlawful, but this shall not apply to such materials as may be carried
or deposited therein by natural drainage of surface waters or by other
natural causes.
§ 21-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-5.1
1:329
§ 21-5.1. Duties of Owners, Occupants or Tenants. [1978 Code
§ 14-6.1; Ord. No. 620 § 1]
The owner, occupant or tenant of premises abutting or bordering upon any
street in the Township shall remove all snow and ice from the abutting
sidewalks of such streets or in the case of ice which may be so frozen as
to make removal impractical shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered
with sand or other grit material within 12 daylight hours after the same
shall fall or be formed thereon.
§ 21-5.2. Depositing of Snow or Ice in Street Prohibited. [1978 Code
§ 14-6.2; Ord. No. 620 § 2; Ord. No. 05-20 § 2]
No owner, tenant or occupant of premises abutting on any street shall plow,
shovel, throw, place, or deposit any snow or ice into or upon or across
any street in the Township. The intent and purpose of this provision is to
prohibit all persons from plowing, throwing, casting, placing, or depositing
snow and ice which accumulates within the private property upon the
sidewalks or streets of the Township.
§ 21-5.3. Penalties and Violations. [1978 Code § 14-6.3; Ord. No.
620 § 3]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, § 1-5 and each and every day on which said violation exists
shall constitute a separate violation. In case such snow or ice shall not be
removed from such sidewalks or shall be cast, deposited or placed upon
said sidewalks or streets by any person, firm or corporation, the Director
of the Department of Public Works shall cause the same to be removed
forthwith, and the cost of such removal as nearly as can be ascertained shall
be certified to the Governing Body. The Governing Body shall examine such
certification and if found to be correct shall cause such cost to be charged
against such real estate so abutting or bordering upon such sidewalks and
the amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien and a tax upon such
real estate or land and be added to, recorded and collected in the same way
and manner as the taxes next to be levied and assessed upon such premises,
and shall bear interest and be enforced and collected by the same officers
and in the same manner as other taxes. The imposition and collection of
a fine or fines imposed by the provision of this section shall not constitute
barring the right of the Township to collect the cost as certified for the
removal of said snow or ice in the manner herein authorized.
§ 21-5.4. Enforcement. [1978 Code § 14-6.4; Ord. No. 620 § 4]
The Police Department shall be charged with enforcement of the provisions
of this section and shall cause prosecutions for violations thereof to be
instituted before the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township of
Sparta.
§ 21-5.1 SPARTA CODE § 21-6
1:330
§ 21-6. ACCEPTANCE OF PRIVATE ROADS BY THE TOWNSHIP.
§ 21-6.1. Title. [1978 Code § 14-5.1]
This section shall be known as the "Road Acceptance Regulations of Sparta
Township."
§ 21-6.2. Acceptance of Private Roads as Township Roads. [1978
Code § 14-5.2]
Upon application to the Township Council by the owner of at least 80%
of the frontage on an existing private road or right-of-way that has not
previously received maintenance from the Township, the Council may elect
to accept the dedication of such a road or right-of-way as a Township road in
accordance with the provisions of this section, provided such request shall
be accompanied by an agreement in the form approved by the Township
Council to bear all the cost of such improvements as are required, and
provided further that where adjoining owners do not own the roadbed, the
consent of the owner thereof must be obtained.
§ 21-6.3. Specifications for Acceptance of Private Roads. [1978
Code § 14-5.3]
a. Streets and Pavement.
1. Where no pavement exists the subgrade topsoil shall be stripped
from the proposed roadbed for the entire width of pavement,
gutters, and other required improvements. All soft spongy material
shall be removed from the area. All loose rock or boulders shall be
removed or broken off at least six inches below the surface of the
subgrade.
Subgrades shall be compacted to a density of not less than 95%.
All embankments shall conform to current New Jersey Highway
Specifications.
2. Pavements shall be constructed of macadam or soil cement as
herein specified:
(a) Macadam pavement.
(1) Four-inch base course of 2 1/2 inch crushed stone.
(2) Two-inch modified penetration macadam - 1 1/2 inch
stone.
(3) One and one-half inch bituminous concrete surface (type
SM-1 or FABC-1).
(4) Materials and construction shall conform to New Jersey
State Highway Specifications.
§ 21-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-6.3
1:331
(b) Soil cement pavement. Six inches of soil cement with a 1 1/2
inch bituminous concrete surface (type SM-1 or FABC-1). Soil
cement to be constructed in accordance with construction
handbook standards of the Portland Cement Association, 1956
edition.
3. Where pavement exists on public roads or private roads being
offered for acceptance and is to be resurfaced, if in the opinion of
the Township Council after a review of the Township Engineer's
report, the base is adequate, a 1 1/2 inch bituminous concrete
surface course may be required without the necessity of
constructing a stone or soil cement base. However, when the 1 1/2
inch bituminous concrete surface is not required, the road must
have been seal treated within one year prior to the date of
acceptance.
4. General conditions.
(a) Where grades are 6% or more, a bituminous concrete curb five
inches high maximum with a sloping face of 2 to 1, shall be
provided.
(b) No materials shall be placed on wet or frozen ground.
(c) A crown calculated at the rate of four inches per 20 feet shall
be provided in all paved areas.
b. Right-of-way width, graded width, and pavement width:
1. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line
and shall not be less than the following:
Arterial streets 66 feet
Collector streets 50 feet
Minor streets 40 feet
Marginal access streets 33 feet
2. The graded width of streets shall be as follows:
Arterial streets 42 feet
Collector streets 36 feet
Minor streets 32 feet
Marginal access streets 32 feet
3. Pavement width shall be as follows:
Arterial streets 26 feet
Collector streets 20 feet
Minor streets 20 feet
§ 21-6.3 SPARTA CODE § 21-6.3
1:332
§ 21-6.4. Paving Township Roads. [1978 Code § 14-5.4]
When Township roads are to be paved they shall meet all conditions in
Subsection 21-6.3.
§ 21-6.5. Modifications. [1978 Code § 14-5.5]
Where existing buildings, rock formations, topography or existing dedicated
rights-of-way now paved or hard-surfaced, as of the date of this ordinance
(February 13, 1962) would physically prohibit the conformance to the
specifications of this ordinance, or create undue hardship, the Township
Council upon recommendation of the Township Engineer may modify any of
the provisions of this section.
§ 21-7. WINTER MAINTENANCE FOR STREETS IN
DEVELOPMENTS PRIOR TO ACCEPTANCE BY TOWNSHIP. [1978
Code § 14-7; Ord. No. 811; Ord. No. 2015-03]
Marginal access streets 20 feet
There shall be an eight-foot minimum shoulder on each side of the
pavement on arterial and collector streets. All other streets shall
have a six-foot shoulder.
Shoulder pavement shall consist of a minimum of six inches of
compacted type B-1 gravel. The surface is to be treated with one
application of MC-0 or MC-1 and followed with a seal coat of RC-4
or RC-5 with a suitable cover material.
c. Storm sewers and culverts. All streets must be provided with sufficient
catch basins, storm sewers, culverts and other drainage appurtenances
for the proper drainage of the area in the light of existing conditions,
with final disposition to an existing natural water course. This
installation shall be in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Township Engineer. Storm sewer drains shall be
constructed of reinforced concrete pipes conforming to the
requirements of the "Standard Specifications for Reinforced Culvert
Pipes A.S.T.M. Designation C-76" of the year of last revision. Storm
drainage features shall be based on a two year storm frequency curve.
Runoff coefficient for 1/2 acre and larger lots should be 0.3 to 0.45.
a. Upon the installation of street improvements by a developer and prior
to acceptance by the Township, and where properties adjacent to said
streets contain occupied dwellings, the developer shall be responsible
for the maintenance of said streets including but not limited to
maintaining the streets free of snow and ice. If the Township shall
provide any snow removal and/or treatment of any roadways for snow
and for ice, the developer shall pay to the Township the sum of $1.03
per lineal foot ("Reimbursement Rate"). The Township shall bill the
developer and the developer shall pay such charges in full within 30
§ 21-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-7
1:333
§ 21-8. ADOPTION OF OFFICIAL ROAD MAP.
§ 21-8.1. Official Road Map Established and Adopted. [1978 Code
§ 14-1.1]
§ 21-8.2. Official Names of Streets. [1978 Code § 14-1.2]
Names of the streets shown upon the "Official Road Map" shall be the
official names of the streets so designated.
§ 21-8.3. Conformance of Tax Map and Tax Bills. [1978 Code
§ 14-1.3]
The names of all streets shown on the "Official Road Map" shall be placed
upon the tax map of the Township and the addresses on all tax bills shall
conform to the "Official Road Map."
§ 21-8.4. Map Construed. [1978 Code § 14-1.4]
The approval and adoption of the "Official Road Map" shall in no way be
construed as the acceptance of any private road or street which is shown on
the map, as being a public road by the adoption of this section.
§ 21-9. MISCELLANEOUS FEES. [1978 Code § 8-14]
days of the date of the bill from the Township. In the event that the
developer fails to pay the bill in full within 30 days the outstanding
balance shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per year until paid in
full. Annually as of January 1 of each year the Reimbursement Rate
shall be adjusted to reflect the one year change in the Consumer Price
Index ("CPI") as of January 1 for the prior 12 months. The CPI Index
to be used shall be the CPI Index for all urban consumers (1982-84
= 100), New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island, issued by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States, Department of Labor,
or such replacement Index in the event the indicated Index is no longer
published.
b. The Township shall be held harmless against any damage to
infrastructure improvements of said streets and private property that
may occur as a result of the Township providing such winter
maintenance.
a. Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:67-1, there is hereby
established and adopted as the official road map of the Township, the
map entitled "Official Street Map of the Township of Sparta", adopted
July 24, 1973. The requisite copies of this map have been and are now
filed in the office of the Township Clerk.
b. The map is hereby adopted as fully as if a replica of this map were
printed herewith.
§ 21-7 SPARTA CODE § 21-9
1:334
§ 21-10. MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS
RESPONSIBILITY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNER. [New]
Every owner of land abutting upon or containing a sidewalk shall be
responsible at the owner's sole cost and expense for maintaining and
repairing such sidewalks so as to prevent or eliminate broken, raised or
uneven pavement or other conditions creating a potential safety hazard for
pedestrians. The obligations of abutting owners under this section shall not
be dependent upon receipt of a notice pursuant to this section requiring the
construction or repair of sidewalks.
Chapter 22
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 22-1. RECYCLING.
§ 22-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 09-21 § 1]
a. Driveway permit - $25
a. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMINGLED — Shall mean a combining of non putrescible sourceseparated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean those
materials designated within the Sussex County District Solid Waste
Management Plan to be source separated for the purpose of recycling.
These materials include:40 (As defined by the Sussex County Solid
Waste Management Plan - Residential Generators)
01 ALUMINUM CANS — Food and beverage containers made
entirely of aluminum.
03 COMPUTER PRINTOUT/WHITE LEDGER — All-computer paper,
all high-grade white paper (including letterhead, typing paper,
copier paper, onionskin, tissue and note pad).
06 CORRUGATED — Containers, brown grocery bags, and similar
paper items, usually used to transport supplies, equipment, parts
or other merchandise.
07 GLASS CONTAINERS — AU glass containers used for packaging
food or beverages.
10 LEAVES AND BRUSH LEAVES — Brush and other yard
trimmings, including grass clippings, from institutions,
commercial or industrial sources.
40.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1978 Code §§ 17-1 — 17-9.9 and
Ordinance Nos. 759, 05-27 and 07-14.
§ 21-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1.1
1:335
11 MAGAZINE AND JUNK MAIL MAGAZINE STOCK — White and
colored paper and envelopes, telephone directories and books.
13 MIXED OFFICE PAPER — Items listed in computer printout/
white ledger category when mixed with envelopes, manila
binders and color paper. Material is generated by commercial/
institutional sources.
14 NEWSPAPER — All paper marketed as newsprint or newspaper
and containing at least 70% newsprint or newspaper (American
Paper Institute grades #6, #7 and #8-news).
15 PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Containers such as polyethylene
terephthalate (PETE - #1) soda bottles, high-density
polyethylene (HDPE -#2) milk, and water or detergent bottles.
17 STEEL CANS — Rigid containers made exclusively or primarily
of steel, tin-plated steel, and composite steel and aluminum cans
used to store food, beverages, paint and a variety of other
household and consumer products.
18 STUMPS, LOGS AND TREE PARTS — Unfinished wood from land
clearing projects, storm damage or pruning activities.
19 TEXTILES — Textiles larger than 15 inches by 15 inches (e.g.
clean clothing, drapes, curtains, sheets, towels, cloth, belts,
shoes, handbags and small stuffed animals).
20 TIRES — Rubber-based scrap automotive and truck tires.
22 USED MOTOR OIL — A petroleum base or synthetic oil whose
use - Includes, but is not limited to, lubrication of internal
combustion engines, which through use, storage or handling has
become unsuitable in its original purpose due to the presence
of impurities or loss of original properties.(As defined by the
Sussex County Solid Waste Management Plan - Non-Residential
Generators, Commercial and Institutional Sectors)
CLASS MATERIAL AND DEFINITION
01 ALUMINUM CANS — Food and beverage containers made
entirely of aluminum.
02 ANTIFREEZE — An automotive engine coolant consisting of a
mixture of ethylene glycol and water or propylene glycol and
water.
03 COMPUTER PRINTOUT/WHITE LEDGER — All computer paper,
all high-grade white paper (including letterhead, typing paper,
copier-paper, onionskin, tissue and note pad).
04 CONCRETE, ASPHALT AND MASONRY/PAVING MATERIAL —
Asphalt, concrete, brick, cinder block, "patio blocks," and other
masonry and paving materials.
§ 22-1.1 SPARTA CODE § 22-1.1
1:336
CLASS MATERIAL AND DEFINITION
05 CONSUMER BATTERIES — Any type of button, coin, cylindrical,
rectangular or other shaped, enclosed device or sealed container
which is utilized as an energy source for commercial, industrial,
medical, institutional, or household use. (Does not include leadacid
batteries from vehicles).
06 CORRUGATED — Containers, brown grocery bags, and similar
paper items, usually used to transport supplies, equipment, parts
or other merchandise.
07 GLASS CONTAINERS — All glass containers used for packaging
food or beverages.
08 HEAVY IRON — All structural steel or ferrous metal, cast iron
components.
09 LEAD-ACID -BATTERIES — Batteries from automobiles, trucks,
other vehicles and machinery and equipment, which shall be
stored in a manner that protects them from the elements to avoid
corrosion and leakage.
10 LEAVES AND BRUSH LEAVES — Brush and other yard
trimmings, including grass clippings, from institutions,
commercial or industrial sources.
11 MAGAZINE AND JUNK MAIL MAGAZINE STOCK — White and
colored paper and envelopes, telephone directories and books.
12 MERCURY CONTAINING DEVICES — Including fluorescent and
compact tubes, High Intensity Discharge (HID) and neon lamps,
electrical switches, thermostats, thermometers and any
batteries containing mercury.
13 MIXED OFFICE PAPER — Items listed in computer printout/
white ledger category when mixed with envelopes, manila
binders and color paper. Material is generated by commercial/
institutional sources.
14 NEWSPAPER — All paper marketed as newsprint or newspaper
and containing at least 70% newsprint or newspaper (American
Paper Institute grades #6, #7 and #8-news).
15 PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Containers such as polyethylene
terephthalate (PETE - #1) soda bottles, high-density
polyethylene (HDPE - #2) milk, and water or detergent bottles.
16 SCRAP AUTOS — Crushed or shredded automobile or truck
bodies, excluding auto shredder residue or "fluff."
17 STEEL CANS — Rigid containers made exclusively or primarily
of steel, tin-plated steel, and composite steel and aluminum cans
used to store food, beverages, paint and a variety of other
household and consumer products.
§ 22-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1.1
1:337
CLASS MATERIAL AND DEFINITION
18 STUMPS, LOGS AND TREE PARTS — Unfinished wood from land
clearing projects, storm damage or pruning activities.
19 TEXTILES — Textiles larger than 15 inches by 15 inches (e.g.
clean clothing, drapes, curtains, sheets, towels, cloth, belt,
shoes, handbags and small stuffed animals).
20 TIRES — Rubber-based scrap automotive and truck tires.
21 USED CONSUMER ELECTRONICS — Any appliance used in
a business that includes circuitry. Includes components and
subassemblies of the electrode products. Examples include
computers and peripherals, printers, copiers, VCRs, televisions,
cell phones and fax machines, etc.
22 USED MOTOR OIL — A petroleum base or synthetic oil whose
use includes, but is not limited to, lubrication of internal
combustion engines, which through use, storage or handling has
become unsuitable in its original purpose due to the presence of
impurities or loss of original properties.
23 WHITE GOODS AND LIGHT IRON — All large appliances such
as washers, dryers, refrigerators, etc., as well as products made
from sheet iron, such as shelving, file cabinets, metal desks,
recycled or reconditioned steel drums, and other non-structural
ferrous scrap.
24 WOOD SCRAP — Unfinished lumber from construction or
demolition projects including pallets. Unfinished shall mean
nonchemically treated (not pressure treated, impregnated with
preservatives, insecticides, fungicides, creosote, or other
chemicals, and not painted, resin-coated or otherwise surface
treated, and not laminated or bonded, and not similarly altered
from its natural condition).
25 NONFERROUS AND ALUMINUM SCRAP — All non-container
aluminum, stainless steel, copper, zinc, brass, and other metals
which generally do not rust;
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean any building or structure,
or complex of buildings in which three or more dwelling units are
owner-occupied or rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease,
for residential purposes (see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a) and shall include
hotels, motels, or other guest houses serving transient or seasonal
guests as those terms are defined under subsection (j) of section 3 of
the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law," P.L. 1967, c.76 (C.55: 13A-1 et
seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — Shall mean the person or
persons appointed by the municipal Governing Body and who shall
be authorized to, among other things, enforce the provisions of this
section, and any rules and regulations which may be promulgated
hereunder.
§ 22-1.1 SPARTA CODE § 22-1.1
1:338
§ 22-1.2. Source Separation; Exemption from Source Separation
Requirements. [Ord. No. 09-21 § 1]
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — Shall mean all solid
waste generated at residential, commercial, and institutional
establishments within the boundaries of the municipality of Sparta
Township.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Shall mean those materials which would
otherwise become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated,
or processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of
raw materials or products.
SOURCE SEPARATION — Shall mean the process by which recyclable
materials are separated at the point of generation by the generator
thereof from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean
recyclable materials which are separated at the point of generation by
the generator thereof from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
a. Mandatory Source Separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons
who are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the municipality of Sparta Township, to
separate designated recyclable materials from all solid waste.
Designated recyclable materials shall be deposited separate and apart
from other solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants
of such premises and shall be placed separately at the curb in a manner
and on such days and times as may be hereinafter established by
regulations promulgated by the municipality of Sparta Township.
b. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the governing body of
a municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or
institutional premises within its municipal boundaries from the source
separation requirements of the ordinance which requires persons
generating municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to
source separate from the municipal solid waste stream, the specified
recyclable materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this section, a commercial or institutional
generator of solid waste shall file an application for exemption with the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator on forms to be provided for this
purpose. The form shall include, at a minimum, the following
information: the name of the commercial or institutional entity, the
street address location and lot and block designation; the name, official
title and phone number of the person making application on behalf of
the commercial or institutional entity the name, address, official
contact person and telephone number of the facility which provides the
service of recycling those designated recyclable materials, and a
certification that the designated recyclable materials will be recycled,
§ 22-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1.2
1:339
§ 22-1.3. Collection and Disposal of Recyclable Materials. [Ord. No.
09-21 § 1]
Residential curbside collection, as provided by and in accordance with the
current existing recycling program, as administered by the office of the
Recycling Coordinator;
§ 22-1.4. Residential Dwelling Compliance Requirements. [Ord. No.
09-21 § 1]
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
section. For multi-family units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the appropriate municipal office. Violations and penalty
notices will be directed to the owner or management, in those instances
where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every
six months during their occupancy.
§ 22-1.5. Nonresidential Establishment Compliance Requirements.
[Ord. No. 09-21 § 1]
and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling service provider or
commercial/institutional generator shall provide written documentation
to the municipal recycling coordinator of the total number of tons
collected and recycled for each designated material.
a. Recyclable material includes aluminum (01) and steel (17) cans, glass
containers (07) and plastic containers (15). Recyclable material shall be
commingled and placed curbside in a reusable thirty-gallon (maximum)
container. Recyclable containers and cans must be rinsed and free of
lids, metal rings and paper labels.
b. Recyclable fiber material includes computer and white paper (03),
corrugated (05), magazine and junk mail (11), mixed office paper (13)
and newspaper (14). Recyclable fiber material shall be commingled and
placed curbside in a reusable thirty-gallon (maximum) container or
bundled and tied.
c. Other mandatory recyclable material may be disposed of at any
authorized recycling center, which will accept such materials or may be
donated or sold to any person, partnership or corporation, whether
operating for profit or nonprofit.
All containers used for the purpose of recycling shall be marked and designated
recyclable material only." All containers shall be kept clean and in a safe
manner.
a. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this section.
§ 22-1.2 SPARTA CODE § 22-1.5
1:340
§ 22-1.6. New Developments of Multi-Family Residential Units or
Commercial, Institutional, or Industrial Properties (Pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and 99.16c). [Ord. No. 09-21 § 1]
b. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder
shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial
property owner or their designee, unless the municipality provides for
the collection of designated recyclable materials. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoors litter
receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide
receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials
commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall
provide for separate recycling service for their contents.
c. Every business, institution, or industrial facility shall report on an
annual basis to the Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be
prescribed, on recycling activities at their premises, including the
amount of recycled material, by material type, collected and recycled
and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
d. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be
prescribed, for inspection by any Code Enforcement Officer.
a. Any application to the Planning Board of the municipality of Sparta
Township, for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of
multi-family dwellings of three or more units, single-family
developments of 50 or more units or any commercial, institutional, or
industrial development for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more
of land, must include a recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a
minimum, the following:
1. A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
2. Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
b. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the municipality of
Sparta Township, the owner of any new multi-family housing or
commercial, institutional, or industrial development must supply a copy
of a duly executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of
collection and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials, in
§ 22-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-1.6
1:341
§ 22-1.7. Prohibition of the Collection of Solid Waste Mixed with
Recyclable Materials. [Ord. No. 09-21 § 1]
§ 22-1.8. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 09-21 § 1]
The Code Enforcement Official, the Recycling Coordinator, the Property
Maintenance Official, and the Sussex County Department of Health are
hereby individually and severally empowered to enforce the provisions of
this section. An inspection may consist of sorting through containers and
opening of solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any
recyclable material.
§ 22-1.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 09-21 § 1]
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this section or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by
a fine not less than $250, nor more than $1,000. Each day for which a
violation of this section occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
be immediately deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund (or
equivalent). Monies in the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund shall be used for
the expenses of the municipal recycling program.
§ 22-1.10. Severability, Effective Date. [Ord. No. 09-21 § 1]
In the event that it is determined, by a Court of competent jurisdiction,
that any provision or section of this section is unconstitutional, all other
those instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
c. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
a. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this section and the local sanitary code.
c. Once placed in the location identified by this section, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this section, no person, other than
those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove,
or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
§ 22-1.6 SPARTA CODE § 22-1.10
1:342
sections and provisions shall remain in effect. This section shall take effect
immediately, unless otherwise provided by resolution of the Governing
Body.
§ 22-2. GARBAGE AND REFUSE.
§ 22-2.1. Definitions. [1978 Code § 17-3.1]
As used in this section:
COMBUSTIBLE WASTES — Shall mean yard trimmings, rags, wood,
cardboard and other combustible waste solids of a nonvolatile or explosive
nature.
GARBAGE — Shall mean animal or vegetable waste solids resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE WASTES — Shall mean all solid waste material which
does not burn.
REFUSE — Shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
(except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
and solid market and industrial wastes, whether combustible or
noncombustible.
RUBBISH — Shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes.
§ 22-2.2. Receptacle Requirements. [1978 Code § 17-3.2]
a. The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, or occupant of every dwelling house
or other premises where refuse accumulates shall provide and keep on
such premises sufficient and suitable receptacles with tight fitting
covers for receiving and holding the refuse.
1. SUFFICIENT – Is defined for the purpose of this section to be at
least one receptacle for each family unit or other occupant of
premises and at least two such receptacles for each commercial or
business establishment where the aforesaid refuse shall
accumulate, but each occupant of premises shall provide sufficient
receptacles to store all refuse which may be accumulated there
between the times when such refuse is disposed of as hereinafter
provided.
2. SUITABLE – Is defined for the purpose of this section to be a watertight
metal, rubber or plastic receptacle with a tight fitting cover so
constructed as to prevent spilling or leakage of its contents.
b. Each receptacle for use at a single residence shall have a capacity of
not more than 30 gallons and be equipped with a pull handle or handles.
c. Receptacles for refuse from multi-dwelling units or industrial premises
may have a greater capacity than that prescribed in paragraph b of this
subsection provided they meet the other qualifications of a suitable
§ 22-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2.2
1:343
§ 22-2.3. Preparation for Collection; Frequency. [1978 Code
§ 17-3.3]
§ 22-2.4. Refuse Disposal. [1978 Code § 17-3.4]
No refuse shall be disposed of except at a sanitary landfill established,
conducted, operated and maintained in accordance with standards
established by the State Department of Environmental Protection.
receptacle and are equipped for handling by motorized equipment,
cleaned and sanitized as needed after emptying and replaced by the
same type of receptacle if removed for emptying.
d. Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this section, may be classed as refuse and collected
and disposed of as such by the person or agency responsible for the
collection of refuse, provided that such receptacle shall not be collected
if it appears to have been suitable under the definition of this section at
some previous time without a written notice being delivered to the
owner of the fact that the receptacle is not deemed suitable at least 10
days before the receptacle is collected.
e. Receptacles shall be conveniently located on premises for the storage
of refuse and maintained in such a manner with the cover in place as to
prevent creation of a nuisance or menace to public health.
a. Garbage shall be thoroughly and completely drained of all liquids,
wrapped securely in paper or placed in paper bags and placed in a
receptacle as herein described.
b. Combustible or noncombustible waste of such a nature that it cannot be
deposited in a receptacle shall be securely and properly tied into
bundles or packages to prevent spilling or scattering. The bundles or
packages shall be of a size and weight to permit ease of handling by one
man and shall be packaged or otherwise assembled in quantities
weighing not more than 50 pounds.
c. Receptacles for refuse shall not be set out for collection except during
hours of a day scheduled for collection of refuse or the evening before.
d. The person occupying any premises whereon a business or industry is
conducted shall arrange for the removal of refuse from such premises
each day unless sufficient and suitable facilities are provided and used
for the storage of such refuse within a building on such premises until
the refuse is removed.
e. The person occupying any premises shall be required to arrange for the
pickup or collection of refuse from the premises at least once a week
during a period when the premises are being occupied and used by
such person.
§ 22-2.2 SPARTA CODE § 22-2.5
1:344
§ 22-2.5. Nuisance. [1978 Code § 17-3.5]
The storage, collection or disposal of refuse in violation of any provision of
this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to public
health.
§ 22-2.6. Additional Regulations. [1978 Code § 17-3.6; Ord. No.
07-14 § XII]
The Code Enforcement Officer may, by regulation approved by the Township
Council, adopt rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this
section and the violation of such rules and regulations shall constitute a
violation of this section.
§ 22-3. SOLID WASTE UTILITY.
§ 22-3.1. Created. [Ord. No. 07-28 § 22-3]
§ 22-3.2. Recovery of Costs; Fees. [Ord. No. 07-28 § 22-3.1]
The costs associated with the collection and disposal of solid waste shall
be recovered as may be provided in the contract or contracts made by the
Township for such services, plus uniform fees fixed from time to time by
the Township Council and collected from the property owners to whom the
service is available.
§ 22-3.3. Service Charge. [Ord. No. 07-28 § 22-3.2]
There is hereby established a solid waste service charge to be imposed
annually upon the owners of those properties for which solid waste
collection and disposal service is made available by the Township. The funds
so collected shall be paid into the dedicated Solid Waste Utility Fund of the
Township of Sparta.
§ 22-3.4. Computation of Service Charge. [Ord. No. 07-28 § 22-3.3]
The solid waste service charge for residential properties served, unless and
until nonresidential properties are served, shall be computed by dividing
the approved annual budget of the Solid Waste Utility by the number
of residential units to which the service will be made available by the
Township.
a. A solid waste utility is hereby created to transact the collection and
disposal of solid waste, as provided by law.
b. Said solid waste utility shall be self-liquidating with a dedicated budget
as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:4-34 through 40A:4-36.
§ 22-2.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-3.5
1:345
§ 22-3.5. Payment of Service Charge. [Ord. No. 07-28 § 22-3.5; Ord.
No. 11-07 § 1; Ord. No. 12-17; Ord. No. 2017-14 §§ 1 — 3]
The Solid Waste Utility of Sparta Township will prepare bills setting forth
solid waste charges and send them to its customers through the US Postal
System. Bills that are not delivered by the US Postal System shall,
nevertheless, remain due and owing. The payment, or nonpayment of utility
bills is the sole responsibility of the customer.
a. The annual solid waste charges shall be due in installments on January
15th, April 15th, July 15th and October 15th each year. All payments of
solid waste charges are due by the due date on the bill. In the event that
the bill is not paid within 10 days of its due date ("grace period"), the
account shall be subject to an 8% late charge, which shall be added to
the amount of the bill and collected as other charges.
b. All bills shall be paid as of the due date set forth on the bill. In the event
that the bill is not paid within 10 days of the due date ("grace period"),
the account shall be subject to the late charge.
c. Charges for use shall be payable to the Township of Sparta Solid Waste
Utility. The Township shall have the same remedies for the collection of
charges with penalties and costs pursuant to the collection of taxes
upon real estate.
d. In the event that a bill remains unpaid for 30 days or more after the due
date of such bill, will comply with the following procedure:
1. A delinquent notice shall be sent to the account stating that service
the bill remains unpaid for 30 days. This notice shall be deemed
satisfactory if sent as follows:
2. The Township may also deliver this notice to the physical address
or phone account if that number has been provided to the Utility
Collector.
3. In the event that the delinquent account is that of a landlord/tenant
dispute, then the tenant will have the option of paying the
delinquent bill.
e. Owner-occupants of residential units served by the solid waste utility
who are age 65 and older and who qualify for a New Jersey senior
citizen property tax credit may apply for an annual $25 credit against
the annual solid waste utility billing. Said applications must be in
writing on a Township provided form and must be updated as per New
Jersey property tax requirements.
f. Owners of residential units serviced by the solid waste utility who are
honorably discharged from any branch of the United States Armed
Services and who qualify for a New Jersey Veteran's Property Tax credit
or deduction may apply for an annual $25 credit against the annual
solid waste utility billing. The application must be in writing on the
§ 22-3.5 SPARTA CODE § 22-3.5
1:346
Chapter 23
QUARRYING
§ 23-1. LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 01-02 § I]
It is the intent of this chapter to license and regulate the operation of
quarries within the Township of Sparta to provide for the protection of
persons and property, to provide for a safe post quarrying condition, to
preserve the public health and safety of the inhabitants of the Township,
to ensure that quarrying operations are conducted in such a manner as to
mitigate impacts from conditions, such as, but not limited to, noise, dust,
traffic, vibration, and odors, to owners and occupants of nearby properties
in accordance with applicable law and regulation, and to ensure that the
quarried area shall be suitably and reasonably rehabilitated to a safe and
environmentally sound condition after quarrying operations have been
completed or otherwise terminated.
§ 23-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 01-02 § II]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Shall mean person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, limited liability entity, or organization of any kind
that seeks a license to quarry within the Township of Sparta.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any applicant that is engaged in and/or manages
or controls, or who or which will be engaged in and/or will control, the
operation of a quarry.
OWNER — Shall mean the person, entity, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, limited liability entity or organization of any kind who or which
owns or controls the property upon which the quarry operation is being or
is to be conducted.
PROCESSING — Shall mean the crushing, washing, sorting, milling, drying,
mixing, and blending of quarry produced products, separately or with other
materials or chemicals to create a new product, material or substance
and the packaging and shipping of processed quarry products or other
processing of excavated materials on site which takes place in an enclosed
building or conveyor.
QUARRY — Shall mean a place where stone, shale, rock, ore, slate or other
mineral is excavated and removed from rock deposits including drilling,
coring and blasting and loaded and transported, crushed or screened in
preparation for processing, but shall not include the mining of sand and soiltype
material. The removal of such soil from quarry property is regulated
Township provided form and must be updated as per New Jersey
Property Tax requirements.
§ 22-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-2
1:347
pursuant to subsection 18-4.7c8 entitled "Soil Removal Operations" of the
Comprehensive Land Management.
QUARRYING — Shall mean the business of operating a quarry, including,
but not limited to, excavation, drilling, blasting, crushing (other than
crushing as part of processing which takes place in an enclosed building
or conveyor), screening of stone, rock, ore, shale, slate or other natural
mineral resources, the movement of excavated materials in preparation
for processing, the operation, including warm-up and maintenance of
equipment used in the operation of a quarry exclusive of vehicles
maintained in a garaged area and the removal and storage of overburden.
RECLAMATION — Shall mean reconditioning of land affected by quarrying
operations to restore it to a reasonably safe and environmentally sound
condition consistent with Chapter 18, the Comprehensive Land
Management Code, of the Sparta Township Code as may be amended or
supplemented from time to time, suitable for development of one or more
productive permitted uses after termination of quarrying and processing
operations, in whole or in part.
RECLAMATION PLAN — Shall mean a plan filed by the applicant and
approved by the Township at the time of the initial license application
for reclamation of the land affected by quarrying operations during each
license period in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 23-3. LICENSE REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 01-02 § III]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the operation of a quarry
within the Township without first obtaining a license to do so in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 23-4. LICENSE APPLICATION FORM. [Ord. No. 01-02 § IV]
An original and 10 copies of the application for a license required by this
chapter shall be submitted by the applicant to the Township in such form
as required by the Township Clerk. The application shall be signed and
verified by the applicant or owner and shall set forth or be accompanied
by information required by this chapter. An application for any quarry
existing within the Township as of the date this chapter is enacted must
be submitted to the Township within six months following the effective
date of the chapter. License renewal applications shall be submitted every
three years thereafter. License renewal applications shall contain the same
information required for an original license as specified in this chapter.
Applications for licenses shall include the following information:
a. The name, business address and telephone number of the applicant, if
an individual; the name, business address and telephone number of
each partner, if a partnership; the corporate name, business address
and telephone number, date and state of incorporation, and name,
business address of each officer and stockholder with an interest of
10% or greater, if a corporation; and the name, business address and
§ 23-2 SPARTA CODE § 23-4
1:348
telephone number of each plant officer or manager. If a corporation is
not incorporated in the State of New Jersey, the applicant shall state
whether the corporation is authorized to conduct business in the State
of New Jersey. If a corporation has any stockholder with an interest of
10% or greater, which is a partnership, the applicant shall state the
name and business address of each partner with an interest of 10%
or greater of each stockholder. If a corporation has any stockholder
with an interest of 10% or greater which is a corporation, the applicant
shall state the name and business address of each stockholder with an
interest of 10% or greater.
b. The name and business address of each owner of the quarry property. If
the applicant is not the sole property owner, written, notarized consent
of each owner or proof of legal authority granted by the owner to
operate the quarry (such as a lease) must be furnished. The application
must also identify the zone or zones in which the property is located
pursuant to the Township's Comprehensive Land Management Code
and Zone Map.
c. An Operations Map of the extraction property prepared by an engineer
or land surveyor licensed in the State of New Jersey, showing the entire
tract property and including the following:
1. The map shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet. Any
exceptions to this scale shall be requested by the applicant in
writing to the Township Engineer for consideration. If one sheet is
not sufficient to contain the entire property and surrounding area
as required by this chapter, the map shall be divided into sections
shown on separate sheets of equal size and scale, with reference on
each sheet to the adjoining sheets.
2. A key map showing the quarry property and its relation to the
surrounding areas at the scale of one inch equals not less than
2,000 feet.
3. Title block showing:
(a) Quarry name, municipality and county.
(b) Address of operation.
(c) Scale.
(d) Date of preparation or revision(s).
(e) Name, address, telephone number, license number, seal and
signature of the preparer.
(f) Map shall be clearly identified as "Operations Map."
4. Graphic and numeric scale.
5. Revision box.
§ 23-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-4
1:349
6. All boundary lines with lengths of courses to the 100th of a foot and
bearing to 1/2 minute.
7. Zone boundaries.
8. Existing block and lot number(s) of the quarry property as they
appear on the Township tax map.
9. Existing block and lot numbers and name(s) and address(es) of the
owners of record of all properties within 500 feet of the quarry
property boundaries as shown on the most recent tax list prepared
by the Tax Assessor.
10. Acreage of the quarry property to the nearest 0.10 of an acre.
11. The names, locations and widths of all existing, recorded or
proposed streets; water courses, streams, wetlands, flood plains
and drainage rights-of-way intersecting the quarry property on and
within 500 feet of the quarry property boundaries to the extent
reflected in the public records.
12. A copy of each restrictive deed covenant of every nature, existing
by deed or otherwise, affecting the quarry property.
13. Existing contours at five-foot intervals (ten-foot intervals for slopes
of greater than 30%) for the extraction property and surrounding
area to a distance of 200 feet from the boundary of the quarry
property. Elevations must be based upon United States Geological
Survey (USGS) datum. Applicant to specify NAD 1927 or NAD
1983.
14. Location of all permanently affixed equipment or structures
excluding rolling stock.
15. Location of all internal roadways and parking areas.
16. Location and type of all stockpile areas. Include location, type and
coverage of all stationary dust control devices.
17. Exterior limit of all extraction or extraction related activities and
earth disturbance.
18. Location of existing fencing and fencing proposed to be
constructed during the license period.
19. Location, direction of illumination, wattage and type of exterior
lighting.
20. Location and type of all proposed buffer areas.
21. Location of all topsoil piles.
22. All means of vehicular ingress and egress to and from the quarry
property onto public streets showing the location and design of
§ 23-4 SPARTA CODE § 23-4
1:350
driveways and curb cuts, including any installed traffic control
devices.
23. Plans for storm water management facilities as required by NJDEP
and the Sussex County Conservation District.
24. Plans for soil and erosion control facilities in accordance with
Sussex County Conservation District standards.
25. The location and depth where extraction is anticipated to occur
during the license period.
d. Other Requirements. A listing of licenses, permits or other approvals
required by any municipality, County, State or Federal entity necessary
to lawfully operate the quarry.
e. Policies of insurance naming Sparta Township as an insured party shall
be attached to the application evidencing liability coverage in an
amount not less than $1,000,000 for injuries, including accidental
death, and an aggregate amount of at least $3,000,000 for one accident
involving more than one person; and an amount not less than
$1,000,000 for property damages on account of any one accident and in
an amount of not less than $1,000,000 for property damages on account
of all accidents. Certificates of insurance shall be provided to the
Township annually on the anniversary of the license issuance date.
f. A detailed dust management plan with described equipment and
practices that will be implemented to minimize fugitive dust emissions
from the operation in accordance with NJDEP rules and regulations.
g. A Reclamation Map of the extraction property prepared by an engineer
or land surveyor licensed in the State of New Jersey, showing the entire
tract property and including the following:
1. The map shall be at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet. Any
exceptions to this scale shall be requested by the applicant in
writing to the Township Engineer for consideration. If one sheet is
not sufficient to contain the entire property and surrounding area
as required by this chapter, the map shall be divided into sections
shown on separate sheets of equal size and scale, with reference on
each sheet to the adjoining sheets.
2. A key map showing the quarry property and its relation to the
surrounding areas at the scale of one inch equals not less than
2,000 feet.
3. Title block showing:
(a) Quarry name, municipality and county.
(b) Address of operation.
(c) Scale.
§ 23-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-4
1:351
(d) Date of preparation or revision(s).
(e) Name, address, telephone number, license number, seal and
signature of the preparer.
4. All boundary lines with lengths of courses to the 100th of a foot and
bearing to 1/2 minute.
5. Existing and proposed contours at five-foot intervals (ten-foot
intervals where slopes exceed 30%) for the quarry property. All
final slopes in areas above any final water pool elevation, or within
10 vertical feet of the surface of any pool elevation shall be no
steeper than 1H:1V (45°) unless approved by the Township
Engineer. Elevations must be based upon United States Geological
Survey (USGS) datum identical to that used for the Operations
Map.
6. Location of all permanently affixed equipment or structures that
will permanently remain on the property.
7. Location of all internal roadways and/or parking areas that will
permanently remain on the property.
8. Plans for storm water management facilities as required by NJDEP
and the Sussex County Conservation District to facilitate final
reclamation and any facilities that will permanently remain on the
property.
9. Plans for soil and erosion control facilities in accordance with
Sussex County Conservation District standards to facilitate final
reclamation and any facilities that will permanently remain on the
property.
10. Location and type of vegetative cover that will be planted on
regraded areas. The vegetative locations should be keyed to the
Reclamation Plan Narrative as required by this ordinance.
h. Reclamation Plan. The applicant shall submit a narrative description of
the proposed reclamation plan. The narrative should address areas
already affected by the operation plus areas proposed to be affected
during the license period. Provisions shall be included in the
reclamation plan to complete all reclamation activities within one year
following cessation of quarry operations or such longer period as may
be provided in the approved reclamation plan. The reclamation plan
shall include provisions for simultaneous extraction and reclamation
where consistent with the Operation Plan. The reclamation plan shall
meet the following standards:
1. Areas where the final highwall is characterized by in-situ bedrock
shall be graded so that no slope is steeper than 45° (1H:1V)
measured from the horizontal.
§ 23-4 SPARTA CODE § 23-4
1:352
2. Areas where the final highwall or backfill material is characterized
as soil, sand, gravel or similar granular material and slopes steeper
than 26.6° (2H:1V) are proposed, the reclamation plan shall include
a stability analysis prepared by an experienced engineer licensed in
the State of New Jersey that demonstrates a minimum factor of
safety for the backfill material of at least 1.5. In no instance shall
slopes be steeper than 45°, except as set forth in H,3 below, or,
unless approved by the Township Engineer.
3. In areas where the final reclamation plan consists of permanently
pooled or ponded water, slopes steeper than 45° will be acceptable
with the exception of shoreline areas where the water depth is less
than 10 feet deep. In these shallow areas, the maximum slope shall
conform to the requirements specified in the previous two
paragraphs.
4. All final grades exposed to the atmosphere (i.e., not under water)
shall be covered by a layer of soil in sufficient depth and quality to
successfully and permanently sustain the vegetation proposed by
the applicant. The plan shall include a demonstration that a
suitable volume of soil material is available, either on site or from
accessible borrow areas, to complete the reclamation plan.
5. The final reclamation plan shall include a post-closure storm water
management plan. This plan must include plans and computations
for handling storm water discharge from the property based upon a
100-year design storm.
6. The proposed revegetation plan shall be prepared to be consistent
with the types of vegetation that existed on the property prior to
the commencement of licensed quarrying operations. In areas
where quarrying operations were conducted prior to the enactment
of this chapter, the revegetation plan shall be developed to be
compatible with adjacent vegetative cover types. Revegetation
plans shall include a description of soil preparation, soil
stabilization and planting plans that conform to Soil Conservation
Service standards. The plan shall also include a description of soil
nutrient application; temporary and permanent seed mixtures and
application rates; size, type, planting density and planting plan for
woody species; and a two-year maintenance plan. The plan must
provide for complete and permanent revegetation of all areas
affected by the quarry operations.
7. The reclamation plan shall remain in effect until regrading and
revegetation are completed to the satisfaction of Sparta Township.
8. An aerial photograph every three years with license application of
the site in sufficient detail to clearly show the perimeter of quarried
material, benches, improvements, stockpiled material, internal
roadways, portable equipment, parking areas and similar features
§ 23-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-4
1:353
§ 23-5. PERFORMANCE BOND. [Ord. No. 01-02 § V]
The applicant shall submit a performance bond or guarantee in favor of
the Township of Sparta in an amount sufficient to assure reclamation of
the site of quarrying operations pursuant to the reclamation plan. The
amount of the performance bond or guarantee shall be based upon a
certified estimate prepared by an engineer licensed in the State of New
Jersey that reflects the maximum reclamation cost (including regrading,
revegetation and demolition of existing structures) that exist, or could exist,
as a result of operations on the licensed property during the license period.
The performance bond or guarantee shall be posted in accordance with the
following standards:
§ 23-6. APPLICATION FEES. [Ord. No. 01-02 § VI]
The following fees and deposits shall be submitted with each original or
renewal license application:
shall be provided. The photo shall be marked to show quarry
boundaries and buffer zones.
9. At each license renewal period, the reclamation plan shall be
updated and the applicant shall describe the reclamation that has
been accomplished in the prior license period.
10. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the applicant from
submitting alternative or revised reclamation plans from time to
time.
a. The form of the performance bond or guarantee shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Council and, if a performance bond, shall be a
performance bond from a recognized surety company authorized to do
business in the State of New Jersey and approved by the Township
Council or a letter of credit, credit or cash, or such other guarantee as
approved by the Township Council.
b. The amount of the performance bond or guarantee shall be reviewed
and approved by the Township Council based upon information
submitted by the applicant and shall be 110% of the cost of reclamation;
c. The performance bond or guarantee shall remain in full force and effect
during the entire period that quarrying operations are conducted and
until completion of reclamation after the termination of those
operations. The licensee shall post a maintenance bond in the amount
of 15% of the cost of reclamation to cover the period of two years after
the completion of reclamation.
a. Initial application fee deposit: $5,000.
b. Renewal application fee deposit: $4,000.
§ 23-4 SPARTA CODE § 23-6
1:354
§ 23-7. INSPECTION FEES. [Ord. No. 01-02 § VII]
The applicant shall annually post a fee deposit of $4,000 with the Township
for reasonable costs associated with services by the Township for
conducting inspections. Draws made on the inspection account will be
conducted in the same manner as described in Section 23-6, Application
Fees, above.
Said fee deposit shall be used to offset reasonable expenses incurred by the
Township in effectuating the terms of this chapter including, but not limited to,
document reviews and inspections. All deposits shall be placed into an interest
earning escrow account.
Each payment charged to the deposit shall be pursuant to a voucher that shall
identify the personnel performing the service and for each date the services
were performed, the hours spent to the one-quarter hour increment, the hourly
rate and the expenses incurred. All vouchers shall be submitted monthly to
the Township's Chief Financial Officer. Fees or charges shall be based on a
schedule established by resolution. Review by outside consultants may also
include out-of-pocket expenses as are reasonable. The fees for municipal staff
shall not exceed 200% of the sum of products resulting from multiplying the
hourly base salary by the number of hours spent on the review.
The Township's Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the applicant a
statement listing all deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and cumulative
balances on a quarterly basis. If the escrow account contains insufficient funds
to enable the municipality to perform application review, the Township's Chief
Financial Officer shall notify the applicant of the insufficient balance. The
applicant shall post a deposit sufficient to balance the account within 20 days of
the aforesaid notice and same shall be a condition of the issuance of the license.
Within 30 days after a final action on the application by the Township, final
vouchers must be submitted to the Township's Chief Financial Officer. The
Township's Chief Financial Officer shall render a written final accounting to the
applicant on the uses to which the deposit was put within 45 days of receipt of
the final vouchers. Any balances shall be refunded with the final accounting.
The applicant shall post sums necessary to balance the account within 20 days
of receipt of the final accounting and same shall be a condition of the issuance
of the license.
The applicant, in writing, shall notify the Chief Financial Officer and the
Township Manager of any dispute regarding the charges submitted by the
Township within 20 days of receipt of the final accounting or same shall be
deemed approved. The Township Manager, or its designee, shall hear the
matter and render a written decision within 45 days of written receipt of
notification of dispute by the applicant.
During the pendency of any appeal, professional review shall continue and the
application shall continue to final decision.
§ 23-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-8
1:355
§ 23-8. PROFESSIONAL REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS AND
INSPECTIONS. [Ord. No. 01-02 § VIII]
All license applications shall be referred by the Township Clerk to the
Township Engineer, or his designated consulting engineer, the Township
Health Officer and Township Planner for review, and each will report as to
whether the application complies with the requirements of this chapter. The
Township Engineer, or his designated consulting engineer, the Township
Health Officer and Township Planner shall each make a report and
recommendation on the application to the Township Council within 60 days.
The Township Engineer, or his designated consulting engineer, is hereby
authorized as quarry inspector. In conjunction with the Township Health
Officer and Township Planner, he shall conduct inspections of the quarry
property in order to determine whether the operations are being conducted
in accordance with the quarry license and the terms and provisions of this
chapter. Inspections may be conducted four times per year or as frequently
as the quarry inspector determines is necessary. The quarry inspector may
retain such additional consultants and experts as reasonably appropriate,
subject to Council approval. The quarry inspector shall submit written
reports of all quarry inspections to the Township Council and to the
licensee.
§ 23-9. REVIEW BY TOWNSHIP COUNCIL AND ISSUANCE OF
LICENSE. [Ord. No. 01-02 § IX]
a. After receiving the reports of the Township Engineer, the Township
Health Officer and the Township Planner, the Township Council, upon
14 days written advance notice to the applicant, shall at a public
meeting determine whether the application meets the requirements of
this chapter and, if so, shall issue a license to operate a quarry in the
manner set forth in the application. The applicant and other interested
parties shall have the right to be heard by the Township Council at such
public meeting.
b. Upon each application for a license, the Township and licensee shall
review issues incidental to quarrying, such as noise, blast monitoring,
ground vibration limitations for blasting, sound mitigation, dust and air
and water pollution, as well as any citizen comments that may be
received, and any agreement to address or abate conditions that violate
this chapter shall be incorporated into a separate written agreement.
The Council may include compliance with such agreement as a
condition of approval of the license.
c. Each application shall be acted upon by the Township Council within 60
days from the date of receipt of the reports and recommendations set
forth in Section 23-8, Professional Review of Applications and
Inspections, above. If not acted upon within that time, any existing
license shall continue in full force and effect until the Council acts upon
the renewal application.
§ 23-8 SPARTA CODE § 23-9
1:356
§ 23-10. DURATION OF LICENSE. [Ord. No. 01-02 § X]
Licenses shall be issued for a period of three years and may be renewed
by filing an application therefore in accordance with the standards set
forth herein. Applications to renew a quarry license shall be filed with
the Township by the applicant at least six months prior to the license
expiration date. The requirement to submit the renewal application in a
timely manner is the sole responsibility of the licensee. A quarry presently
in operation may, provided an application for a license as provided herein is
filed within the time prescribed, continue in operation pending action upon
the application by the Township Council.
§ 23-11. REGULATIONS OF THE OPERATION OF A QUARRY. [Ord.
No. 01-02 § XI]
d. A quarry license shall be effective upon approval by the Township
Council. Approval or renewal of a quarry license by the Council shall
not constitute approval of any item or matter that may require separate
review and approval by the Planning Board, or any other Municipal,
County, State or Federal body or agency.
e. If the Council has not acted upon the application within 180 days, it
shall be deemed to have been approved and the license granted.
a. Hours of Operation.
1. Quarrying shall not be conducted for a period of time in excess of
11 gross hours per day. Quarrying may be conducted only on
Monday through Friday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m., prevailing time, and between 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
prevailing time on Saturdays, subject to paragraph a3 below.
2. Hours of operation for processing, as defined herein, the shipping
of quarry materials, vehicle maintenance in a garaged area, or any
other non-quarrying activity conducted on the quarry property
shall not be regulated other than as other commercial/industrial
uses in the Township are regulated.
3. Holidays. All quarrying and processing operations except shipping
are prohibited on the following holidays: (1) Memorial Day; (2)
Independence Day; and (3) Labor Day.
All quarrying and processing operations, including shipping, are
prohibited on the following holidays: (1) New Year's Day; (2)
Thanksgiving Day; and (3) Christmas Day.
b. Drilling. Drilling must be by the wet drilling method or by a method
effective for dust control that complies with NJDEP requirements.
c. Roads. Roads and traveled rights-of-way within the licensed quarry
premises must be treated with water or other dust inhibiting substance
§ 23-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-11
1:357
to reduce the accumulation and dissemination of dust in accordance
with NJDEP requirements.
d. Drainage. Quarrying must be performed in such a manner that complies
with all NJDEP and Sussex County Conservation District requirements.
e. Buffers. Buffers shall be required as follows:
1. A buffer of 100 feet between the disturbed quarry area, including
quarry roads, and any surrounding property not in common
ownership with the property being quarried;
2. The buffer shall be left in its natural state;
3. If the buffer area has already been cleared, it shall be landscaped in
accordance with paragraph j below, with a landscape buffer of
plants, shrubs and trees or a solid berm at least 10 feet high
planted with appropriate vegetation;
4. Where an existing building or stockpile is closer than 100 feet to an
external property boundary a buffer of 1/2 the distance between
the building or stockpile and the boundary shall be required, which
buffer shall comply with the requirements of this chapter;
5. Quarry products, equipment and materials may not be deposited or
stored on any public or private property or road other than the
licensed premises, except as permitted by zoning ordinance or
independent approvals.
f. Setbacks. After the date of initial license, new buildings, structures,
equipment, quarry product or other material must be 200 feet or more
from an external property line where adjoining properties are in a
residential zone; 100 feet when not adjoining a residential zone. This
restriction shall not apply to contiguous land owned or leased by the
quarry.
g. Fencing and Gates. A chain link fence, or equivalent approved by the
Township, at least six feet in height must be erected or maintained
along all property lines. All means of ingress and egress shall be
controlled by substantial gates of similar height, which shall be closed
and securely locked unless said gate is in actual use. Reasonable
variations in fence alignment may be made along the perimeter in order
to accommodate existing natural features and terrain thereby making
erection of the fence practicable within the external boundary lines of
the quarry premises. An orange or yellow construction safety fence at
least four feet in height or similar warning fence and warning signs or
other perimeter demarcation, such as rows of large boulders shoulder
to shoulder so as to prevent access between same as may be approved
by the Township Engineer and shall be installed and periodically
relocated above the quarry working face to deter and warn pedestrians.
§ 23-11 SPARTA CODE § 23-11
1:358
h. Signs. A sign at each entrance/exit shall indicate the name and address
of the licensee, and that the business being conducted on the premises
includes a licensed quarry operation.
i. Dust Control. Dust management practices must be employed at the
quarry at all times in compliance with NJDEP requirements. The
Township will be notified of all dust management plans submitted for
approval to NJDEP.
j. Landscape Screen. Wherever the licensed premises abuts a public
street or road, natural landscape or buffer or earthen berm with
appropriate vegetation shall be planted and maintained. The
landscaping shall consist of such massed evergreen and deciduous
trees and shrubs or similar natural vegetation as will provide an
attractive landscape buffer throughout the year. Berms shall be
inspected semi-annually and all dead or dying plantings shall be
replaced.
k. Stockpiling. Stockpiling of materials is permitted in any area subject to
setback requirements.
l. Asphalt, Concrete, Cement. Production of asphalt, concrete and cement
is not permitted, absent the consent of the Township Council..
m. Plans, Permits and Notices of Violations. A copy of the Sussex County
Soil, Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, NJDEP, and other permits and
notices of violations and penalty assessments relative to operation of
the quarry shall be maintained at the quarry site and shall be provided
to the Township with the license application and continuously updated
as received by the applicant.
n. Lateral Support. No quarrying shall be permitted which will threaten
the lateral support of abutting properties as demonstrated by stability
calculations submitted by the applicant and certified by an engineer
licensed in the State of New Jersey.
o. Blasting. Blasting shall only be conducted between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, in compliance with State
regulations; subject to paragraph a3 above. On each occasion when
blasting is to be conducted, written or verbal notice shall be given to
the office of the Township Clerk. Notice shall be given at least two hours
prior to the proposed detonation unless prevailing conditions make it
impossible, but in no case less than 1/2 hour. Additionally, all residents
within 500 feet of any quarry property line who have in writing
requested notice shall be notified verbally at least 1/2 hour prior to the
proposed detonation. The licensee may provide a weekly or monthly
written schedule of blasting detonation to the Township Clerk and
residents entitled to notice in satisfaction of this paragraph.
The applicant shall file with the Township Clerk written claims of
damage due to blasting within 10 days of receipt and the results of
§ 23-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-11
1:359
§ 23-12. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No.
01-02 § XII]
applicant's investigation of those claims within 90 days of the date of
the claim.
The applicant shall monitor each blast with seismographic equipment
and shall identify on the license plans the locations of seismographic
equipment.
p. Warning Signals. To the maximum extent possible, and as permitted by
law and regulation, strobe lights shall be used instead of back up
alarms on all quarry equipment.
a. The Township Engineer, in consultation with the Township Health
Officer and Township Planner, may enforce the provisions of this
chapter by filing a complaint of a violation in the Municipal Court of the
Township, or issuing a written order of abatement prior to filing a
complaint, requiring that any alleged violation be abated within 20 days
of receipt of said notice or sooner if an imminent danger or hazard is
observed. The written order of abatement shall be served by hand
delivery to the quarry premises or by regular and certified mail. The
licensee may request an extension of the abatement notice by serving a
written notice upon the Clerk of the Township of Sparta setting forth
the reasons for an extension and identifying a date when the abatement
will be complete. Approval of such extension shall not be unreasonably
withheld, conditioned or delayed.
b. If the enforcement officer issues a violation the matter shall be heard in
the Municipal Court of the Township of Sparta. A person or entity that
pleads or is found guilty of violation of any provision of this chapter
shall pay a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 for each
violation. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a
separate and distinct violation in the event the quarry fails to cure the
violation pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
c. The enforcing officer shall render a report to the Township Council of
any violation of the provisions of this chapter and shall provide a copy to
the licensee.
d. In addition to the foregoing, the violation of any provision of this
chapter which endangers the health, safety or peace of residents in the
area may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or
injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
e. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise
impair the right of any person to damages or other relief on account of
injuries to persons or property and to maintain any action or other
appropriate proceeding therefore.
§ 23-11 SPARTA CODE § 23-13
1:360
§ 23-13. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE. [Ord. No.
01-02 § XIII]
§ 23-14. APPLICABILITY OF OTHER ORDINANCES. [Ord. No. 01-02
§ XIV]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as repealing any provision or
provisions of any other municipal ordinance or ordinances which, by its
terms, regulate or control quarrying or its incidental activities either
directly or indirectly, or which further the general purposes of this chapter
in any way. In the event any regulation provided in this chapter shall vary
from the same or similar regulation or any other municipal ordinance, the
more restrictive provisions of such ordinances shall be deemed to control.
Chapter 24
CABLE TV
Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 1002
and 09-34.
§ 24-1. SERVICE ELECTRIC CABLE TV OF NEW JERSEY, INC.
§ 24-1.1. Short Title. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 1]
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Service Electric
Cable TV of New Jersey, Inc. Non-Exclusive Franchise Renewal Ordinance."
a. The Township Council may suspend or revoke any quarry license if it
finds the licensee is violating a material term or provision of this
chapter or the license, or an applicable statute of the State of New
Jersey and the licensee has not abated the violation following the
review as set forth herein. Before suspending or revoking a license, the
Township Council shall give the licensee 20 days' written notice
specifying the grounds upon which the licensee is proposed to be
suspended or revoked. The licensee shall have 15 days from receipt of
said notice to request a hearing in writing by certified mail addressed to
the Township Manager or shall be deemed to have waived same. A
hearing shall be scheduled with the Township Manager, or his designee,
serving as the Hearing Officer within 60 days of receipt of the request
and a decision shall be rendered by the Hearing Officer within 10 days
after the hearing has concluded.
b. A license may be suspended or revoked in the event the taxes due on
the property upon which the quarry operation is or will be conducted,
have not been paid for at least three consecutive quarters in the event
that the licensee is the owner of the property or there is common
ownership of the quarry operation and the quarry property. Upon
payment of the delinquent taxes or assessments, the license shall be
restored.
§ 23-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-1.2
1:361
§ 24-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 2]
For purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions given by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R. § 76.1
et seq., and the Communications Act of 1934 at 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq. and shall
in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with Federal and State
definitions:
§ 24-1.3. Statement of Findings. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 3]
A public hearing concerning the renewal of the franchise herein granted
to the Company was held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms
and conditions of the Act. Said hearing having been held and having been
fully open to the public, and the Municipality, having received all comments
regarding the qualifications of the Company to receive this franchise, the
Municipality hereby finds that the Company continues to possess the
necessary legal, technical, character, financial, and other qualifications and
that the Company's operating and construction arrangements are adequate
and feasible.
§ 24-1.4. Grant of Authority. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 4]
The Municipality hereby grants to the Company its non-exclusive consent
to place in, upon, along; across, over and under highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the Municipality, poles, wires,
cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
Municipality of a cable television and cable communications system, and
for the provision of any other service over such system as permitted under
Federal and State law. Operation and construction, pursuant to said
consent, is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ 24-1.5. Duration of Franchise. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 5]
The consent herein granted shall expire 10 years from the date of expiration
of the previous Certificate of Approval as issued by the Board of Public
Utilities. The Municipality reserves the right at any time to enforce and/or
terminate the consent according to applicable laws, rules, and regulations
a. MUNICIPALITY – Shall mean the Township of Sparta, County of Sussex,
State of New Jersey.
b. COMPANY – Shall mean the grantee of rights under this Ordinance and
is known as Service Electric Cable TV of New Jersey, Inc.
c. ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT – Shall mean chapter 186 of the
General Laws of New Jersey, and subsequent amendment thereto,
Section 48:5A-1 et seq.
§ 24-1.2 SPARTA CODE § 24-1.5
1:362
for the Company's failure to perform any of its commitments and obligations
as set forth in this Ordinance.
§ 24-1.6. Expiration and Subsequent Renewal. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 6]
If the Company seeks a successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration
of this consent, apply for municipal consent and Certificate of Approval in
accordance with the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11 and 48:5A-16,
and the applicable State and Federal rules and regulations.
§ 24-1.7. Franchise Fee. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 7]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act, the
Company shall, during each year of operation under the consent granted
herein, pay to the Municipality 2% of its annual gross revenues from all
recurring charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers
to its cable television reception service in the Municipality or any greater
amounts mandated by the New Jersey Cable Television Act or otherwise
required by law immediately upon the effective date thereof. In the event
applicable law hereinafter permits a larger fee to be collected, however it
does not fix the amount thereof, the Municipality and the Company should
negotiate in good faith with respect to the amount of the fee. Additionally,
in the event the relevant laws are amended in the future to allow additional
fees and/or charges (collectively "fees") to be paid to the Township, the
Township shall have the right to impose such fees in accordance with the
applicable law. In the event the law does not state the amount the Township
is allowed to impose, the parties shall negotiate in good faith with respect
to the amount of the fee. In the event any of the fees provided for in this
section cannot be agreed to after negotiations, then the Township shall have
all rights available to it under law in order to establish the fee.
§ 24-1.8. Territory. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 8]
The consent granted under this Ordinance shall apply to the entirety of the
Township, and any property hereafter annexed thereto.
§ 24-1.9. Extension of Service. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 9]
The Company shall be required to proffer service to any person, residence
or business located in all areas of the franchise territory at the tariffed
rates for standard and non-standard installation and in accordance with
the approved line extension policy. The line extension policy is amended to
provide that it shall include 20 homes per mile.
§ 24-1.10. Construction Requirements. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 10]
a. Restoration. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces
in the natural topography, the Company shall at its sole expense restore
and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a condition as
existed prior to the commencement of the work.
§ 24-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-1.10
1:363
§ 24-1.11. Technical and Customer Service Standards. [Ord. No.
11-01 § 11]
The Company shall comply with the technical and customer service
standards established for the cable industry under applicable Federal and
State laws, rules and regulations.
§ 24-1.12. Local Office. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 12]
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a local business office or agent within Sussex County for the
purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all complaints regarding
the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and similar matters in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:18-5.1. All complaints shall be received and
processed by the Company pursuant to N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The local office
shall be open to receive inquiries and complaints and to receive payment of
bills from subscribers during normal business hours, and in no event less
than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
In the event that the Company requires that a converter or other equipment
provided to a subscriber be exchanged in order for the subscriber to
maintain their current level of service, the Company shall cause such
exchange to be effectuated by delivery of the equipment to the subscriber's
home at no cost to the subscriber.
§ 24-1.13. Municipal Complaint Officer. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 13]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Municipality, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5.
b. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place, the Company, upon reasonable notice by the Municipality,
shall remove, re-lay and relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
Company.
c. Temporary Removal of Cables. The Company shall temporarily move or
remove appropriate parts of its facilities to allow for the moving of
buildings, and machinery, or in other similar circumstances. The
expense shall be borne by the party requesting such action, except
when requested by the Municipality, in which case the Company shall
bear the cost.
d. Removal or Trimming of Trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the Municipality so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance for the Company's facilities.
§ 24-1.10 SPARTA CODE § 24-1.14
1:364
§ 24-1.14. Performance Bonds. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 14]
During the life of the franchise the Company shall obtain and maintain a
bond to the Municipality, which bond shall be in the amount of $25,000.
Such bond to insure the faithful performance of all undertakings of the
Company as represented in its application and this Ordinance as well as
all applicable statutes and regulations. However, in the event that the
Company undertakes construction, maintenance or repairs, for which the
cost of the restoration and repair of the property, equipment or facilities
owned by the Municipality exceeds $25,000, the Company shall post such
additional bonds in an amount to be approved by the Township Engineer as
well as the Office of Cable Television in order to insure complete and full
restoration and repair of any of the property, equipment or facilities owned
by the Municipality.
§ 24-1.15. Rates. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 15]
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
Federal and State law.
§ 24-1.16. Public, Educational and Government Access Channels.
[Ord. No. 11-01 § 16]
The Company shall provide a dedicated public, educational and government
access channel for use by the Municipality upon the Township's adoption
of this Ordinance. In addition, the Company shall supply at its cost the
requisite cable connection into the Municipal building as well as all
equipment necessary to allow for the transmission of composite video and
line level stereo audio or equivalent over the channel provided.
§ 24-1.17. Free Services. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 17]
The Company shall provide the installation and enhanced basic monthly
cable service to each and every school, library, municipally owned building,
fire station and rescue squad building as listed in Exhibit "A" free of charge
to the Municipality and the entities named in this section. Exhibit A may be
found at the end of this chapter. To the extent requested by the Municipality,
the Company shall provide free initial installation and shall provide internet
service at SECTV's actual cost for residential internet service, including
moderns and monthly internet access.
EXHIBIT A
1. Department of Public Works: Prices Lane.
2. Municipal Building (both floors): Main Street.
3. Library and Recreation Department: Mohawk Avenue.
4. Water Department: Park Lake Road.
5. Ambulance Building: Sparta Avenue.
6. Firehouse Buildings: Woodport Road, Stanhope Road and Glen Road.
§ 24-1.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-1.17
1:365
EXHIBIT A
7. Schools: High School (West Mountain Road), Middle School (Route
517), Mohawk Avenue School (Mohawk Avenue), Helen Morgan
(Stanhope Road) and Alpine School (Andover Road).
§ 24-1.18. Discounted Service. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 18]
In the event the Company implements a discount for senior citizens or
persons who are economically disadvantaged or any other individual or
entity in any municipality in which the Company provides services, the same
discount shall be provided to subscribers within the Municipality.
§ 24-1.19. Liability Insurance and Indemnification. [Ord. No. 11-01
§ 19]
The Company agrees to maintain and keep in full force and effect at its
sole expense at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient general
liability insurance naming the Municipality as an insured insuring against
loss by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to one person and
$5,000,000 for bodily injury or death per accident or occurrence and
$500,000 in property damage resulting from any one accident. In addition,
the Company shall maintain motor vehicle liability insurance within at least
the minimum amounts of coverages required in this section.
The Company shall pay, and by its acceptance of this franchise the Company
expressly agrees that it will indemnify, defend and hold harmless and pay, all
damages and penalties which the Township may legally be required to pay
as a result of the Company's installation, operation, or maintenance of the
Cable Television System authorized herein. The Township shall notify the
Company's General Manager within 30 days after the presentation of any
claim or demand to the Township, either by suit or otherwise, made against
the Township on account of any negligence or contract as aforesaid on the
part of the Company. The Company's obligation to indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the Township shall include any and all reasonable attorney's
fees and costs that the Township may incur.
§ 24-1.20. Emergency Issues. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 20]
The Company is in compliance with the Federal Emergency Alert System
("EAS") and, as such, the Company is required to have the capability to
override the audio portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting
of emergency messages by the Municipality pursuant to State and Federal
requirements. The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injuries
suffered by the Municipality or any other person, during an emergency,
if for any reason the Municipality is unable to make full use of the cable
television systems as contemplated herein. The Municipality shall utilize the
State approved procedures for such emergency uses.
§ 24-1.17 SPARTA CODE § 24-1.21
1:366
§ 24-1.21. Comparable Terms and Services. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 21]
The Company shall, throughout the term of this franchise, insofar as is
technically, economically and operationally practicable, provide to the
subscribers within the Township any and all cable television programming
services and related equipment that the Company provides to any other
subscribers or municipalities in which it holds a franchise in Sussex County
on terms and conditions which are at least as favorable to such subscribers
and municipalities. In the event an issue arises as to what is technically,
economically and operationally practicable, the Township and the Company
shall enter into negotiations concerning such matters. If such negotiations
do not produce a mutually acceptable result, either party may make
application to the Board for appropriate relief. Any modification to the terms
of the chapter shall require an agreement between the parties and a formal
petition for approval to the Board pursuant to statutes and regulations.
§ 24-1.22. Activities Prohibited. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 22]
The Company shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with
television reception of persons not served by the Company, nor shall the
system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner, the operation of
the various utilities serving the residents of the Township.
§ 24-1.23. Removal of Facilities. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 23]
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of the franchise granted by this
Ordinance, the Company at its sole cost and expense and upon direction
of the Board, shall remove cables and appurtenant devices constructed or
maintained in connection with the services authorized herein, provided that
such facilities are owned by the Company. To the extent such facilities are
not owned by the Company they shall petition the utility or other company
that has ownership of the facilities in order to coordinate the removal of the
facilities within the next six months.
§ 24-1.24. Biannual Meetings. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 24]
The Company shall make available representatives to meet upon the
request of the Township and upon 30 days' written notice on a biannual
basis with the Township, for the purpose or reviewing the Company's
performance. The Company representatives shall respond to the reasonable
requests for information made by the Township. Either party shall have
the right to request the Office of Cable Television ("OCTV") to have a
representative at the said meeting. The OCTV shall decide whether to
attend such meeting or not.
§ 24-1.25. Reservation of Rights. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 25]
The Township reserves the right to amend this Ordinance in the event of
any changes in State and/or Federal Law or regulations regarding cable
television.
§ 24-1.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-1.26
1:367
§ 24-1.26. Incorporation of the Application. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 26]
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and
any amendment thereto submitted in writing to the Municipality by the
Company except as modified herein, are binding upon the Company as
terms and conditions of this consent. The application and any other relevant
writings submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a
part hereof by reference as long as they do not conflict with State and
Federal law.
§ 24-1.27. Compliance with Other Statutes and Regulations. [Ord.
No. 11-01 § 27]
Notwithstanding any specific mention of application Federal or State
statutes or regulations above, the Company shall comply with all of the
requirements of the Federal Act, the Federal regulations, the State Act
and State regulations (to the extent not preempted) and any other valid
statute, regulation, rule or promulgation, specifically including but without
limitation, those relating to equal employment opportunity.
§ 24-1.28. Severability. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 28]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid, preempted, or unconstitutional by
any court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed
a separate, distinct, and independent provision of this Ordinance, and such
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 24-1.29. Repealer. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 29]
All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this
Ordinance are hereby repealed.
§ 24-1.30. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 11-01 § 30]
This Ordinance shall become effective after final passage and publication
in accordance with law. The franchise shall become effective upon the
adoption of this Ordinance and the issuance of a certificate of approval by
the Board of Public Utilities.
Chapter 25
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 25-1. LAWN FERTILIZER CONTROL WITHIN LAKE MOHAWK
COUNTRY CLUB PROPERTIES.
§ 24-1.26 SPARTA CODE § 25-1.1
1:368
§ 25-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 985 § 1.1]
The Lake Mohawk Country Club has conducted studies and has reviewed
existing data to determine the current and projected water qualities of Lake
Mohawk. The data indicates that lake water quality may be maintained
and improved if Lake Mohawk Country Club, with the assistance of the
Township of Sparta is able to minimize phosphorous in lawn fertilizer and
other chemicals entering the lake as a result of storm water runoff or their
causes. The purpose of this section is to promulgate regulations which
will aid the Township in maintaining and improving lake resources and to
protect the public health by regulating the application of fertilizers.
§ 25-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 985 § 1.2]
As used in this section:
LAKE MOHAWK COUNTRY CLUB — Shall mean and include all properties
located within Lake Mohawk Country Club.
LAWN FERTILIZER — Shall mean any substance used to increase soil
fertility.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Sparta.
§ 25-1.3. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 985 § 1.3]
§ 25-1.4. Exempt. [Ord. No. 985 § 1.4]
Newly established turf areas shall not be limited by this section on the
quantity of phosphorus for the first growing season.
§ 25-1.5. Penalty Provision. [Ord. No. 985 § 1.5]
Any person who shall do or commit any act that is forbidden by the provision
of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.
a. Fertilizer. Within Lake Mohawk Country Club no person, firm,
corporation or franchise shall apply liquid or granular fertilizer which
contains phosphorous.
b. Time of Application. Lawn fertilizer applications shall not be applied
when the ground is frozen.
c. Disposal of leaves and other vegetative material. No person shall
deposit leaves or other vegetative materials on roads or within any lake
or storm water drainage system.
d. Buffer Zone. Fertilizer applications shall not be made within 10 feet of
any wetland or body of water.
§ 25-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-1.5
1:369
Chapter 26
(RESERVED)
Chapter 27
(RESERVED)
Chapter 28
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1978 Code
§§ 24-1 — 24-5.3 and Ordinance Nos. 632, 677 and 732.
§ 28-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 28-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 11-13]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Council of the Township
of Sparta in the County of Sussex, State of New Jersey does ordain the
following regulations.
§ 28-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 11-13]
§ 28-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 11-13]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
a. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Sparta are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. Protect human life and health;
b. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
§ 25-1.5 SPARTA CODE § 28-1.3
1:370
§ 28-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. No. 11-13]
In order to accomplish its purpose, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 28-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 11-13]
Unless specifically defined below, words, or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEALS — Shall mean a request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO, AH or VO
Zone on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with
c. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
f. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
h. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 28-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2
1:371
a 1% annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — Shall mean the
official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building:
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — Shall mean the official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report provided
in which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles,
as well as the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation
of the base flood.
Built in the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard to have
the top of the elevated floor above the ground level by means of piling,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the
water; and
a.
Adequately anchored so as to not impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
In an area of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters.
b.
§ 28-2 SPARTA CODE § 28-2
1:372
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — Shall mean freeboard is a factor of safety usually expressed
in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed
area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
d.
§ 28-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2
1:373
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is (a) built on a
single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and (d) designed primarily not for use as
a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean for other than new construction
or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start shall mean either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such
as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundation or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
§ 28-2 SPARTA CODE § 28-2
1:374
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 28-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 28-3.1. Applicability; Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord.
No. 11-13]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Sparta, Sussex County, New Jersey.
§ 28-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. No. 11-13]
The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Sparta, Community
No. 340535 are identified and defined on the following documents prepared
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
b.
a. A scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Sussex County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated, September 29,
2011.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Sussex County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 34037CO306E,
34037CO307E, 34037CO308E, 34037CO309E, 34037CO315E,
§ 28-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-3.2
1:375
§ 28-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. No. 11-13]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of the chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,250
or be required to perform community service as designated by the local
magistrate, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs
and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the Township of Sparta from taking such other lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 28-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No. 11-13]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 28-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 11-13]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 28-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No. 11-13]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding
34037CO316E, 34037CO317E, 34037CO318E, 34037CO319E,
34037CO326E, 34037CO328E, 34037CO329E, 34037CO335E,
34037CO336E, 34037CO340E, 34037CO345E, 34037CO410E,
34037CO426E: whose effective date is September 29, 2011.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this
chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 65 Main Street,
Sparta, New Jersey.
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
§ 28-3.2 SPARTA CODE § 28-3.6
1:376
or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the Township of Sparta, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal
Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 28-4. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 28-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. No. 11-13]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in subsection 28-3.2. Application for a
development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction
Official and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to
scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required;
§ 28-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Ord. No. 11-13]
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 28-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. [Ord. No.
11-13]
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 28-5.2, paragraph b; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
a. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
§ 28-3.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-4.3
1:377
§ 28-4.4. Variance Procedure. [Ord. No. 11-13]
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of subsection 28-5.3, paragraph a are
met.
b. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
28-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
Construction Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any
base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State
or other source, in order to administer subsection 28-5.2, paragraph a,
Specific Standards, Residential Construction, and subsection 28-5.2,
paragraph b, Specific Standards, Nonresidential Construction.
c. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection 28-4.1, paragraph c.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
d. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying
capacity is not diminished.
e. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection 28-4.4.
§ 28-4.3 SPARTA CODE § 28-4.4
1:378
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment as established
by the Township Council shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
2. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and
decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the Construction
Official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to
the Superior Court of New Jersey, as provided by law.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this
chapter; and
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and flood plain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
§ 28-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-4.4
1:379
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 28-4.4a4, and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
6. The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
(a) through (k) in paragraph a4 above have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for repair or rehabilitation or restoration
of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in paragraph a4
above, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
§ 28-4.4 SPARTA CODE § 28-4.4
1:380
§ 28-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 28-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. No. 11-13]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
§ 28-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5.1
1:381
§ 28-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. 11-13]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 28-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 28-4.3, paragraph b, Use of
Other Base Flood Data, the following standards are required:
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding, shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
f. Freeboard. Freeboard is intended to allow for uncertainties in analysis,
design and construction which cannot be fully or readily considered. A
one foot freeboard is required to account for the one foot rise built into
the concept of designating a floodway and the encroachment
requirements where floodways have not been designated.
a. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to one
foot or more above the base flood elevation.
2. Within any AO zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
one foot or more above the highest adjacent grade at least as high
as the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified), and, require adequate drainage paths around
§ 28-5.1 SPARTA CODE § 28-5.2
1:382
§ 28-5.3. Floodways. [Ord. No. 11-13]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
28-3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
b. Nonresidential Construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, either:
1. Elevated one foot or more above the base flood elevation; and
2. Within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure:
(a) Shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one
foot or more above the highest adjacent grade at least as high
as the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified), and require adequate drainage
paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around
and away from proposed structures; or
(b) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood plus one foot level
of the structure is watertight with:
(1) Walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy; and
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in
subsection 28-4.3, paragraph c2.
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 28-5.1 paragraph a2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
§ 28-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5.3
1:383
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
Chapter 29
SEX OFFENDER-FREE ZONE
§ 29-1. FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 06-22 § 1]
The Township Council finds that:
§ 29-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 06-22 § 1]
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If paragraph a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of Section 28-5, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
a. There is community concern regarding the need to secure the safety of
children from convicted sex offenders; and
b. There are presently no State laws in the State of New Jersey which
prohibit convicted sex offenders from residing or living or loitering near
areas where children regularly meet and congregate; and
c. Because there is no uniform statewide standard prohibiting convicted
sex offenders from residing or living or loitering near areas where
children regularly meet and congregate, municipalities are addressing
the issue through the enactment of ordinances providing those
restrictions; and
d. The Township Council finds that, in order to protect the welfare of
children, it is necessary to restrict places within the Township of Sparta
where convicted sex offenders may reside, live or loiter.
a. Convicted sex offender shall mean a person who is required to register
as a sex offender under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2.
b. Residence shall mean the place where a convicted sex offender sleeps,
which may include more than one location, and may be mobile or
transitory.
§ 28-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 29-3
1:384
§ 29-3. SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY PROHIBITION: 2,500 FEET.
[Ord. No. 06-22 § 1]
§ 29-4. PROHIBITION OF SEX OFFENDER IN PARKS FREQUENTED
BY CHILDREN. [Ord. No. 06-22 § 1]
§ 29-5. PENALTY. [Ord. No. 06-22 § 1]
The penalty for any violation of this chapter shall be in accord with the
provisions of Section 1-5 of the Sparta Township Code.
a. No person over the age of 18 who has been convicted of a violation of
any crime as listed in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2, and who as a result of said
conviction is required to register with the proper authorities pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2 et seq., Registration and Notification of Release of
Certain Offenders, shall be permitted to reside or live within 2,500 feet
of any school; library; municipal building; public park, tot-lot, active or
passive recreation area or open space; playground; child care center or
church, or property designated for such use in the Township Master
Plan.
b. A convicted sex offender who resides or lives within 2,500 feet of any
school; library; municipal building; public park, tot-lot, active or passive
recreation area or open space; playground; child care center or church,
or property designated for such use in the Township Master Plan shall
have 60 days from receipt of written notice of the prohibition set forth
herein to move. Failure to move to a location which is in compliance
with this section within that time period shall constitute a violation of
this section.
c. This section shall not apply to a person who has established a residence
prior to enactment of this chapter.
a. No convicted sex offender shall be present in or on any park, tot-lot or
playground, which has been designated by Council as a park, tot-lot or
playground, frequented by children.
b. No convicted sex offender shall be permitted to knowingly loiter on a
public way within 300 feet from a park, tot-lot or playground, which has
been designated by the Council as a park, tot-lot or playground
frequented by children.
c. If a Police Officer reasonably believes that a convicted sex offender is in
a park or playground which has been designated by the Council as a
park or playground frequented by children, the officer shall require the
convicted sex offender to provide his or her name and address to
determine if he or she is on the New Jersey Sex Offender Registry.
§ 29-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 29-5
1:385

Appendix A
FEE SCHEDULE
Editor's Note: This Appendix Fee Schedule contains reprinted
sections of the Code. For source information, see the Code text.
§ A-1. FEES FOR CHAPTER 1, GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ A-1.1. Sale of Code Book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Municipal Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the
Township Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures
for the periodic supplementation thereof. (Subsection 1-6.2)
§ A-2. FEES FOR CHAPTER 2, ADMINISTRATION.
§ A-2.1. Public Defender Nonrefundable Application Fee.
Each applicant applying for the services of the Municipal Public Defender
shall pay a nonrefundable application fee of $200. The fee may be waived
or reduced, in part, as the Court determines based on the financial
circumstances of the applicant. The application fees collected pursuant to
this section shall be deposited in a dedicated fund administered by the
Township's Chief Financial Officer. The funds shall be used exclusively to
meet the costs incurred in providing the services of the Municipal Public
Defender including, when required, any expert or lay investigation and
testimony. (Subsection 2-11.3)
§ A-2.2. Police Department. [Ord. No. 2015-07]
§ A-2.3. Fees Charged by the Office of the Township Clerk. [Ord. No.
13-14 § 3]
Requests for copies of government records under the Open Public Records
Act, N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
a. Fees for Police Services. Whenever the Chief of Police authorizes the
assignment of a Township Police Officer, or Special Officer to quasipublic duty the fee for this service shall be equal to the Senior Patrol
Officer's overtime hourly rate of prior years' pay with a minimum of four
hours plus a 10% administrative fee for all hours worked. A fee is to be
charged should a patrol vehicle be required for any such quasi-public
duty, not to exceed $50 per day. (Subsection 2-18.10)
1. Photostatic copies of any government record that can be photocopied
with municipal facilities - $0.05 per letter size page or smaller and
$0.07 per legal size page or larger.
2. In the event that the actual cost for duplication of a government record
exceeds the foregoing rate, the charge shall be the actual cost of
A:1
duplicating the government records requested. The actual cost shall be
the cost of materials and supplies used to make a copy of the record,
but shall not include the cost of labor or other overhead expenses
associated with making the copy except as provided in Subsection 5
hereof.
3. For any government record copied onto a non-paper medium, the actual
cost of the non-paper medium.
4. For any copy of a government record for which the Township is unable
to duplicate with its own facilities and requires the services of an
outside vendor, the actual cost to the Township from the outside vendor.
5. Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation or volume of a record
embodied in the form of printed matter to be inspected, examined or
copied is such that the record cannot be reproduced by ordinary
document copying equipment in the ordinary business size or involves
an extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to accommodate the
request, the charge for the record shall be the actual cost to the
Township, together with a service charge of $12 per hour for each hour
required to duplicate the record. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the charge prior to it being
incurred.
6. In the event that the Township does not maintain the record requested
in the medium requested, the Township shall either convert the record
to the medium requested or provide a copy in some other meaningful
medium. If a request is for a record in a medium not routinely used by
the Township, not routinely developed or maintained by the Township
or requiring a substantial amount of manipulation or programming of
information technology, the cost for the record shall be the actual cost
of duplication together with a special charge that shall be reasonable
and shall be based upon the cost for any extensive use of information
technology, or for the labor cost of personnel providing the service, that
is actually incurred by the Township or attributable to the Township for
the programming, clerical and supervisory assistance required, or both.
7. Access to electronic records and non-printed materials shall be
provided free of charge, provided however, that the Township may
charge for the actual costs of any needed supplies, such as computer
disks.
Returned checks $20
FEES FOR MAPS
Road map (black & white) $3
Road map color plot $5
Zoning map $3
Tax map $7
§ A-2.3 SPARTA CODE § A-2.3
A:2
§ A-2.4. Fees Charged by the Office of the Tax Collector.
§ A-2.5. Fees Charged by the Police Department.
Aerial photo (36" x 48" grid) $7
Planemetric (36" x 48" grid) $7
Planemetric color plot (36" x 48" grid) $10
Specialty color combination plot (36" x 48"
grid)
$25
Bingo/raffle license, per game $10
Peddlers/solicitor permit (for profit) [Amended 9-24-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-16]
Yearly fee per person $50
Yearly fee per badge $2
Peddlers/solicitor permit for charitable/
religious organizations and veterans
No charge
(Subsection 2-63.1)
a. Informal tax status advice;
Per line item: $1
b. Assessment search: $10
c. Two hundred feet list: $10
(Subsection 2-63.2)
a. Copies of All Police Reports:
Photostatic copies of any police report that can be photocopied with
municipal facilities - $0.05 per letter size page or smaller and $0.07 per
legal size page or larger.
Police Motor Vehicle Accident Reports not requested in person and not
part of municipal court discovery, an additional administrative fee of $5
shall be charged.
b. Clearance visa and letters of good conduct (except to bona fide
charitable or religious organizations for which there is no charge: $15.
c. Fingerprints: for bartender permit, applicants for peddlers, canvassers
or wherever required: $5.
d. Duplicate copies of fingerprints, per copy: $3.
e. For any police record, including photographs, copied onto a non-paper
medium, the actual cost of the non-paper medium.
§ A-2.3 FEE SCHEDULE § A-2.5
A:3
§ A-2.6. Fees.
The fee for participating in the Sparta Township Cooperative Pricing
Council shall be $300 per year payable by March 31.
(Subsection 2-56-5)
§ A-3. FEES FOR CHAPTER 3, POLICE REGULATIONS.
§ A-3.1. Worthless Checks, Deposit for Costs.
When a complaint is filed under the provisions of this section, the person
filing such complaint shall deposit the sum of $25 to cover court costs
with the Clerk of the Municipal Court at the time when the complaint is
made. If the complaint is subsequently withdrawn by the complainant, or if
for any other reason there is no conviction of the defendant named in the
complaint, the sum of $25 shall be retained to cover the costs of making
out the complaint and service of the same. In the event the defendant is
convicted, he shall be required to pay the costs and in this event the $25
deposit shall be returned to the complainant. (Subsection 3-11.4)
§ A-4. FEES FOR CHAPTER 4, GENERAL LICENSING.
§ A-4.1. Amusement Devices.
The annual license fee for operating or maintaining each amusement device
shall be $10 per year or any part thereof for each device and payable to
the Municipal Clerk at the time of the filing of the application. (Subsection
4-2.5a)
§ A-4.2. Tourist Homes and Motels.
The annual fee for the license of tourist homes and motels shall be $10 for
each housing or lodging unit, provided, however, that the annual license fee
shall not exceed $100 annually. (Subsection 4-7.7)
§ A-4.3. Alarm Systems.
A fee of $25 shall be paid when filing for a registration permit. The permit
application shall be submitted no later than January 31 of each year or
within 30 days of installation of the system. A late fee of $5 per month shall
be incurred. (Subsection 4-12.4e)
A fee of $25 shall be paid to the Township for any alarm not registered as
required by this section. (Subsection 4-12.4f)
f. For any copy of a police record for which the Township is unable to
duplicate with its own facilities and requires the services of an outside
vendor, the actual cost to the Township from the outside vendor.
(Subsection 2-63.3)
§ A-2.5 SPARTA CODE § A-4.4
A:4
§ A-4.4. Taxicabs — Issuance of License.
The Municipal Clerk is hereby authorized to issue a license for any vehicles
to be used in accordance with the terms hereof, upon the payment by the
applicant of the initial application fee of $1,000 plus the fee of $30 per
vehicle. The annual application fee after the initial application shall be $100
plus the fee of $30 per vehicle. (Subsection 4-16.2)
§ A-4.5. Deer Hunting Permit.
The annual fee for a deer hunting permit shall be $75, or such other
fee established by the Township Council. Applications must be submitted
between July 1 and July 31 each year. Permits shall be issued during the first
week of September each year. (Subsection 4-3.1)
§ A-4.6. Fireworks Permit. [Ord. No. 2018-06]
§ A-5. FEES FOR CHAPTER 5, ANIMAL CONTROL.
§ A-5.1. Dogs. [Ord. No. 13-14 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-19 § 1]
a. The permit fee for a fireworks display is $600. (Subsection 4-18.3)
a. Fees; Term of License. The person applying for the license and
registration tag shall pay a fee of $15 for a one-year license and $35 for
a three-year license for each dog. Additional fees established by the
State of New Jersey will also be incurred. The licenses, registration tags
and renewals thereof shall expire on the last day of January in each
year. (Subsection 5-2.6)
b. Lost Tags. The owner of any dog may, if the license tag is mislaid, stolen
or lost, procure a replacement dog license and registration upon the
payment of a fee of $1. The owner must provide adequate proof that the
dog is currently licensed for the year in which the replacement tag is
desired. (Subsection 5-2.3e)
c. Delinquent Fees. Any dog owner or person harboring a dog, found to
have an unlicensed dog by the Animal Control Officer, dog canvassers
or any other municipal official after February 1 of each year, shall be
required to pay a delinquent fee of $5 per month for each dog, plus the
required license and registration tag fees provided in this section, in
addition to any fine imposed for failure to obtain a dog license before
February 1. The aforementioned delinquent fee shall not apply to dogs
which have been acquired by the owner after March 1, on which the
license fee shall be the same as required in Subsection 5-2.5. The
owner, however, shall present sufficient proof to establish that the dog
was acquired after March 1. (Subsection 5-2.8)
d. Fee for License for Potentially Dangerous Dogs. The annual license and
registration fee for a potentially dangerous dog is $500 each.
(Subsection 5-9.13)
§ A-4.4 FEE SCHEDULE § A-5.2
A:5
§ A-5.2. Cats. [Ord. No. 2016-19 § 1]
§ A-5.3. Impounding.
The following fees are established:
For each dog/cat impounded [Ord. No. 2016-19 § 1] $30
For each dog/cat redeemed [Ord. No. 2016-19 § 1] $10
Maintenance charge for each day or part thereof while
impounded [Ord. No. 2016-19 § 1]
$10
Disposal of dogs $45
Disposal of cats $30
Checks returned for insufficient funds [Ord. No.
2016-19 § 1]
$20
Replacement dog license and registration; for each dog $1
Adoption fee for a dog or cat $10
There shall be charged to the owner of each dog which is impounded,
pursuant to Subsection 5-20.1, the sum listed in Subsection a for picking
up each dog; and the sum listed in Subsection b for each dog which
is redeemed by its owner, plus the sum listed in Subsection c per day
maintenance fee for each day or part thereof that the dog has been
impounded, which fee shall be paid when the dog is released.
(Subsection 5-20.4)
§ A-6. FEES FOR CHAPTER 6, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL.
§ A-6.1. License Fees. [Ord. No. 13-14 § 2]
The annual fee of licenses for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages
in the Township shall be as follows:
a. Fees. A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of $12 for each
neutered cat for a one-year license or $24 for a three-year license and
$15 for each unneutered cat for a one-year license or $30 for a threeyear license for each unneutered cat. Persons who fail to obtain a
license as required by February 1, will be subject to a delinquent fee of
$5 per month for each cat. (Subsection 5-12.8)
b. Loss of License; Replacement Fee. If a license tag or sleeve has been
misplaced or lost, the Health Department may issue a duplicate license
and/or registration sleeve for that particular cat at a fee of $1.
(Subsection 5-12.10)
§ A-5.2 SPARTA CODE § A-6.1
A:6
Class of License Annual License
Number of
Licenses
Plenary Retail Consumption
License
$940 17
Club License $150 2
(Subsection 6-3.4)
§ A-7. through § A-10. (RESERVED)
§ A-11. FEES FOR CHAPTER 11, HEALTH REGULATIONS.
§ A-11.1. Retail Food Establishment. [Ord. No. 2016-19 § 2]
a. Retail food establishment license fee annually:
CLASS I
Prepackaged only $40
Nonseating $65
1-50 seats $85
51-100 seats $120
101+ seats $140
CLASS II
Supermarkets (12,000 square feet) $200
CLASS III
Schools $85
CLASS IV
Mobile food and drink $75
CLASS V
Temporary retail food establishments $30
Temporary retail food establishments for
nonprofit organizations
$15
b. Milk or cream, distribution or sale, by motor vehicle, license fee,
annually: $10
c. There shall be a fee of $25 for each permit issued pursuant to this
section, per year. However, if the establishment sells only prepackaged
foods such as candy, nuts, fruitcakes and like items, the fee shall be $20
for foods not contained in indoor vending devices. The fee for indoor
vending machines shall be $10 per machine, with the exception of gum
machines and $0.01 to $0.05 candy machines for which a fee of $2 per
machine shall be charged.
§ A-6.1 FEE SCHEDULE § A-11.1
A:7
§ A-11.2. Public Recreational Bathing.
The following fees are hereby established:
§ A-11.3. Air Pollution Control.
§ A-11.4. Copies of Certificates. [Ord. No. 13-14 § 3]
d. Farmer's Market Licenses shall be issued for the period January 1 to
December 31 of each year. There shall be a fee of $75 for each Farmer's
Market License issued per calendar year or any portion of a year. The
payment is due on or before March 1 of each year and in the event the
payment is not received by March 1 the applicant shall be subject to a
$25 late fee. Subsection 11-2.8 does not apply to the Farmer's Market
License.
(Subsection 11-2.7)
a. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct a swimming pool,
the fee shall be as established in Chapter 12, Subsection 12-1.3a2(h).
b. For the issuance of a permit to alter a swimming pool, the fee shall be as
established in Chapter 12, § 12-1.3, Construction Permits.
c. For the issuance of an annual license to operate a public recreational
bathing place, the fee shall be as follows:
Public bathing place $225
Hot tub or spa $40
Swimming pool $65
Wading pool $30
(Subsection 11-6.5)
a. Incinerators. No person shall operate or permit the operation of an
incinerator in the Township without a permit issued by the Sussex
County Health Department. The Sussex County Health Department
shall recommend issuance of a permit for the operation of an
incinerator after examining the application and inspecting the facility
and being satisfied that it may be operated in accordance with this
code. The permit may be conditioned on improvements being made
within a prescribed time or on certain operating restrictions, if
necessary, to comply with this section. All permits shall be issued by the
Sussex County Health Department and shall expire on September 15
following their issuance, or at such time prior thereto as any conditions
or restrictions shall not be complied with. Each incinerator shall
require a permit for which the annual fee shall be $25 payable to the
Township of Sparta. (Subsection 11-8.8a)
a. Certified copies of births, marriage, civil unions and domestic
partnerships: $10.
§ A-11.1 SPARTA CODE § A-11.4
A:8
§ A-12. FEES FOR CHAPTER 12, BUILDING AND HOUSING.
§ A-12.1. Fees for Construction Permits. [Ord. No. 2016-19 § 3]
b. Certified copies of death certificates: $25/first copy and $2 for each
thereafter.
(§ 11-3)
a. The fees for construction permits shall be as follows:
1. Plan review:
(a) The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to be
charged for the construction permit and shall be paid before
the plans are reviewed. The amount paid for this fee shall be
credited towards the amount of the fee to be charged for the
construction permit and shall not be refundable.
2. Building subcode: The building subcode fees shall be:
New construction (for all use groups except
use groups S-1 and S-2)
$0.033
New construction S-1 and S-2 use groups:
Up to 100,000 cu. ft. per cu. ft. $0.019
Over 100,000 cu. ft. per cu. ft. $0.011
New construction is subject to a minimum fee of:
For principal structure $110
For accessory structure $50
Additions to existing structures per cu. ft. $0.033
Subject to a minimum fee of $50
Alterations/renovations/repairs per $1,000 of cost:
For costs up to $50,000 $25
For costs from $50,000 to $100,000 $13
For costs exceeding $100,000 $11
Addition of open unroofed deck per $1,000 of
cost
$25
Subject to a minimum fee of $50
R3 or R4 re-roof or re-side $70
Combination of additions and alterations/renovations/repairs
shall be computed separately applying the sum of the above
schedule; subject to the same minimum fee
Pools:
Private:
§ A-11.4 FEE SCHEDULE § A-12.1
A:9
Above ground $100
Below ground-includes fences $250
Certificate of occupancy $20
Public:
Less than 25,000 gallons capacity $198
In excess of 25,000 gallons capacity $396
Certificate of occupancy $85
All structures for which volume cannot be computed, shall be
computed as follows:
Under 35 feet in height - per $1,000 of cost $20
Subject to minimum fee of $40
Exceeding 35 feet in height - per $1,000 of
cost
$25
Subject to minimum fee of $110
Solid fuel burning device $120
3. Plumbing subcode: The plumbing subcode fees shall be:
(a) Per fixture or stack except as elsewhere noted: $15.
(For the purpose of computing this fee, fixtures or stacks shall
include but not be limited to lavatories, kitchen sinks, slop
sinks, sinks, urinals, water closets, bathtubs (excluding
whirlpool type). Shower stalls, laundry tubs, floor drains,
leaders, roof drains, drinking fountains, dishwashers, water
heaters, air cooled air condition or refrigeration units, clothes
washers, or similar devices.)
(b) Special devices as listed herein: $50.
Grease interceptors, oil separators, water cooled air condition
or refrigeration units, public or private water or sewer utilities,
steam or water boilers, whirlpool type bathtubs, sewer
ejectors, storm sewer, lawn sprinkler systems, reduced
pressure backflow preventers, gas piping, water conditioners.
(c) Minimum plumbing subcode fee: $50.
4. Electrical subcode: The electrical subcode fees shall be 100% of
Department of Consumer Affairs (DCA) fees.
(a) In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20 (c) iii (see schedule of
fees on file in Construction Code Enforcement Office).
(b) Minimum fee: $50.
5. Fire protection subcode: The fire protection subcode fees shall be:
§ A-12.1 SPARTA CODE § A-12.1
A:10
(a) Sprinkler systems and smoke and heat detectors.
(1) One to 20 heads or detectors: $50.
(2) Twenty-one to 100 heads or detectors: $85.
(3) One hundred one to 200 heads or detectors: $163.
(4) Two hundred one to 400 heads or detectors: $423.
(5) Four hundred one to 1,000 heads or detectors: $585.
(6) Over 1,000 heads or detectors: $748.
In computing fees for heads and detectors the number of each
shall be counted separately and two fees, one for heads and one
for detectors shall be charged.
(b) Standpipes: The fee for each standpipe shall be: $163.
(c) Pre-engineered systems: The fee for each independent preengineered system shall be: $65.
(d) Kitchen exhaust system: The fee for each kitchen exhaust
system shall be: $42.
(e) Suppression systems (other than water) per $1,000 of cost:
$21.
Subject to a minimum fee of: $42.
(f) Manual alarm systems: The fee for a manual alarm system
shall be: $60.
(g) Appliances: The fee for each gas or oil fired appliance which is
not connected to the plumbing system shall be: $50.
(h) Storage tanks:
(1) Up to 1,000 gallons each tank: $50.
(2) 1,001 to 2,000 gallons each tank: $75.
(3) 2,001 to 5,000 gallons each tank: $100.
(4) 5,000 gallons or more each tank: $150.
6. Elevator subcode: The elevator subcode fees shall be:
(a) In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6 (see schedule of fees of
elevator inspection agency on file in construction code
enforcement office).
(b) Township of Sparta administration fee shall be 15% of the
elevator subcode permit fee.
§ A-12.1 FEE SCHEDULE § A-12.1
A:11
7. Demolition:
(a) The fee for a demolition permit for a structure less than 5,000
square feet and less than 30 feet in height for one- or twofamily residences (use groups R-3 and R-4) and all structures
on farms regardless of height, used exclusively for storage of
feed or grain or sheltering of livestock shall be: $75.
(b) The fee for all other demolition permits shall be: $125.
8. Moving/relocation:
(a) The fee for a permit for removal of one building from one lot to
another or to another location on the same lot shall be in the
amount of $25 per $1,000 of the estimated cost of moving, plus
the estimated cost of new foundation and all work necessary to
place the building in its completed condition in the new
location.
9. Signs:
(a) Advertising signs shall be computed on the basis of square
footage of surface area. Double faced signs shall be computed
on one side only:
Per square feet $1
Subject to minimum
fee of
$50
10. Temporary structures:
(a) The fee for all temporary structures (tents, air supported
structures, trailers, etc.) shall be: $50.
11. Permit update: The administrative fee for updating permits shall be
$25.
12. Renewal of permits:
(a) The fee for expired permits shall be the same as a new permit.
13. Variation: The fee for an application for a variation in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $423 for class I structures and $85
for class II and class III structures. The fee for resubmission of an
application for a variation shall be $163 for class I structures and
$46 for class II and class III structures.
14. Certificate of occupancy/approval:
(a) The minimum fee shall be $100 except for one- or two- family
(use group R-3 and R-4) structures of less than 5,000 square
feet in area and less than 35 feet in height and structures on
farms (regardless of height) used exclusively for storage of
§ A-12.1 SPARTA CODE § A-12.1
A:12
food or grain or sheltering of livestock, for which the minimum
fee shall be: $50.
(b) Change of use certificate of occupancy fee: $100.
(c) Certificate of continued occupancy fee: $100.
(d) There shall be no fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy:
$0.
(e) Certificate of approval fee: $0.
(f) Certificate of occupancy for R-3 or R-4 additions or alterations:
$20.
15. All fees shall be rounded to the nearest dollar amount.
16. Waiver of fees:
(a) The Township of Sparta waives all construction code fees
subject to exceptions set forth herein for the following entities:
(1) Sparta Township Fire Department.
(2) Sparta Township Ambulance Squad.
(3) Charitable, philanthropic, fraternal, and religious
nonprofit organizations holding a tax exempt status under
the Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 U.S.C.
Section 501 (c) or (d)).
(4) Those entities set forth in Section 52:27D-16C of the
Uniform Construction Code Act.
(5) The within waiver shall not apply to Department of
Community Affairs Training Fees and private enforcing
agency fees.
17. Training fees:
(a) In order to provide for the training and certification and
technical support programs required by the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code, the Township shall collect a
surcharge fee which shall be forwarded to the Department of
Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey.
(b) This fee shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.19.
18. Unlisted fees: Construction fees not specifically listed in this
schedule shall be as listed in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20.
19. Mechanical subcode:
Mechanical inspections (replacement):
§ A-12.1 FEE SCHEDULE § A-12.1
A:13
§ A-13. through § A-15. (RESERVED)
§ A-16. FEES FOR CHAPTER 16, FIRE PROTECTION AND
PREVENTION.
§ A-16.1. Certificate of Smoke Detector, Carbon Monoxide Alarm
and Fire Extinguisher Compliance. [Ord. No. 2016-19 § 3]
The application fees for a certificate of smoke detector, carbon monoxide
and fire extinguisher compliance are as follows:
Fee for replacement or new installation of:
Oil or gas-fired stove or fireplace, water heater,
boiler, furnace, air conditioning unit, pool heater, oil
and propane tanks, oil or gas lines in existing R-3,
R-4 and R-5 structures
$100
For each additional appliance on same permit (No
additional fee for gas, fuel oil, or water piping
connection to appliance
$75
b. Building permits must be obtained before any work is commenced
involving new construction, additions or alterations to existing
structures and repairs or maintenance to existing structures (other
than exterior or interior painting or redecoration).
(Subsection 12-1.3)
a. Inspection applications filed prior to 10 calendar days before the
closing date, the inspection fee is $50.
b. Inspection applications that are filed within 10 calendar days prior to
the closing, the inspection fee is $100.
c. Exceptions:
1. Short sales where the buyer is responsible for paying for the
inspection, the fee for the inspection will be $50.
2. Foreclosure sales where the buyer is responsible for paying for the
inspection, the fee for the inspection will be $50.
(Subsection 16-1.8)
Permit Fees.
a. The permit fees for Life Hazard Inspections shall be as
provided in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
b. For all commercial occupancies that do not meet the criteria
for Life Hazard Inspection as defined in the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code, inspection fees are based on the square
footage of the occupancy as follows:
§ A-12.1 SPARTA CODE § A-16.1
A:14
§ A-16.2. Annual Registration Fees.
The State Division of Fire Safety shall collect and account for the annual
registration fees. They shall annually bill for and take such steps as may be
necessary to collect these annual fees. 65% of these fees shall be remitted to
the Township of Sparta in accordance with the provisions of the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code. (Subsection 16-1.11)
§ A-17. (RESERVED)
§ A-18. FEES FOR CHAPTER 18, LAND MANAGEMENT.
§ A-18.1. Land Use Fees. [Ord. No. 2016-19 § 4]
1. 20 to 500 square feet: $25.
2. 501 to 11,999 square feet: $50.
(Subsection 16-1.9)
a. Minor subdivision — lot line adjustment, application fee: $250.
b. Minor subdivision — two or three lots. Base fee: $300 plus $10 per lot.
c. Preliminary major subdivision plat — original submission. Base fee:
$750 plus $25 per lot.
d. Final subdivision plat. Base fee: $500 plus $25 per lot.
e. Site plans — preliminary. Base fee: $500 plus $25 per 1,000 square feet
gross floor area plus $10 per 1,000 square feet site disturbance. Final -
1/2 preliminary fee.
f. Appeals, interpretations and variances. For each application requesting
an appeal interpretation, or variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(a), (b), (c) and/or (d), the following application fees shall
apply:
1. Base fees:
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70
Subsection Type
Single-Family
Residential
Retail Prof. MultiFamily Industrial
(a) $100 $100 $100
(b) $100 $100 $100
(c) $75 $200 $200
(d) $200 $500 $750
If the application requires more than one type of relief under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 (a, b, c, d) as listed in
Subsection f, the applicant shall apply the fee required for every and each type variance requested.
g. Other Base Fees.
§ A-16.1 FEE SCHEDULE § A-18.1
A:15
§ A-18.2. Assorted Fees. [Ord. No. 2015-13]
Comprehensive Land Management
Code
$30 per copy
Master Plan $35 per copy
Zoning Permit $20
Highlands Area Exemptions:
Applicants for a municipal exemption shall pay the following fees and
escrow charges:
1. Construction of a single family residence on an undersized lot (in
addition to the foregoing) - $100.
2. Special meeting of either the planning board or zoning board of
adjustment - $1,000.
3. Request for extension of preliminary or final site plan or
subdivision approval - $500.
4. Request to planning board for zone change - $500.
h. Upon submission of a lot line adjustment (minor subdivision): Review
inspection escrow: $500.
i. Minor subdivision, including lot line adjustment, two or three lots;
Review inspection escrow: $1,200, plus $25 per lot for minor
subdivision other than lot line adjustment.
j. Upon submission of preliminary major subdivision: Review inspection
escrow: $2,500, plus $50 per lot.
k. Upon submission of final plat: Review inspection escrow: $2,000, plus
$50 per lot.
l. Preliminary - $500 plus $25 per 1,000 square feet floor area plus $10
per 1,000 square feet site disturbance. Final, if submitted separately -
1/2 of preliminary.
m. Applications involving residential properties - $300.
n. Applications involving commercial properties - $500.
o. Subdivision amendment: Application fee: $500: Review inspection
escrow: $1,200.
p. Site Plan Amendment: Application fee: $500: Review inspection escrow:
$1,200.
(Subsection 18-8.1)
§ A-18.1 SPARTA CODE § A-18.2
A:16
Highlands Exemption Determination Fee (without a
zoning permit)
$50
Highlands Exemption Determination Fee (with a zoning
permit)
$100
Highlands Exemption Determination Escrow Deposit for
Professional Review (if needed)
$750
(Subsection 18-8.2)
§ A-18.3. Professional Personnel or Professional Services.
The term "professional personnel" or "professional services," as used
herein, shall include the services of a duly licensed engineer, surveyor,
planner, attorney, realtor, appraiser or other expert who would provide
professional services or advise to insure an application complies with the
standards set forth in this ordinance and other experts whose testimony
is in an area testified to be any of the applicant's experts. "Professional
personnel" shall include personnel retained by the Township pursuant to
a professional services contract, as well as Township employees (i.e.,
personnel whose services are provided by a Township employee). The
charge shall not exceed 200% of the sum of the products resulting from
multiplying (1) the hourly base salary, which is established annually by
ordinance, of each of the professionals by (2) the number of hours spent by
the respective professionals upon review of the application or inspection of
the developer's improvements. (Subsection 18-8.3)
§ A-18.4. Residential Development Fees for Low and Moderate
Income Housing.
a. Residential Development Fees. Residential development in the
Township of Sparta that includes less than four residential lots and/or
dwelling units shall pay a development fee of 1 1/2% of the equalized
assessed value of any eligible residential activity. The term developer
shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development including the
holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land. Teardowns and
reconstruction of previously existing dwellings are subject to the
requirements of this section except existing housing units
reconstructed after being destroyed by a catastrophic event such as
fire, flood or other natural disaster. (Subsection 18-8.4b)
b. Collection of Fees.
1. Developers shall pay 50% of the calculated development fee to the
Township of Sparta at the issuance of building permits. The
developer shall submit to the Housing Officer an estimate of the
assessed value of the new construction and lot to be verified if
required by the Tax Assessor.
§ A-18.2 FEE SCHEDULE § A-18.4
A:17
§ A-19. FEES FOR CHAPTER 19, WATER.
§ A-19.1. Individual Wells.
The following fees and charges are hereby established:
§ A-19.2. Water Rates and Charges.
The following prices, annual rentals and water charges are hereby
established by the Township in accordance with the following schedule:
2. Developers shall pay the remaining fee to the Township of Sparta at
the issuance of certificates of occupancy. At the issuance of
certificates of occupancy, the Tax Assessor shall calculate the
equalized assessed value and the appropriate development fee. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at certificate of occupancy and the amount paid
at building permit.
(Subsection 18-8.4d)
a. The fee for the issuance of a permit to locate, construct or alter nonpublic or non-community water system: $150.
b. The fee for the filing of an application and plans and issuance of a
permit to locate, construct or alter a pump and/or storage tank for the
purpose of supplying water to a non-public or public non-community
water system: $40.
c. The fee for each reinspection of a water supply system or part thereof,
caused by the failure of the permittee to locate and construct or alter
the same in accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the terms
of the aforesaid Code shall be for each house or building to be served:
$50.
d. The fee for the review of an application and plans to locate, construct or
alter a non-public or public non-community water system: $40.
e. The fee for the review of an application and plans to locate, construct or
alter a non-public or public non-community water system, after the
initial review which is necessary because of applicant's failure to
submit an application and plans that conform to the required State Law
and Regulations and local ordinances shall be: $25.
f. The fee for the reissuance of a permit that has expired to locate,
construct or alter a non-public or public non-community water system:
$40.
(Subsection 19-1.6)
a. Water Use Rates. Customers shall be charged at the rate of $4.50 per
1,000 gallons of water consumption plus a minimum quarterly service
charge in accordance with the size of the service meter as follows:
§ A-18.4 SPARTA CODE § A-19.2
A:18
Meter Size
(Inches)
Minimum Quarterly Service
Charge
5/8 x 3/4 $33.38
3/4 $44.58
1 $72.18
1 1/4 $102.88
1 1/2 $123.28
2 $194.88
3 $332.88
4 $410.88
6 $880.88
8 $1376.88
b. Unmetered Customers. Unmetered single-family residences which
would normally be provided with standard 5/8 inch by 3/4 inch service
meters, shall be charged a quarterly flat rate equal to a minimum
25,000 gallons plus service charge, or alternate usage determined by
the Utility based upon historical records. This flat rate shall also be
applicable to one inch and larger meters.
In those cases where a metered customer has equipment that is not
working properly to determine water usage and access has been denied
to the Township after repeated attempts to repair said equipment, these
accounts shall be charged a quarterly flat rate equal to 75,000 gallons
plus the applicable service charge, or alternate usage determined by
the Utility based upon historical records. This flat rate shall apply
until the metering unit can be repaired or replaced. A continued lack
of cooperation with providing a Township agent access to correct
metering functions may result in a loss of water service.
c. Hydrant and Sprinkler Systems.
Public Hydrants – Applicable to municipalities for public fire protection
service provided by the Sparta Water Utility and fee distributed to
benefiting customers $85 per hydrant per quarter.
Private Hydrant – Applicable for private fire protection through
hydrants owned by the Sparta Water Utility or the customer, and
connected to utility-owned mains, and located in private rights-of-way
$85 per hydrant per quarter.
Private Fire Protection – Applicable for private sprinkler heads, or other
fire-fighting facilities connected to a private service connection, with
fee based upon size of service line as it enters the building.
§ A-19.2 FEE SCHEDULE § A-19.2
A:19
Size of Service
(Inches) Quarterly Fee
Less than 2 $0
2 $31.25
3 $62.50
4 $106.25
6 $225
8 $375
10 or greater $575
d. Fountains. Unmetered water fountains shall be charged a quarterly flat
fee equal to 15,000 gallons consumption.
e. Temporary Water Service.
Unmetered: $100 per quarter/per service connection, minimum.
Metered: Fees charged for a metered, temporary water service shall
be in conformance with rates listed under Subsection a, "Water Use
Rates," or at a rate of $100 per quarter per service connection,
whichever is greater.
f. Turning On or Off Water Service Line.
Turn on during normal working hours $30
Turn off during normal working hours $30
Turn off or on outside of normal working hours
on emergency call basis
$100
Above fees shall be charged for each visit to site.
g. Frozen Meter. Fee for the disconnection, repair, and reconnection of a
service shall be:
Service provided during normal working hours $50
Service provided outside normal working hours
on emergency call in basis
$100
The above fees, or actual cost incurred, whichever is greater shall be
charged
h. Service Meter Test.
Disconnection, testing, and reconnection of
service meter
$75
The fee shall be refunded if the meter is found to register consumption
in excess of 2% fast of actual water delivered.
§ A-19.2 SPARTA CODE § A-19.2
A:20
i. Water Meter Supply and Inspection. As requested, water meters up to
two inches in size shall be furnished and installed by the Department
provided that all valves and meter yokes have been properly installed
(where wiring is required for outside readers, this shall be done prior to
meter installation). Meters larger than two inches may be provided and
installed by owner/contractor and inspected by the Department. The fee
for meters provided by the Department shall be the actual meter cost
incurred plus a surcharge by meter size as follows:
Meter Size
(Inches)
Surcharge**
(%)
5/8 x 3/4 25%
3/4 and 1 20%
1 1/2 and 2 10%
Greater than or equal to 3 5%
** Surcharge equals actual cost of meter plus percentage listed.
Fee for inspection or reinspection of water service meter installed by
others for each site visit shall be $25
j. Water Meter Installation. As requested, water service meters shall be
installed outside of normal working hours for a fee of $100.
k. Supply Line Installation. Supply line installation shall be allowed at the
sole discretion and approval of the Water Utility as follows: A supply
line shall be installed by the Water Department, including all aspects of
labor, materials, and equipment for a fee (tapping fee) of $4,200 for a 3/
4-inch tap; $4,400 for a one-inch tap; and $4,800 for a two-inch tap. Any
additional costs incurred by the Water Department, above fees listed, as
a result of certain subsurface or above grade conditions or constraints,
shall be borne by the applicant. [Amended 6-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-07]
l. Thawing Privately-Owned Service Pipe. Point of contact for electrical
thawing purposes to any component of the water utility such as a curb
box, or main line or hydrant valve requires approval by the water utility
and shall be subject to the following fees:
Inspection service within normal business
working hours
$30
Inspection service outside normal business
working hours
$100
m. Meter Readings. Request for special water meter readings other than
the routine quarterly readings obtained by water utility personnel shall
pay a fee of $30 per reading.
§ A-19.2 FEE SCHEDULE § A-19.2
A:21
n. No Show Service Fee. For any service requiring entry into a building
and a prearranged appointment with the property owner or
representative to gain access by the water utility, an additional fee shall
be charged if the appointment is not met and access to the building
cannot be made by the water utility.
Within normal business working hours $30
Outside normal business working hours $100
o. Water Quality Sampling. As requested by the property owner, an
administrative handling fee of $25 shall be charged for the sampling of
the water supply at a home or business. This fee shall be in addition to
the laboratory analytical costs to be reimbursed by the property owner
to the water utility.
p. Miscellaneous Service Call Fee. A minimum fee for miscellaneous
service calls not specifically identified elsewhere within this fee
schedule shall be:
Service call within normal business working
hours
$30
Service call outside normal business working
hours
$100
q. Special Cases. In special cases not specifically identified or clearly
defined elsewhere within this fee schedule, the Township Manager is
hereby authorized to establish special rates or rentals under such
schedules or formulas as the Township Council may deem necessary to
keep and maintain the Water Department on a self-liquidating basis.
r. Inoperable and Inaccessible Meters. In those cases where the
customer's meter is not operating properly so as to be able to determine
amount of water usage, there shall be charged each quarter at a rate
equivalent to the usage of 25,000 gallons, plus a minimum quarterly
service charge as set forth in Subsection a. In those cases where the
customer does not provide access to the Township to read or repair the
water meter, there shall be charges each quarter at a rate equivalent to
the usage of 75,000 gallons, plus a minimum quarterly service charge
as set forth in Subsection a. The 75,000 gallon rate will apply until the
meter can be required, replaced or, if deemed necessary, water service
is discontinued.
s. Connection Fee. A connection fee shall be paid by each property
connecting to the municipal water system in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:31-11 and this subsection.
1. The procedure for the determination of connection fees shall be as
follows:
(a) The amount representing all debt service, including but not
limited to sinking funds, reserve funds, the principal and
§ A-19.2 SPARTA CODE § A-19.2
A:22
interest on bonds, and the amount of any loans and the interest
thereon, paid by the Township to defray the capital cost of
developing the system as of the end of the immediately
preceding budget year shall be added to all capital
expenditures made by the Township not funded by a bond
ordinance or debt for the development of the system as of the
end of the immediately preceding budget year.
(b) Any gifts, contributions or subsidies to the Township received
from, and not reimbursed or reimbursable to, any Federal,
State, County or municipal government or agency or any
private person, and that portion of amounts paid to the
Township by a public entity under a service agreement or
service contract which is not repaid to the public entity by the
Township shall then be subtracted.
(c) The remainder shall be divided by the total number of service
units served by the Township at the end of the immediately
preceding budget year, and the results shall then be
apportioned to each new connector according to the number of
service units attributed to that connector. In attributing service
units to each connector, the estimated average daily flow of
water for the connector shall be divided by the average daily
flow of water to the average single-family residence in the
Township water system, to produce the number of service units
to be attributed. Estimates of water usage for other than
residential units shall be based upon commonly used
engineering standards, as approved by the Township Engineer.
This fee shall be exclusive of the supply line installation fee.
The connection fee shall be recomputed at the end of each
budget year, after a public hearing is held. The revised
connection fee may be imposed upon those who subsequently
connect in that budget year to the system.
2. Subdivisions and Site Plans. Any property receiving either
subdivision or site plan approval for development that has frontage
along a right-of-way or easement containing an existing Water
Department distribution main shall connect to this main and shall
pay a connection fee for water supply and storage in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, unless stipulated otherwise by a
developer's agreement executed with the Township.
3. Affordable Housing Connection Fees. [Added 6-25-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-06]
(a) New connection. Public housing authorities, nonprofit
organizations building affordable housing projects, and any
other affordable housing including affordable housing units in
inclusionary projects, shall receive a 50% reduction in the
connection fees established in Subsection s1 for new
connections to the water system.
§ A-19.2 FEE SCHEDULE § A-19.2
A:23
§ A-20. FEES FOR CHAPTER 20, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
§ A-20.1. Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems. Fees and
Charges.
The fees and charges under this chapter shall be as follows:
(b) Previously connected to system(s). Units previously connected
to the Township's water system that were demolished or
refurbished in order to allow for new affordable housing units
and for which a water connection or tapping fee was previously
paid shall receive a credit in the amount of the connection fee
previously paid. However, the connection fee(s) shall be the
lesser of the 50% reduced rate provided for in Subsection s3a,
or the current nonreduced rate minus the credit for the
connection fee previously paid. The affordable housing
developer is responsible to provide evidence of the previously
paid connection fee; failure to provide such proof of payment
shall result in the developer paying the reduced rate provided
for in Subsection s3a.
t. Bulk Water Purchase. A 10% surcharge will be added to the current
water rate per 1,000 gallons of water consumption for bulk water
purchase with no hookup fee or a quarterly service charge. A truck
using the Germany Flats Filling Station shall pay a flat rate of $50 per
visit for a truckload of up to 8,000 gallons.
u. Water Distribution Plan Review. As a condition of the Township's Master
Permit, if in effect with the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP), for each permit to construct a water distribution
system, the permit application review fee payable to the Township shall
be the greater of the amounts calculated based on the number of
service connections or the water main length in accordance with the
following table:
Service Connection
Water Main Length
(feet) Fee Required
2 to 5 Less than or equal 100 feet $250
6 to 15 101 to 500 feet $1,500
16 to 49 501 feet to 1,500 feet $2,500
50 to 100 1,501 feet to 3,000 feet $3,000
101 to 250 3,001 feet to 7,500 feet $3,500
251 to 500 7,501 feet to 15,000 feet $4,000
More than 500 More than 15,000 feet $5,000
(§ 19-14)
§ A-19.2 SPARTA CODE § A-20.1
A:24
§ A-20.2. Sewer Rates.
The following schedule of charges for the use of sewer utility facilities shall
apply:
$18.50 per 1,000 gallons or $250 minimum charge per quarter, whichever
is higher. (Subsection 20-2.5; 20-4.2)
§ A-20.3. New Tap Fee; New Service Fee.
Where a tap is required into an existing sewer main, a tap-in application
fee of $100 shall be charged. The applicant shall also pay the service
a. Application:
1. For the filing of an application for each soil log/soil test required for
the construction, alteration or repair of an individual sewage
disposal system, to be witnessed and recorded by a representative
of the Health Department the fee shall be $40 per hole.
2. For the review of an application and plans to construct, alter or
repair an individual sewage disposal system the fee shall be $40.
3. For the review of an application and plans to construct, alter or
repair an individual sewage disposal system, after the initial
review, which is necessary because of applicant's failure to submit
an application and plans that conform to the required State Law
and Regulations and local ordinances the fee shall be $25.
b. Permits:
1. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct an individual
sewage disposal system the fee shall be $150.
2. For the issuance of a permit to alter an existing individual sewage
disposal system the fee shall be $100.
3. For the reissuance of a permit that has expired to construct, alter
or repair an individual sewage disposal system the fee shall be $40.
4. For the issuance of a permit to repair an existing individual sewage
disposal system the fee shall be $40.
c. Reinspection. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal
system, or part thereof, caused by the failure of the permittee to locate
and construct or alter the same in accordance with the terms of the
permit issued or the terms of the aforesaid State Code, the fee shall be
$50.
d. License. For the issuance of a license to operate subsurface sewage
disposal system in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:9-3.14, the fee shall be
$15.
(Subsection 20-1.8)
§ A-20.1 FEE SCHEDULE § A-20.3
A:25
connection construction cost fee of $1,800. Any additional costs incurred
by the Sparta Sewer Utility, above the fees listed, as a result of certain
subsurface or above grade conditions or constraints, shall be borne by
the applicant. The service connection construction cost fee shall be for
the service connection from and including the fitting at the main to and
including the cleanout, located in the vicinity of the property line or edge
of pavement, as determined by the Township Engineer. The applicant shall
have the option to install the service connection with their means at their
cost. (Subsection 20-2.8)
§ A-20.4. Connection Fees. [Ord. No. 15-04; Ord. No. 2016-06]
Connection Fee. All premises required to be connected to the Sparta
Township Municipal Sanitary Sewer System pursuant to Subsection 20-2.2
and Subsection 20-3.6, shall pay a wastewater treatment facility connection
fee as determined and set forth in accordance with Subsections a and b
below.
a. Procedure for Connection Fees.
1. The procedure for determination of connection fees shall be as
follows:
(a) The amount representing all debt service, including principal
and interest paid by the utility for capital improvements to the
Plaza Wastewater Treatment Facility and Collection System
shall be calculated as of the end of the immediately preceding
calendar year.
(b) An equivalent dwelling unit (EDU) shall be defined as a single
family residential dwelling unit. The wastewater flow
generated from a single family residential dwelling unit shall
be assigned a value of 1.00 EDU and the rate of flow in gallons
per day is as defined in Table I, below.
(c) The number of equivalent dwelling units (EDU), as of the end
of the immediately preceding calendar year, serviced by the
utility shall be calculated by dividing the average daily
wastewater flow, contributed by its users, by the rate of flow
assigned to 1.00 EDU.
(d) The connection fee for the subsequent calendar year shall be
calculated for a single EDU by dividing the debt service,
defined under "a" by the total number of EDU's, defined under
Subsection e1(c).
(e) The connection fee for a single family residential dwelling unit
shall be that for 1.00 EDU.
(f) For connectors, other than single family residential dwelling
units, the number of EDU's attributed to that connector shall
be calculated by dividing the estimated average daily flow of
§ A-20.3 SPARTA CODE § A-20.4
A:26
sewage for the connector by the average daily flow of sewage
from an average single family residential dwelling unit, as
defined in Subsection e1(b) and Table I.
(g) The estimated average daily flow of sewage for the connector
shall be based upon metered water usage for the prior two
years. If metered water usage is not available, sewage flow
shall be calculated based upon Table I. If the specific type of
use is not covered in Table I, the sewage flow shall be
estimated (based upon sound engineering criteria and
judgment) by the Township Engineer.
(h) The connection fee for connectors, other than single family
residential dwelling units, shall be calculated by multiplying
the unit price (cost per EDU), as defined under Subsection
e1(d) by the number of EDU's attributed to the connector, as
defined under Subsection e1(f).
2. Calculation of connection fees. Connection fees shall be calculated
according to the procedure established in Subsection 20-3.6
Subsection e1 above, pursuant to Table I, below.
TABLE I
(Subsection 20-3.6e)
SEWAGE GENERATION AND ASSIGNED EDU'S BY USE CALCULATION OF CONNECTION
FEES
Use
Unit
Measurement
Gallons Per
Day No. of EDU's
RESIDENTIAL
Single Family Private Dwelling Per dwelling 250 1.00
Multiple Dwellings (Condos, Townhouses, etc.)
1 bedroom per dwelling Per dwelling 140 0.60
2 bedrooms per dwelling Per dwelling 200 0.80
3 bedrooms per dwelling Per dwelling 250 1.00
Deed Restricted Adult Communities
1 bedroom per dwelling Per dwelling 110 0.44
2 bedrooms per dwelling Per dwelling 170 0.68
3 bedrooms per dwelling Per dwelling 225 0.90
TRANSIENT DWELLING UNIT
Hotels Per bedroom 75 0.30
Lodging Houses & Tourist Homes Per bedroom 60 0.24
Motel & Tourist Cabins Per bedroom 60 0.24
Boarding Houses (resident) Per bedroom 50 0.20
§ A-20.4 FEE SCHEDULE § A-20.4
A:27
TABLE I
(Subsection 20-3.6e)
SEWAGE GENERATION AND ASSIGNED EDU'S BY USE CALCULATION OF CONNECTION
FEES
Use
Unit
Measurement
Gallons Per
Day No. of EDU's
CAMPS
Trailer Camps (Private bath) Per site 200 0.80
Trailer Camps (Central bath, etc.) Per site 100 0.40
Luxury Camps (Private bath) Per person 50 0.20
Children's Camps (Central bath, etc.) Per person 50 0.20
Labor Camps Per person 40 0.16
Day Camps (No meals) Per person 15 0.06
RESTAURANTS
(Including washrooms)
Average Type Per seat 35 0.14
Bar & Cocktail Lounges Per seat 20 0.08
Fast Food Restaurant Per seat 15 0.06
24-Hour Service Restaurant Per seat 50 0.20
Curb Service/Drive-In Restaurant Per car space 50 0.20
CLUBHOUSES
Residential Type Per member 75 0.30
Nonresidential Per member 35 0.14
Golf Course (including related facilities) Per person 35 0.14
Racquet Club Per court/hour 80 0.32
Pool/Beach Bathhouse (w/shower) Per person 25 0.10
Pool/Beach Bathhouse (w/o shower) Per person 10 0.04
INSTITUTIONAL
Hospitals Each bed 175 0.70
Other Institutions Each bed 125 0.50
SCHOOLS
Elementary (No showers/cafeteria) Per person 10 0.04
W/cafeteria Per person 15 0.06
W/cafeteria & showers Per person 20 0.08
W/cafeteria, showers & laboratories Per person 25 0.10
§ A-20.4 SPARTA CODE § A-20.4
A:28
TABLE I
(Subsection 20-3.6e)
SEWAGE GENERATION AND ASSIGNED EDU'S BY USE CALCULATION OF CONNECTION
FEES
Use
Unit
Measurement
Gallons Per
Day No. of EDU's
Boarding Per person 75 0.30
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
Additive Per filling
position
125 0.50
Service Bays Per bay 50 0.20
Minimarket Per square foot 0.100 *
MISCELLANEOUS
Stores, Shopping Centers & Office Buildings
(Gross area)
Per square foot 0.100 *
Factories (Sanitary, per 8 hr. shift) Per person 25 0.10
Factories (Sanitary, per 8 hr. shift) w/showers Per person 40 0.16
Car Washing (without recycling) Standard 1,500 6.00
Car Washing (with recycling) Standard 750 3.00
Laundries Per washer 580 2.32
Bowling Alley Per alley 200 0.80
Picnic Parks (restrooms only) Per person 10 0.04
Picnic Parks (w/showers) Per person 15 0.06
Fairgrounds (Based on avg. attendance) Per person 5 0.02
Assembly Halls Per seat 3 0.01
Airports Per passenger 3 0.01
Churches Per seat 3 0.01
Theatre Per seat 3 0.01
Dinner Theatre Per seat 20 0.08
Catering/Banquet Hall Per person 20 0.08
Sports Stadium Per seat 3 0.01
Visitor Center Per visitor 5 0.02
*Note: 250 gallons per day = 1 EDU; the number of EDU's shall be determined by multiplying the area
of the building (in square feet), by 0.100 gpd/square feet, and dividing the resulting product by 250 gpd/
EDU.
(Subsection 20-3.6)
§ A-20.4 FEE SCHEDULE § A-20.4
A:29
Sewer Connection Permit and Sewer Main Extension Permit Fees.
3. All applications for a sewer connection to be made to the Sparta
Township Municipal Sanitary Sewer System shall be accompanied
by a permit fee of $100. (Subsection 20-3.7b1)
UTILITY CAPITAL CONNECTION FEES
The Sparta Township Sewer and Sewage Disposal Ordinance,
Chapter 20, Subsection 20-3.6d and e requires the payment of
connection fees for properties that connect to the Township's
sewer systems.
The Township Engineer and the Utility Superintendent have
reviewed the fees and recommended that the fees for the year
2016 be amended as provided for in this ordinance.
The Utility Capital Connection Fees as provided for in the
Township Code Subsection 20-3.6d and e and Appendix A-20.4 are
set for the year 2019 as follows: [Amended 5-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 19-01]
Cost Per EDU*
Town Center Sanitary Sewer Collection System
Sparta Local Connection Fee
$6,780
White Deer Plaza Treatment Municipal Utility
Connection Fee
$13,394
Sparta Township Water Utility Capital
Connection Fee
$8,436
* EDU = Equivalent Dwelling Unit = 250 gpd
(Subsection 20-3.6)
b. Affordable Housing Connection Fees. [Added 6-25-2019 by Ord. No.
19-06]
1. New connection. Public housing authorities, nonprofit
organizations building affordable housing projects, and any other
affordable housing, including affordable housing units in
inclusionary projects, shall receive a 50% reduction in the
connection fees established in § 20-3.6e1 for new connections to
the sewer system.
2. Previously connected to system(s). Units previously connected to
the Township's sewer system that were demolished or refurbished
in order to allow for new affordable housing units and for which a
sewer connection or tapping fee was previously paid shall receive a
credit in the amount of the connection fee previously paid.
However, the connection fee(s) shall be the lesser of the 50%
reduced rate provided for in § 20-3.6e3(a) or the current
nonreduced rate minus the credit for the connection fee previously
§ A-20.4 SPARTA CODE § A-20.4
A:30
§ A-20.5. Sewer Utility Rates; Fees; Charges.
paid. The affordable housing developer is responsible to provide
evidence of the previously paid connection fee; failure to provide
such proof of payment shall result in the developer paying the
reduced rate provided for in § 20-3.6e3(a).
a. The schedule of charges for the use of sewer utility facilities shall apply
as set forth below:
$18.50 per 1,000 gallons or a minimum of $250, whichever is higher
per quarter.
1. Sewer charges shall be based upon the consumption of water
measured by an approved water meter installed on the premises.
Where other water sources are connected to the sewer system, the
consumer shall install a separate, approved meter on the building
sewer at his own expense. Any consumer may, at his own expense,
install such a meter with the approval of the Township. Such
installations shall be made under the supervision of the
Department.
2. Sewer users connected to the system who are not water users may
be required by the Department to install suitable metering devices
or they may be billed pursuant to the provisions of Subsection
12-4.17a of this section.
b. Special regulation of charges.
1. Unspecified users. Any other users of the sanitary sewer system,
not coming within the above group, shall be charged in accordance
with arrangements upon application made to the Township Council
of the Township.
2. New connections. In the event of a new connection, the sewer
rental will be prorated on a monthly basis, with full month charge
for the month for which water service is turned on prior to the 15th
of the month connection is made.
3. Unused building. An unused building connection shall not be
connected with the sewer system until the sewer department has
inspected the same, and has found it to be clean and to conform
with the requirements of this section. If a building is to be unused
for more than 90 days, the owner must notify the sewer utility and
request a water turn-off by the water utility in writing in order to
eliminate the minimum quarter fee.
4. Billings and interest. Billings for sewer service shall be rendered in
accordance with the standard billing period employed by the
Department. Such bills will be mailed within a reasonable time
after each billing date. Bills remaining unpaid for more than 45
days after the billing date shall accrue interest, from the billing
§ A-20.4 FEE SCHEDULE § A-20.5
A:31
§ A-20.6. Sewer Capacity Reservation.
§ A-21. FEES FOR CHAPTER 21, STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
date, at the maximum rate permitted for nonpayment of real
property taxes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-67, i.e., 8% per annum of
the first $1,000 of delinquency and 12% per annum on any amount
in excess of $1,000 or at such greater rate of interest as may
hereinafter be permitted by future amendment to the foregoing
statute.
(Subsection 20-3.17)
a. Application Fees. Each property owner filing for a sewer allocation
permit shall pay the following permit fees:
1. Single family residential dwellings — $50.
2. Multifamily residential dwellings — $100.
3. All commercial properties — $100.
4. All nonprofit properties — $50.
5. All properties owned by Sparta Township or Sparta Township Board
of Education — exempt.
(Subsection 20-6.6)
b. Escrow Fees. For all properties requiring eight or more EDUs, the
applicant shall also submit an escrow fee of $500 per project with the
application to offset the Township's costs in evaluating and processing
the application. In the event that the entire escrow is not utilized by the
Township in processing the application, any unused escrow shall be
returned to the applicant within 90 days of the processing of the
application. In the event that additional funds are necessary to
complete the review of the application, the applicant will be required to
replenish the escrow account in an amount sufficient to cover said
costs. (Subsection 20-6.8)
c. Sewer Allocation Permit Fees. Upon approval and prior to the issuance
of a sewer allocation permit, the property owner shall pay to the
Township a nonrefundable allocation reservation fee of $260 per EDU
for any improved property or $515 per EDU for any unimproved
property. Fractional portions of EDUs shall be paid proportionately. No
sewer allocation permit shall be issued unless all application permit
fees and escrow fees have been paid in full and all real property taxes
for the property are current. The property owner shall pay the
allocation permit fee within 90 days of notification by the Township of
Sparta of the granting of the allocation or the allocation shall lapse.
(Subsection 20-6.12)
§ A-20.5 SPARTA CODE § A-21.1
A:32
§ A-21.1. Excavations. [1978 Code § 14-2.2c]
§ A-21.2. Winter Maintenance for Streets in Developments Prior to
Acceptance by Township.
a. Fees and Deposits. Applications for permits referred to herein shall be
accompanied by deposits of money sufficient to cover the fees for said
openings, which fees may be amended from time to time, and any
escrow which may be required to defray inspection costs. The Public
Works Department, upon receipt of a properly completed application,
shall determine the amount of the deposit to be made by the permittee
in accordance with the schedule of charges established by ordinance of
the Township Council. The deposit shall be paid at the time the permit is
received and the deposit shall be used to reimburse the Township for
the cost of all necessary inspections of said work, the cost of restoration
or for any other purpose set forth in this section. The Township may
elect to waive this requirement insofar as it pertains to a public utility
company if such company files with the Township its corporate bond in
a form satisfactory to the Township Attorney, conditioned upon the
payment to the Township of all costs which would otherwise be covered
by and paid out of such a deposit. In the event any public utility
company elects to file such a bond, the Township shall bill such
company monthly for such costs as they accrue. If any deposit is less
than sufficient to pay all costs, the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to
the Township an amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or
refuses to pay such deficiency, the Township may institute an action to
recover the same in any court of competent jurisdiction until such
deficiency is paid in full. No additional permits will be issued to such a
permittee.
Road Opening permit, square
yard
$25 - Refund upon final inspection
Inspection/Administrative Fee $100 - Non-refundable
(Subsection 21-1.4)
b. Driveways over Drainage Ditches; Permit Required; Fee. No person
shall create, construct or put in a driveway over or across a drainage
ditch serving any street without first applying to the Township in
writing for a permit. The application shall be signed by the owner of the
property on which the driveway is to be located, and shall have annexed
thereto a simple but legible plan or sketch showing where, how and in
what manner the driveway will be constructed over or across the
drainage ditch and what materials will be used in permanently
preserving drainage space and courses underneath the point where the
driveway will cross over the drainage ditch and connect up with the
right of way. A non-refundable permit fee of $1 shall accompany each
application. (Subsection 21-4.3)
§ A-21.1 FEE SCHEDULE § A-21.2
A:33
§ A-21.3. Miscellaneous Fees.
§ A-22. (RESERVED)
§ A-23. FEES FOR CHAPTER 23, QUARRYING.
§ A-23.1. Performance Bond.
The applicant shall submit a performance bond or guarantee in favor of
the Township of Sparta in an amount sufficient to assure reclamation of
the site of quarrying operations pursuant to the reclamation plan. The
amount of the performance bond or guarantee shall be based upon a
certified estimate prepared by an engineer licensed in the State of New
Jersey that reflects the maximum reclamation cost (including regrading,
revegetation and demolition of existing structures) that exist, or could exist,
as a result of operations on the licensed property during the license period.
The performance bond or guarantee shall be posted in accordance with the
following standards:
a. Upon the installation of street improvements by a developer and prior
to acceptance by the Township, and where properties adjacent to said
streets contain occupied dwellings, the developer shall be responsible
for the maintenance of said streets including but not limited to
maintaining the streets free of snow and ice. In the opinion of the
Director of Public Works if a developer has not kept any streets in his
control free and clear of ice and snow within a reasonable time after
any storm, then the Township shall be authorized to plow or treat said
streets for snow and ice and such plowing or treatment shall not be
considered an acceptance of the roadways. If the Township shall plow
or treat the snow and ice, the developer shall pay to the Township fees
which are hereby established at the rate of $0.25 per running foot of
street for the plowing and $0.25 per running foot of street for each
application of salt and/or sand which fee shall be paid by the developer
within 10 days of the submission of a statement to the developer. (§
21-7)
a. Driveway permit $25.
(Subsection 21-9)
a. The form of the performance bond or guarantee shall be subject to the
approval of the Township Council and, if a performance bond, shall be a
performance bond from a recognized surety company authorized to do
business in the State of New Jersey and approved by the Township
Council or a letter of credit, credit or cash, or such other guarantee as
approved by the Township Council;
b. The amount of the performance bond or guarantee shall be reviewed
and approved by the Township Council based upon information
submitted by the applicant and shall be 110% of the cost of reclamation;
§ A-21.2 SPARTA CODE § A-23.1
A:34
§ A-23.2. Application Fees.
The following fees and deposits shall be submitted with each original or
renewal license application:
§ A-23.3. Inspection Fees.
The applicant shall annually post a fee deposit of $4,000 with the Township
for reasonable costs associated with services by the Township for
conducting inspections. Draws made on the inspection account will be
conducted in the same manner as described in § 23-6, Application Fees,
above. (§ 23-7)
§ A-24. FEES FOR CHAPTER 24, CABLE TV.
§ A-24.1. Franchise Fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers to its cable television
reception service in the municipality or any amount permitted by the Cable
Television Act or otherwise allowable by law. (Subsection 24-1.10)
Chapter 18
COMPREHENSIVE LAND MANAGEMENT CODE
§ 18-1. PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
§ 18-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 636 A 101]
It is the purpose of the Township of Sparta in adopting this Comprehensive
Land Management Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. to promote
and protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare and the
furtherance of the following related and more specific objectives.
c. The performance bond or guarantee shall remain in full force and effect
during the entire period that quarrying operations are conducted and
until completion of reclamation after the termination of those
operations. The licensee shall post a maintenance bond in the amount
of 15% of the cost of reclamation to cover the period of two years after
the completion of reclamation.
(§ 23-5)
a. Initial application fee deposit: $5,000.
b. Renewal application fee deposit: $4,000.
(§ 23-6)
§ A-23.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-1.1
A:35
To encourage municipal action to guide the appropriate use or development
of all land in the Township in a manner which will promote public health,
safety, morals and general welfare;
To secure safety from flood, fire, panic or other natural or man-made
disasters;
To provide adequate light, air and open space;
To ensure that the development of individual neighborhoods does not
conflict with the development of the general welfare of the municipality or
of neighboring municipalities, the County of Sussex and the State of New
Jersey as a whole;
To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities in
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of persons,
neighborhoods, communities and regions and the preservation of the
environment;
To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by
the coordination of public development with land use policies;
To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and
open space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all New Jersey
citizens;
To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of such facilities
and routes which result in congestion or blight;
To promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural resources
and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through
improper use of land;
To encourage an appropriate housing mix according to the needs of the
municipality and region and in an appropriate scale and pace which will not
impinge upon the ability of the Township to properly service the needs of its
citizens;
To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures and
activities shaping land development with the view of lessening the cost of
development while maintaining the quality of development through more
efficient use of land;
To promote the conservation of energy through the use of planning
practices designed to reduce energy consumption and to provide for
maximum utilization of renewable energy sources.
§ 18-1.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-1.2
A:36
§ 18-1.2. Repealer. [Ord. No. 636 A 102]
The following portions of the Revised Ordinances of the Township of Sparta,
New Jersey, (1979) are hereby repealed: Chapter 18 Land Use Procedures,
Chapter 19 Comprehensive Land Management Code as amended.
§ 18-1.3. Severability. [Ord. No. 636 A 103]
If any section, subsection or paragraph of this chapter shall be declared to
be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative in whole or in part by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection or paragraph shall, to the
extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, remain in full
force and effect and no such determination shall be deemed to invalidate
the remaining sections, subsections or paragraphs of this chapter.
§ 18-2. DEFINITIONS.
§ 18-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 636 A 201; Ord. No. 649; Ord. No. 665;
Ord. No. 691 § I; Ord. No. 720 § I; Ord. No. 750 § 1; Ord. No. 772 § I;
Ord. No. 841 §§ I - III; Ord. No. 878 § 5; Ord. No. 883 § I; Ord. No.
1001 § 2; Ord. No. 1003 § 1; Ord. No. 02-20 § 1; Ord. No. 05-03 § 5;
Ord. No. 06-13 § 1; Ord. No. 07-26 § 1; Ord. No. 10-01; Ord. No.
11-05 § 1; Ord. No. 12-01 § 1; Ord. No. 13-04; Ord. No. 2016-21 § 1]
As used in this chapter, the following words and their derivations shall
have the meaning herein given. Any word or term not defined herein shall
be defined by the unabridged edition of the Random House Dictionary of
the English Language. Moreover, whenever a term is used in this chapter
which is defined to the contrary of these sections, it shall have the definition
as stated in the Municipal Land Use Law. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the
plural include the singular, words in the singular include the plural, words
in the masculine gender include the feminine. The word "shall" is mandatory
and not merely directory. The word "may" is permissive.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Shall mean separate or subordinate structure
to the main use on the lot.
ACCESSORY USE — Shall mean a use subordinate to and customarily
incidental to the principal use on the same lot.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Shall mean Township Planner or his
designee.
ADT — Shall mean average daily vehicular traffic movements.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING COUNCIL — Shall mean the New Jersey Council
on Affordable Housing established under the Act and which has primary
jurisdiction for the administration of housing obligations in accordance with
sound regional planning considerations in this State.
AGRICULTURAL USE — See Farm.
§ 18-1.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:37
ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS — Shall mean any change in or addition
to the supporting members of a building such as walls, columns, beams,
girders, posts or piers.
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Shall mean any place of business displaying for
public patronage or keeping for operation in excess of two mechanical or
electric amusement devices and one jukebox.
ANTENNA — Shall mean any exterior transmitting or receiving device
mounted on a tower, building or structure, and use the communications that
radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analogue signals,
radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communication signals.
APPLICANT — Shall mean the land owner, optionee or contract purchaser,
submitting an application for development. See Developer.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the application form,
fees and all accompanying documents required for approval of a subdivision
plat, site plan, conditional use variance or direction for the issuance of a
building permit as required by this chapter. See Complete application.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Shall mean any municipal agency acting
pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
ARABLE SOIL — Shall mean soil that, when dry, contains not less than 4%
by weight of organic material and the balance of which is mineral matter.
AVERAGE GRADE ELEVATION — Shall mean the average of the elevations
of the lowest points taken within six feet of the four corners and the four
mid-points of the smallest rectangle that encompasses the entire building
footprint.
BASEMENT — Shall mean that portion of a building mostly underground
having more than 1/2 of its clear height below the finished average grade
elevation of the adjoining ground and having at least one means of egress
to the exterior of the building.
Note: A basement shall be considered 1/2 story. A cellar shall be considered
1/2 story if on average, a maximum of four feet of its height is above finished
grade elevation.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN — Shall mean an inn for temporary overnight
guests providing breakfast service only and meeting the standards of the
New Jersey Bed and Breakfast Association.
BEDROOM — Shall mean a room planned and used primarily for sleeping.
BLOCK — Shall mean the aggregate of private lots, passages, rear alleys
and rear lanes, circumscribed by thoroughfares.
BOARDER — Shall mean a person who is not related to the principal
resident and who may or may not pay for the privilege of boarding.
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-2.1
A:38
BOND — Shall mean the pledge of cash or a letter of credit or an insurance
agreement, underwritten by a reputable insurance company, which is
approved as to form by the Township Attorney and as to sufficiency by the
Township Council, to provide financial surety against the act of default of
an applicant in failing to comply with standards of this Code and/or the
conditions of his approved plan.
BUFFER — Shall mean a strip of land containing natural woodlands to
which other planted screening materials, earth mounds or other natural
divisions may be incorporated in separating one kind of land use from
another.
BUILDING — Shall mean any combination of material forming any structure
which is erected on the ground and is permanently affixed thereto,
designed, intended or arranged for housing shelter, enclosure or enclosing
of persons, animals or property of any kind and having a roof.
BUILDING COVERAGE — Shall mean the ratio of the horizontal area,
measured from the exterior surface of the exterior walls including
cantilever portions of the structure of the principal structure on a lot to the
total area.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — Shall mean the portion of lot remaining after
required yards are provided.
BUILDING LINE OR BUILDING SETBACK LINE — Shall mean a line
established by the Zoning Ordinance, within a lot defining the minimum
distance between any structure or portion thereof to be erected or altered,
and an adjacent right-of-way, easement, street line, property line, or
common open space.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Shall mean those areas within
boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — Shall mean the geographic depiction of the
boundaries for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and
CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CELLAR — Shall mean any portion of a building completely underground or
partially underground, which does not meet the definition of basement and
has on average a maximum of four feet of its height above finished grade
elevation.
CIRCULATION — Shall mean systems, structures and physical
improvements for the movement of people, goods, water, air, sewerage or
power by means of streets, highways, towers, waterways, railways, airways,
pipes, and conduits in the handling of people and goods by such means as
terminals, stations, warehouses, other storage buildings or transshipment
points.
CLEAR CUTTING — Shall mean the removal of all standing trees on a lot or
portion of a lot.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — Shall mean the triangle formed by the point
of intersection of the right-of-way lines of two intersecting streets and the
§ 18-2.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:39
points on each of the intersection right-of-way lines at a given distance from
the point of intersection which shall remain open and unobstructed.
CLUSTER — Shall mean areas to be developed as single-family units
according to plan containing residential housing which has a common or
public open space as an appurtenance.
CO-LOCATION — Shall mean the use of a common wireless
telecommunications tower or a common structure, by two or more wireless
license holders or unlicensed holders nevertheless regulated by the Federal
Communications Commission or by one wireless license holder for more
than one type of communications technology and/or the placement of a
wireless telecommunication tower on a structure owned or operated by
utility or other public entity.
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean one of the following types of
commercial development:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES — Shall mean trucks, buses and sedan delivery
vehicles, station wagons with advertising matter on the side or any other
commercially registered vehicle except a passenger car with no advertising
matter exposed to view, excluding vehicles with a chassis load of 3/4 tons or
less.
COMMON OWNERSHIP — Shall mean ownership of two or more
contiguous parcels of real property by one person or by two or more
beneficial owners.
COMMON PROPERTY/OPEN SPACE — Shall mean a parcel or parcels of
land, or an area of water, or a combination of land and water, within a site
designed and intended for use or enjoyment of residents and owners of
the development. Common property may contain such accessory structures
and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit of the
residents and owners of the development. The common property shall be
managed in accordance with the provisions of a homeowners' association,
condominium association, and/or restrictive deeds and covenants.
COMMUNITY FACILITIES — Shall mean buildings, structures, recreational
devices, service systems and other facilities generally available to and/or
operated for the benefit of residents including but not limited to swimming
pools, tennis courts, building entries and passageways, roads, drainage
systems, pedestrian and bicycle pathways, sewage treatment plants and
other facilities (municipal buildings, schools).
COMPACTION — Shall mean the increase in soil bulk density.
NEIGHBORHOOD — Retail shopping outlets designed and intended
to serve the day-to-day convenience needs of the residents of the
immediate neighborhood.
a.
COMMUNITY — Retail shopping outlets designed and intended to serve
the shopping needs of the entire Township as well as additional regional
demand beyond Township boundaries.
b.
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-2.1
A:40
COMPLETE APPLICATION — Shall mean an application form completed
as specified by the Code and the rules and regulations of the Township of
Sparta and all accompanying documents and fees as required by the Code
for approval of an application for development including where applicable,
but not limited to, a site plan or subdivision plat provided that the
administrative officer may require such additional information not specified
in this Code or any revisions in the accompanying document as are
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for approval of the application for development
have been met. The application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of
such additional information or any revisions in the accompanying document
though required by the administrative officer or the municipal agency. In
addition, the municipal agency may waive any of the requirements required
by this Code as are appropriate due to the peculiar special circumstances of
any property and/or application. When the application has been deemed to
satisfy sufficient requirements of this Code, the administrative officer shall
immediately certify the completeness of the application and the application
shall be deemed complete on the date certified for the purposes of
commencement of the time period for action by the municipal agency.
CONDITIONAL USE — Shall mean a use as may be permitted in a particular
zone district only upon a showing that such use in a specified location
will comply with the conditions and standards for the location or operation
of such use as contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — Shall mean the form of ownership of real property
under a master deed providing for ownership by one or more owners
of units of improvements together with an undivided interest in common
elements appurtenant to each such unit and meeting the requirements of
the N.J. Condominium Act.
CONDOMINIUM PROPERTY — Shall mean the land covered by the master
deed whether or not contiguous and all improvements thereon, all owned
either in fee simple or under lease, and all easements, rights and
appurtenances belonging thereto or intended for the benefit thereof.
CORE — Shall mean a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic
uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
CORE FOREST — Shall mean the area of forest patch that is greater than
300 feet from a forest edge.
CORNER LOT — Shall mean a lot at the junction of, and having frontage on,
two or more intersecting streets.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Shall mean an agency designated by the
County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The County review
agency may either be:
A County planning agency; or
§ 18-2.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:41
A County water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5,
if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and
implementing ordinances.
COVERAGE RATIO — Shall mean the portion of a site, expressed as a
percentage, covered by impervious materials.
DAY — Shall mean calendar day.
DECK — Shall mean an uncovered, elevated accessory structure attached
to the principal structure with three open sides (excluding safety railing).
DENSITY — Shall mean the permitted number of dwelling units per gross
area to be developed.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — Shall mean a person professionally qualified and
duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and preparation
of drawings and specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — Shall mean a State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Center as designated by the State Planning
Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot
or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any
person for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands,
development means: any activity that requires a State permit; any activity
reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DIAMETER AT POINT OF MEASUREMENT — Shall mean the diameter of
a tree measured 4 1/2 feet (forestry method) above the ground level on the
downhill side of existing trees. Trees utilized in the replacement of existing
trees or proposed in a landscape plan shall be measured 12 inches above
the ground level for trees over four inch in caliper; the measurement shall
be six inches above nursery grade for trees up to four inch caliper (nursery
method).
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-2.1
A:42
DIVISION — Shall mean the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DRAINAGE — Shall mean the removal of surface water or ground water
from land or drains graded or by other means and including control of
runoff during and after construction or development, to minimize erosion
and sedimentation, to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed
culverts and bridges, to include water recharge into the ground where
practical, to lessen nonpoint pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream
channels for their biological functions.
DRAINAGE AREA — Shall mean a geographic area within which
stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving waterbody or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY OR EASEMENT — Shall mean the lands
required for the installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or
required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel
and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against
flood damage, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 58:1-1 to 58:1-34.
DRIP LINE OR TREE CANOPY — Shall mean a limiting line established by
a series of perpendicular drop points marking the maximum radius of the
crown of an existing tree, but not less than six feet from the trunk.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — Shall mean any place or premises used for
sale, dispensing or serving of food, refreshment or beverage to customers
in automobiles or other motorized vehicles, including those establishments
where customers may serve the food, refreshments or beverages on the
premises.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean one or more rooms, designed, occupied or
intended for occupancy as separate living quarters with cooking, sleeping
and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use
of a single family maintaining a household.
EASEMENT — Shall mean a right which one person has to use the lands
of another (owner) for a specific purpose not inconsistent with the general
property rights of the owner.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — Shall mean a neighborhood
designated by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and
conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENTRY LEVEL HOUSING — Shall mean least cost housing units of any
type usually with one bedroom designed for occupancy by young married
couples, singles and divorced citizens often designed with the possibility for
expansion of living area to include more than one bedroom.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — Shall mean an area or feature
which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to:
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge
§ 18-2.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:43
areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using
the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EQUESTRIAN CENTER — Shall mean a facility dedicated to boarding,
training of horses, and the holding of equestrian events, including show
rings (indoor or outdoor), stables, practice facilities, barns, polo grounds
and similar infrastructure dedicated to horses.
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Shall mean the erection, construction, alteration
or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam or
water transmission systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, control boxes, transformers,
junction boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, light stations, telephone
lines, hydrants or other similar equipment and accessories therewith
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utility
or governmental agency for the public safety, health and general welfare.
"Essential service" shall include firehouses and fire stations and first aid
and emergency aid squads. Underground utilities shall be subject to
requirements of the Public Utilities Commission as well as other municipal
ordinances where appropriate.
FAMILY — Shall mean any number of persons maintaining a single
household. A "family" may include foster children placed in such households
by the State Division of Youth and Family Services or a duly incorporated
child care agency but shall not include roomers or members of a fraternity
or sorority.
FARM — Shall mean an area of land which is actively devoted to agricultural
or horticultural use which occupies no less than five acres, exclusive of the
land upon which the farmhouse is located and such additional land may
actually be used in connection with the firehouse as provided in N.J.S.A.
54:4-23, 4-23.4, 4-23.11.
FARMING — See General Regulations.
FINAL APPROVAL — Shall mean the official action of the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment taken on a development plan which has been
given preliminary approval, and after all conditions, engineering plans,
and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled, and the required
improvements have been installed, or guarantees properly posted for their
completion, or approval, conditioned upon the position of such guarantees.
FINAL PLAT — Shall mean the final map of all or a portion of the subdivision
which is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance
with these regulations and which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper
County Recording Officer.
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-2.1
A:44
FLOOD PLAIN — Shall mean the relatively flat area joining the water
channel which has been or may be covered by flood water of the channel
including the following components:
FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the area of all floors computed by using the
dimensions of the outside walls of each floor of a building. In computing
the second floor area, only those areas having a five-foot or more clear
headroom with completed floor/ceiling partitions and a minimum ceiling
height of seven feet six inches may be considered.
FRONTAGE — Shall mean the area between a building facade and the
vehicular lanes, inclusive of its built and planted components. Frontage is
divided into private frontage and public frontage.
GARAGE (PRIVATE) — Shall mean a detached accessory building or portion
of a main building for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles of
occupants of the main building and wherein not more than one space is
rented to persons not resident of the lot or not more than one commercial
vehicle with a rated capacity to exceed 3/4 ton.
GARAGE (PUBLIC) — Shall mean any building, premises or land in which
or upon which a business, service or industry involving the retail sales or
rental of new or used motor vehicles, prepackaged motor fuel or motor
vehicle parts is conducted or rendered other than service stations,
automotive, as defined in this section.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Mayor and Council of the Township
of Sparta.
GRADE — Shall mean:
GROSS AGGREGATE HOUSEHOLD INCOME — Shall mean the total gross
household income from all sources of all members of the household in
determining the amounts of income to be excluded. The Township shall
consider the number of minor children in the household and such other
factors as are given similar consideration under Federal and State
subsidized housing guidelines.
FLOODWAY — The river or other watercourse on the adjacent area
that must be reserved in order to discharge the design flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
a.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Land in the flood plain consisting of the
floodway and flood fringe area.
b.
FLOOD FRINGE AREA — Portion of flood hazard area outside the
floodway.
c.
The average finished ground elevation adjoining a building at a project
completion.
a.
The slope of a road, path, swale or other surfaces expressed as a
percentage.
b.
§ 18-2.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:45
HALF-STORY — Shall mean a space under a sloping roof which has an
internal stairway as a means of access and egress and in which the ceiling
area at a height of five feet above the 1/2 story floor joists is less than 50%
of the entire floor directly below.
Note: A basement shall be considered 1/2 story. A cellar shall be considered
1/2 story if on average, a maximum of four feet of its height is above finished
grade elevation.
HEIGHT — Shall mean the vertical distance from the finished average grade
elevation to the top of a structure or the highest point of the roof surface of
a building.
HISTORIC SITE — Shall mean any building, structure, area or property that
is significant in history, architecture or archaeology or culture of the State,
its communities, or the nation, and has been so designated by the State or
National Register of Historic Places.
HOME OCCUPATION — Shall mean any activity carried out for gain by
a resident such as a physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer, bookkeeper,
accountant, auditor, business and computer consultant, architect, engineer,
seamstress, artist, tutor, broker or member of a design profession,
incidental to and carried out by the person residing on the premises.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — Shall mean a duly incorporated
organization of property owners with mandatory membership by each
purchaser of property usually for the maintenance and/or operation of
common facilities or services.
HOTEL/INN — Shall mean a facility offering transient lodging
accommodations to the general public and providing additional services,
such as restaurants, meeting rooms, health club and spas and catering
facilities with access to guest rooms via hallways from a main lobby.
IMPERVIOUS LOT COVERAGE — Shall mean that portion of one lot or more
than one lot which is improved or is proposed to be improved with principal
and accessory buildings and structures including driveways, parking lots,
pedestrian walkways, signs, and other man-made improvements on the
ground surface, which are more impervious than the natural surface.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean a surface that has been covered with
a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INDIRECT LIGHTING — Shall mean the use of fluorescent (and other vapor
light) or incandescent lighting set apart from, but directed towards the
surface of the sign.
INFILTRATION — Shall mean the process by which water seeps into the soil
from precipitation.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — Shall mean a use by a public or nonprofit quasipublic or private institution for educational, religious, charitable, medical,
or civic purposes. Nonprofit institutional uses are those limited to churches,
nonprofit chartered membership organizations, public schools covering
grades kindergarten through grade 12, hospitals for humans, and libraries.
Profit-making institutional uses are those limited to sanatoriums, nursing
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-2.1
A:46
homes, convalescent homes and rest homes, or private schools and trade
schools.
INTERESTED PARTY — Shall mean any person whether residing within or
without the Township whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property is or
may be affected by any action taken under this Code, or whose right to use,
acquire or enjoy property under this Code or under any other law of the
State of New Jersey or of the United States has been denied, violated or
infringed by an action or failure to act under this Code.
INTERIOR LIGHTING — Shall mean the use of fluorescent (and other vapor
light) or incandescent lighting to illuminate a sign from behind the lettering
or from inside the sign structure.
INTERSECTION — Shall mean a point where two or more streets meet and/
or cross.
KENNEL — Shall mean a business devoted to the boarding, care or
breeding of dogs, cats or other small animals normally and usually kept as
household pets.
LAKE OR POND — Shall mean a standing body of open water whether
created naturally or by artificial impoundment.
LAND (CLASSIFIED) — For the purpose of this chapter, land shall be
classified as either severely restricted, moderately restricted or least
restricted as contained in § 18-5 of this Code.
LOADING SPACE — Shall mean an off-street space on the same lot with
the building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of commercial
vehicles while loading and unloading, having a vertical clearance of at least
15 feet.
LOT — Shall mean a parcel of land, exclusive of any adjoining street,
established by a separate description in a recorded deed, a subdivision or
other recorded map, or otherwise as permitted by law, for the purpose of
sale, lease, mortgage or separate use which is occupied or capable of being
occupied, in accordance with the requirements of this Code by a building
or buildings and the necessary uses, including such open spaces as are
required by this Code; except that, for the purposes of this Code, contiguous
undersized parcels, in single ownership, shall be considered as one lot.
LOT AREA — Shall mean the area contained within the lot lines of a lot,
excluding any portion of the street right-of-way.
LOT COVERAGE — Shall mean that portion of a lot covered by impervious
material (i.e., paving, building and sidewalks, etc.).
LOT DEPTH — Shall mean the shortest horizontal distance between the
midpoint of the front line through the midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE (WIDTH AT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE) — Shall mean the
horizontal distance between side lot lines measured along the street line.
LOT WIDTH — Shall mean the distance between side lines of a lot measured
parallel to the street right-of-way at the building setback line.
§ 18-2.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:47
LOW AND MODERATE INCOME HOUSING — Shall mean dwelling units
developed pursuant to the Township Zoning Ordinance and made available
to low and moderate income households.
LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a household whose aggregate
gross annual income at the time of purchase or rental does not exceed 50%
of the median income established and adjusted from time to time for the
geographic area in which the Township is located by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Shall mean any security other than cash
which may be accepted by the Township for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this Code.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any "development" that provides
for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean any subdivision not classified as a
minor subdivision.
MINOR SITE PLAN — Shall mean a development plan of a single lot which
does not involve any new street or extension of any off tract improvements
and is within the scope of development specifically permitted by this
chapter as a minor site plan as follows:
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean the division of a tract of land meeting
one or more of the following conditions:
A change in use involving no building construction other than interior
modification or interior structural alteration and no additional off street
parking;
a.
Minor exterior structural changes such as entry enclosures, porticos
and other structural appurtenances including roof appurtenances; or
b.
Alterations to the existing facade of existing buildings not involving
expansions of the square footage of the existing buildings.
c.
The elimination of a property line or property lines for the purpose of
enlarging an existing parcel of land or combining contiguous lots or
parcels of land.
a.
The division of a parcel of land for the purpose of enlarging an adjoining
parcel wherein the remaining parcel is not in conflict with the Zoning
Ordinance nor is its future use or development adversely affected.
b.
The division of a tract of land into not more than three separate lots or
parcels, including any remaining area, wherein all such lots or parcels
meet all of the following requirements:
Said lots are not in conflict with the Zoning Ordinance, Master Plan
or Official Map.
1.
c.
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-2.1
A:48
MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a household whose
aggregate gross annual income at the time of purchase or rental is between
50% and 80% of the median income established and adjusted from time to
time for the geographic area in which the Township is located by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
MOTEL — Shall mean a facility offering transient lodging accommodations
to the general public with the majority of all rooms having direct access to
the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the
building.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — Shall mean the approving agency designated in
this Code to take action on an application pursuant to its jurisdiction as set
forth in the Municipal Land Use Law such as, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NATURAL FEATURES — Shall mean the earth itself, the water upon or
under the surface of the earth, the air above the earth, and plants, animals,
fish, birds, insects and other living creatures growing upon or inhabiting the
earth, the water or the air.
NODE — Shall mean an area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NONCONFORMING LOT — Shall mean a lot of record existing at the date
of the passage of this chapter which does not conform to the regulations of
this Code for the zone in which it is located.
All lots front on an existing street as defined in this chapter which
is improved sufficiently to meet all requirements and standards
of Sparta Township so that a building permit could be issued to
construct a building on each lot.
2.
3. No new streets or roads are involved.
The resulting lots are suitable for their intended purpose without
the necessity of making unusual changes in grades of the lots.
4.
The creation of said lots will not produce a drainage problem or
result in the necessity for drainage improvements.
5.
The creation of said lots will not adversely affect the uniform and
comprehensive development of any remaining parcel or adjoining
land in terms of:
Suitable future road access and desirable future road and lot
patterns.
(a)
Future water and sanitary sewer utility installations and storm
drainage improvements.
(b)
6.
§ 18-2.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:49
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE (BUILDING) — Shall mean a building
or structure, the size or location upon the lot does not conform with the
regulations of this Code for the zone in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — Shall mean a use of any building, structure, or
land which existed prior to the passage of this Code and which use does not
conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
NUTRIENT — Shall mean a chemical element or compound, such as
nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development of organisms.
OFF-SITE — Shall mean located outside the lot lines of the lot in question
but within the property (of which the property is a part) which is the subject
of the development application or on a contiguous portion of a street rightof-way.
OFF-TRACT — Shall mean not located on the property which is the subject
of a development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-way.
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean an improvement which is not
located on the property which is the subject of an application for
development nor on a contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way and
includes any of the following:
OFFICIAL MAP — Shall mean a map adopted in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
ON-SITE — Shall mean located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Shall mean located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
ON-TRACT IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any improvement, the
installation of which may be required as part of an application for
development and which is to be located on the property which is the subject
of an application for development or on a contiguous street or right-of-way.
All improvements, whether new, extensions or modifications, of the
types required for on-tract installation where the need for the providing
of such improvements, off-tract, is in whole or in part made necessary
by the application of the applicant and where the making of such
improvements will confer a benefit on the applicant's lands, which are
the subject of the application.
a.
Any improvement or facility, the installation of which is required in the
public interest, and the public need for which would not have arisen
but for the applicant's application and the installation of which will
confer a benefit upon the applicant's lands, which are the subject of the
application. Improvements required to maintain a safe flow of vehicular
and pedestrian traffic are specifically declared to be necessary in the
public interest.
b.
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-2.1
A:50
OPEN SPACE — Shall mean any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designed or reserved for public or
private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that
such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets
and off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be
incidental to the natural openness of the land.
PARKING AREA — Shall mean an open area, other than a street or other
public way, used for the parking of motor vehicles and available for use as
a service or privilege to guests, licensees, clients, customers, suppliers or
residents. It shall include driveways and access drives located within the lot
area.
PARKING SPACE — Shall mean an accommodation for the off-street parking
of one motor vehicle, which space shall have an area required by this Code.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — Shall mean for purposes of notice,
any applicant for development, the owners of the subject property, and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice by law.
PATH — Shall mean a cleared way for pedestrians and/or bicycles to travel
which may or may not be paved.
PATH (BRIDLE) — Shall mean a cleared way for horses to travel which is
not paved.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Shall mean any security which may be
accepted and approved by the Township Attorney, including cash, provided
that no more than 10% of the total performance guarantee can be required
to be secured by cash.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, Township of Sparta, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
PHT — Shall mean the numbers of peak hour vehicular traffic movements
for land uses of various types.
POLLUTANT — Shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the
State, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both
hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
POOL — Shall mean any private pool whether permanently constructed or
of the portable type having a depth of more than 18 inches, or having a
depth of more than 25 inches when partly or wholly above ground, or having
a surface area exceeding 100 square feet, designed, used and maintained
§ 18-2.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:51
for swimming or bathing purposes by an individual for use of members of
his or her household and guests, and located on the applicant's land or land
under the applicant's control, and shall include all buildings, structures,
equipment and appurtenances thereto.
POOL (WADING) — Shall mean and include any shallow pool whether
permanently constructed or of the portable type which is less than 18
inches below the level of the surrounding land, less than 24 inches deep
when partly or wholly above ground and less than 100 square feet in water
surface area.
POOL CABANA — Shall mean an accessory structure located in conjunction
with an inground pool and is limited to a changing room and storage.
POOL HOUSE — Shall mean an accessory structure located in conjunction
with an inground pool and may include a kitchen, bathroom, shower and
changing room, but shall not include a bedroom or be used as sleeping
quarters.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Shall mean the official action taken by the
Planning Board on a preliminary plat or preliminary planned development
application which determines whether or not the map submitted is in proper
form and meets the established standards adopted for design layout and
development of the subdivision. Such preliminary approval confers upon
a subdivider all rights provided for by virtue of the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Shall mean
architectural drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of
the design of a project illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale,
relationship to its site and immediate environs.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure arranged, adopted, or
designed for the predominant or primary use for which a lot may be used.
PRINCIPAL USE — Shall mean the primary or predominant use of the
premises.
PROFESSIONAL USE — Shall mean a use related to professional services
and/or administrative and executive purposes including but not limited to
architecture, medicine, dentistry, engineering, law, accounting, insurance
and real estate.
PUBLIC AREAS — Shall mean:
PUBLIC BUILDING — Shall mean a building which is owned and used by a
governmental agency.
a. Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas;
b. Other public open spaces;
c. Scenic and historic sites;
d. Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-2.1
A:52
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — Shall mean a master plan, capital
improvement program or other proposal for land development adopted by
the appropriate public body, or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — Shall mean the land reserved or dedicated for
the installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or required
along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well
as drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion and
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area conveyed or
otherwise dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education,
State or County agency, or other public body for recreational or
conservational uses.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION CENTER — Shall mean a facility whose
primary purpose is for the transfer of people between modes of
transportation.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Shall mean public utility installations such as power
generating stations, electric substations, power distribution, transmission
lines, radio and television signal towers, telephone exchanges and similar
facilities. This definition shall not apply to telephone poles, gas, water, and
television distribution lines intended to provided direct service to properties
when the same are approved by the appropriate Township agency.
QUALIFYING MAP — Shall be approved by the Planning Board for all
cluster subdivisions. The map shall depict a subdivision designed to meet
the standard yard requirements of the zone. The total number of cluster
subdivision lots may not exceed the number of standard lots which would
have been otherwise permitted.
QUORUM — Shall mean the majority of the full authorized membership of
a municipal agency.
RECHARGE — Shall mean the amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REPLACEMENT TREE — Shall mean a nursery-grown certified tree,
properly balled and burlapped, marked with a durable label indicating
genus, species and variety and satisfying the standards established for
nursery stock and installation as set forth by American Association of
Nurserymen.
RESIDENTIAL APPEARANCE — Shall mean a building or structure having
the appearance, size and bulk of a single family dwelling in keeping with the
goal of the 1993 Interchange Master Plan, generally similar to single family
residence Classes 18 through 20 inclusive, as depicted in the "Real Property
Appraisal Manual for New Jersey Assessors" Third Edition, issued by the
Local Property and Public Utility Branch, Division of Taxation, Department
of the Treasury, State of New Jersey and as shown in Appendix "A" of the
1993 Amendment to the Interchange Master Plan.
§ 18-2.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:53
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — Shall mean an area to be developed as a single
entity according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean an establishment where food and drink are
prepared, served and consumed primarily within the principal building.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD — Shall mean a building in which food and drink
is served to patrons from counters for consumption either inside or outside
the building and may include facilities for serving food and drink to patrons
in automobiles.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean the strip of land on which a road, path or
public utility is located, owned by, or dedicated to the public or subject to
an easement in a public agency.
RIVER, STREAM OR WATERWAY — Shall mean a body of running water
flowing on the earth whether seasonal or permanent.
ROOF LINE — Shall mean the highest continuous horizontal line of a roof.
On a sloping roof, the roof line is the principal ridge line or the highest
line common to one or more principal slopes of the roof. On a flat roof, the
roof line is the highest continuous line of the roof or parapet, whichever is
higher.
ROOMER — Shall mean one who rents a room and either takes in foods or
takes meals by prearrangement.
SATELLITE RECEIVING DISH ANTENNA — Shall mean any structure or
part thereof used to receive satellite transmissions. If said structure and
mounting device is greater than three feet, it shall be considered an
accessory structure and shall conform to the yard requirements of the zone.
SEDIMENT — Shall mean solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — Shall mean the deposit of soil that has been
transported from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other
natural means as a product of erosion.
SELECTIVE CUTTING — Shall mean the removal of larger trees on an
individual basis while leaving trees of lesser size.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — Shall mean a building or group of buildings
containing individual dwelling units designed for occupancy and the
particular use of senior citizens; where residents are provided with physical
support services, designed to meet the daily physical needs of the elderly.
SERVICE STATION AUTOMOTIVE — Shall mean a retail place of business
engaged primarily in the sale of motor fuels but also in supplying goods and
services generally required in the operation and maintenance of automotive
vehicles and the fulfilling of motorist needs.
SETBACKS — Shall mean the required yard or distance between buildings
and property lines.
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-2.1
A:54
SHOP, RETAIL — Shall mean a building or part thereof in which or from
which a service is rendered directly to the ultimate customer.
SIGHT DISTANCE — Shall mean the distance of clear sight from a given
point in particular directions such as the sight distance that may be
required in the alignment of streets and roads and the location of driveways.
SIGN — Shall mean and include every device, frame, letter, figure,
character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, stroke, stripe, trademark,
model, emblem, object, logo or reading matter, which is used or intended to
be used to attract attention or convey information when placed outdoors in
view of the general public; in addition, any of the above shall be considered
a sign within the meaning of this chapter, when placed near the inside
surface of a window in such a way as to be used to convey information to
the public.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — Shall mean a sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service or other facility or entertainment sold or
offered elsewhere than on the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, AREA — Shall mean the entire space within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign.
SIGN, BUSINESS — Shall mean a sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity or profession conducted or offered upon the property where the
sign is displayed.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — Shall mean an off-premises sign, the purpose of
which is to indicate the direction to a permitted use. On-premises signs
directing and controlling traffic shall also be considered directional signs.
SIGN, FACADE AREA — Shall mean the area of a building wall fronting on
a street including windows and doors.
SIGN, FLASHING — Shall mean a sign in which the artificial light is not
maintained constant in intensity, color or frequency at all times when such
sign is in use.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Shall mean any sign supported by uprights or
braces upon or in the ground, and not attached to any building.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — See Sign, advertising.
SIGN, POLITICAL — Shall mean a temporary sign presenting information
expressing support for or opposition to a candidate or candidates for public
office, a political party, or ballot measure, presenting an issue to be voted
upon, or pertaining to an upcoming election.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — Shall mean a temporary freestanding sign used to
advertise the sale or rental of the premises upon which it is placed.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Shall mean any sign that is displayed or erected for
a maximum of 47 days, not requiring a permit, including political signs.
SIGN, VERTICAL HEIGHT — Shall mean and include the largest vertical
height of the background upon which the lettering, illustration or display is
presented. This shall not include the supporting members of any sign which
§ 18-2.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:55
are used solely for such support. If the letters, illustration, or display are
attached directly to the face of the building, the height of the sign shall be
the height of the largest letter, illustration or total display, whichever is the
greater.
SIGNS, DIRECTORY — Shall mean a sign located within the interior of a site
having multiple buildings or offices, the sign of which is approved by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment to provide for identification
and location of individual tenants, and is deemed appropriate for the public
safety and better vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
SILVICULTURE — Shall mean the management of any wooded tract or lot
of land to insure its continued survival and welfare, whether for commercial
or noncommercial purposes, pursuant to a plan approved by the New Jersey
Department of Forestry.
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE — See Dwelling unit.
SINGLE OWNERSHIP — Shall mean ownership by one person or ownership
by two or more persons as joint tenants, as tenants by the entirety, or as
tenants in common, of a separate lot not adjacent to land in which any
of the above-mentioned persons have any beneficial interest whatsoever;
including, among others, interest by marriage and/or blood. For purposes
of this definition, participation in a corporation by stock ownership or
participation in a partnership is a beneficiary interest.
SITE — Shall mean the lot or lots upon which a major development is to
occur or has occurred.
SITE AREA — Shall mean all lands within a closed boundary survey of a site,
including public rights-of-way.
SITE PLAN — Shall mean a development plan of one or more lots on which
is shown:
SOIL — Shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
SOIL REMOVAL OPERATION — Shall mean the removal of sand and gravel
resources, chiefly by means of excavation, which may permit washing,
grading and screening of material, but not including the quarrying of rock
or similar material.
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains,
marshes and waterways;
a.
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening
devices;
b.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to this Code.
c.
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-2.1
A:56
SPECIALTY RETAIL — Shall mean a small retail outlet that focuses on
selling a particular product range and associated items. Specialty store
business operators should maintain considerable depth in the type of
product that they specialize in selling, in addition to providing higher
service quality and expert guidance to shoppers. Specialty retail may
include antique shops, art studios and galleries, restaurants, cafe's,
bakeries, gift shops, and similar specialty retail uses.
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Shall mean standards in § 18-5 of this
Code which regulate noise levels, glare, earthborne or sonic vibrations,
heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic matters, explosive
and inflammable matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste, discharge,
screening of unsightly objects or conditions, and such other similar matters
as may be reasonably required in that section of any applicable Federal,
State or County laws or regulations.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — Shall mean an area delineated on the State
Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is
intended to be the focus for much of the State's future redevelopment and
revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Shall mean the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STEALTH TOWER STRUCTURE — Shall mean man-made trees, clock tower,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative design mounting structures
that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
STORE, RETAIL — Shall mean a building or part thereof in which or from
which merchandise or services are furnished directly to the public.
STORE, WHOLESALE DISPLAY — Shall mean a building or part thereof
where merchandise is displayed for sale and sold at wholesale, but where
no goods, wares, merchandise or material is warehoused.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — Shall mean an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Shall mean any structural
or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
§ 18-2.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:57
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Shall mean water flow on the surface of the
ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORY — Shall mean a set of rooms on one floor level of a building. For
purposes of this Land Management Code, a basement as defined herein
shall be considered a half-story. A cellar as defined in this section shall be
considered a half-story if more than four feet of the total height is above
finished grade elevation.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parking
viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing State, County or municipal
roadway, or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of
the County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board
and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats, and includes the
land between the street lines whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other
areas within the street lines. For the purpose of this Code, streets shall be
classified as follows:
STREET LINE — Shall mean the right-of-way line of a street dedication or
deed of record.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean any combination of materials forming any
construction, the use of which requires location on the ground or
attachment to something having location either above, below, or on the
ground and including among other things, display stands, platforms, poles,
flagpoles, standpipes, earthenworks, tanks and towers of any kind. The
term "structure" shall include the term "building." For the purpose of
determining compliance with the setback requirements of this Code, it
shall not include structures such as fences, fuel oil tanks, septic tanks, or
leaching pools, or any system buried below grade.
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, except that
the following divisions shall not be considered subdivisions provided no new
streets or roads are involved.
LOCAL ARTERIAL STREET — A Township road that lies between two
arterial roads which are either County roads or State highways.
a.
COLLECTOR STREET — All those streets or roads which carry traffic
from local streets to the local arterial streets, County roads, or State
highways. The entrance road to a major subdivision or site plan shall
also be considered a collector street.
b.
LOCAL STREET — Minor streets and cul-de-sac streets which are
primarily intended to provide access to abutting properties. The local
street standards would also be applicable for minimum design
standards for commercial and industrial site plans.
c.
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-2.1
A:58
THINNING — Shall mean the removal of undesirable, competitive, diseased
or damaged trees so as to cultivate and improve the remaining trees on the
site.
THOROUGHFARE — Shall mean a way for use by vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and to provide access to lots and open spaces, consisting of vehicular
lanes and the public frontage.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Shall mean a flood hazard area, which
may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
TOPSOIL — Shall mean the arable soil within eight inches of the surface.
TOWER SITE — Shall mean the enclosed area in which the tower and its
appurtenances are located.
TRAILER — Shall mean a wheel-based noncommercial vehicle that is
designed to be transported by traction and which is used or may be used as
a dwelling or for the transportation or storage of goods, materials, livestock
or any object. The regulations in this chapter that apply to trailers shall also
apply to the following vehicles as herein defined below:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or division committee
thereof appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes
where the resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size;
a.
b. Division of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to,
judgments of foreclosure.
c.
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument.
Subdivision also includes resubdivision and where appropriate to the
context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the lands or territory
divided. The transfer of title to one or more adjoining lots owned by
the same person or persons as the same are designated on a map filed
in the Sussex County Clerk's Office prior to the establishment of a
Planning Board in the Township pursuant to the Municipal Planning Act
of 1953 shall be considered a subdivision of land.
d.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts, or parcels of land,
owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and
certified by the administrative officer are found to the requirements
of this Code and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts,
or parcels on the tax map or atlas of the municipality. The term
"subdivision" also includes the term "resubdivision."
e.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and
vacation uses. It shall have body width not exceeding eight feet and a
body length not exceeding 32 feet.
a.
§ 18-2.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:59
TRAILERS — Used to mount signs, satellite receiving dish antennas, sheds,
or other structures may not be used to circumvent the yard requirements of
an accessory structure within any given zone.
TRANSCRIPT — Shall mean a typed or printed verbatim record of the
proceedings or reproduction thereof.
TRANSECT ZONES (T ZONES) — Shall mean one of several areas on
a Zoning Map regulated by the SmartCode. Transect Zones are
administratively similar to the land use zones in conventional codes, except
that in addition to the usual building use, density, height and setback
requirements, other elements of the intended habitat are integrated,
including those of the private lot and building and public frontage.
TREE — Shall mean any deciduous or coniferous species, which reaches a
mature height of 12 feet or more at maturity and has a typical DPM of fourinch caliper or greater.
TRUCKING TERMINAL — Shall mean a premises which is used for the
temporary parking of motor freight vehicles between trips and for the
transfer of freight between trucks or between trucks and rail facilities
for shipment elsewhere and where the storage of freight or cargo is only
temporary.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— Shall mean a neighborhood given priority access to State resources
through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — Shall mean a zone designated by the
New Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Shall mean previously developed
portions of areas:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment Neighborhoods.
PICKUP COACH — A structure designed primarily to be mounted on
a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it
suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and
vacation uses.
b.
MOTORIZED HOME — A portable dwelling designed and constructed
as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
c.
BOAT TRAILER — A trailer designed for the purpose of transporting a
boat over land.
d.
HOUSE TRAILER — A trailer with a built-in or attached tent designed
and equipped to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for
travel, recreational and vacation uses.
e.
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-2.1
A:60
VARIANCE — Shall mean permission to depart from the literal requirements
of a zoning regulation, granted by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
VETERINARIAN OFFICE — Shall mean the office used by a veterinarian
for out-patient treatment of dogs, cats or other small animals normally and
usually kept as small pets.
WAREHOUSE — Shall mean a building used for the temporary storage of
goods, materials or merchandise for later or subsequent distribution or
delivery elsewhere for purposes of processing or sale.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwaters, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WET MINING — Shall mean an operation in which material is removed
below the water table.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — Shall mean an area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Shall mean an antenna
that transmits or receives radio frequency signals for wireless
telecommunications towers and the users of towers or other structures.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Shall mean the
accessory structures or uses serving the tower site such as equipment
sheds, telecommunications antennas and fences.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Shall mean a freestanding, vertical structure designed to support one or more wireless
telecommunications antennas. The height of the tower shall not include a
lightning rod.
YARDS — Shall mean:
FRONT YARD — An area, unoccupied except by a use as hereinafter
specifically permitted, extending across the full width of a lot and lying
between the abutting street right-of-way line and the nearest part of the
principal structure on the lot.
a.
SIDE YARD — An area, unoccupied except by a use as hereinafter
specifically permitted, extending from the front yard to the rear yard
of a lot and lying between the side lot line and the nearest part of the
principal structure on the lot.
b.
REAR YARD — An area, unoccupied except by a use as hereinafter
specifically permitted, extending across the full width of a lot and
lying between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the existing
or proposed principal structure on the lot. If there is no rear lot line,
c.
§ 18-2.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-2.1
A:61
ZONING PERMIT — Shall mean a document signed by the Zoning Officer:
§ 18-3. PROCEDURE.
§ 18-3.1. Title and Purpose. [Ord. No. 636 A 301]
§ 18-3.2. Planning Board. [Ord. No. 636 A302; Ord. No. 841 § IV]
as in the case of a triangular shaped lot, or if there is doubt as to
determination of rear yard measurement, the rear yard requirement
of this chapter shall be construed as conforming provided there can
be drawn entirely within the property a quadrilateral formed by the
rear line of the existing or proposed principal building, the extension
of the sidelines of the principal building from the rear of the principal
building and a line connecting said extending building side line which
quadrilateral shall have an average depth measured from the rear of
the building equal to at least the required minimum rear yard. In
no event shall the principal building be located closer to a property
line at any point other than the minimum side yard requirement. (See
Illustration #1.)
ILLUSTRATION #1
(Rear yard)
Which is required by this Code as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or illustration of a structure or building; and
a.
Which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provisions of the zoning regulations or variance therefrom duly
authorized by the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
b.
a. Short Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the Land
Management Procedure Ordinance of the Township of Sparta.
b. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and the Planning Board for the Township of Sparta.
a. Establishment. There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23 in the Township of Sparta, a Planning Board of nine
members, consisting of the following four classes:
§ 18-2.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.2
A:62
Class I. The Mayor.
Class II. One of the officials of the municipality other than a member
of the Governing Body to be appointed by the Council; provided that,
if there is an Environmental Commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II
Planning Board Member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education among the Class
IV members.
Class III. A member of the Governing Body to be appointed by it.
Class IV. Six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Township Council.
The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, except
that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and one may be a member of the Board of Education. A member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 shall be a Class IV.
Planning Board member unless there be among the Class IV members
of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education in which case
the member of the Environmental Commission shall be deemed to be a
Class II member of the Planning Board.
1. Alternate Members. There may be two alternate members
appointed by the Township Council as Class IV members and they
shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the
Mayor as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2. The terms of the
alternate members shall be for two years except that the terms for
the first alternate member shall be such that the term of not more
than one alternate member shall expire in any one year provided,
however, that in no instance shall the terms of the alternate
members first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy occurring
otherwise and by the unexpired term shall be filled by the
appointing authority for the unexpired term only. Alternate
members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a
regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the
event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is
to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
b. Terms. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond
with his official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II
and Class III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of
their respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a
Class II member who is also a member of the Environmental
§ 18-3.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.2
A:63
Commission. The term of a Class II or Class IV member who is also a
member of the Environmental Commission shall be for three years or
terminate at the completion of his term of office as a member of the
Environmental Commission, whichever occurs first.
The terms of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment or Board of Education shall terminate whenever
he is no longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his
Class IV term, whichever occurs first.
The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
section shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such term shall be distributed evenly over the first
four years after their appointment as determined by resolution of the
Governing Body, providing however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the terms for which they
were appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years except as otherwise hereinabove provided. All terms
shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment is made.
c. Vacancies and Removals. If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise
than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment as above
provided for the unexpired term. Any member other than a Class I
member, after a public hearing if he requests one, may be removed by
the Governing Body for cause.
d. Organization of Board. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and
Vice Chairman from the members of Class IV and select a Secretary
who shall be a member of the Planning Board.
e. Planning Board Attorney. The office of Planning Board Attorney is
hereby created. The Planning Board may annually appoint to such
office, fix compensation or rate of compensation of an attorney-at-law of
New Jersey other than the Township Attorney. Such compensation,
however, shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the Governing
Body for this use.
f. Experts and Staff. In addition, the Planning Board may also employ or
contract for the services of experts and other staff and services as it
may deem necessary. The Board shall not however exceed, exclusive of
gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Governing Body for its
use. The Township Manager shall appoint a person to perform
secretarial or clerical functions for the Planning Board and, in
particular, to assist the Secretary of the Planning Board.
g. Powers and Duties Generally. The Planning Board is authorized to adopt
bylaws governing its procedural operation. It shall also have the
following powers and duties.
§ 18-3.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.2
A:64
1. To make and adopt at least every six years and amend a Master
Plan for the physical development of the Township, considering any
areas outside its boundaries, which in the Board's judgment bear
essential relation to the planning of the Township, in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55F-28.
2. To hear and decide site plan and subdivision applications in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and the
Comprehensive Land Management Code.
3. To hear applications for conditional uses and in proper cases to
approve conditional use permits in accordance with the provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
4. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required of the Planning Board by State or Federal law or
regulations.
5. To prepare an official map for Sparta Township in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
6. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
7. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years and amendments
thereto, and recommend same to the Governing Body.
8. To consider and make report to the Governing Body within 35 days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted
to it pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(a), and also
pass upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board
by the Mayor and Township Council, pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(b).
9. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to
the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(a) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c;
(b) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of permit
for building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55d-34; and
(c) Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35 of said act for
issuance of a permit for building or structure not related to a
street. Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section,
notice of a hearing on the application for development shall
include reference to the request for a variance, or direction for
issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
§ 18-3.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.2
A:65
10. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the Governing Body for the aid and
assistance to other agencies or officers.
h. Time for Decision.
1. Minor Subdivisions and Minor Site Plans. Minor subdivision and
minor site plan approvals shall be granted or denied within 45 days
of the date of submission of a complete application which has been
certified as complete to the Planning Board or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor
subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board
approval unless within such period a plat in conformity with such
approval and the provisions of the "Map Filing Law," or a deed
clearly describing the approved minor subdivision, is filed by the
developer with the County Recording Officer, the Municipal
Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed
must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board before it will be accepted for filing by the County Recording
Officer.
2. Preliminary Approval — Major Subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application which has been certified as complete for a
subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning Board shall grant or
deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Upon submission of a complete application for a
subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board shall grant or
deny preliminary approval within 95 days of such submission or
within such further time as may be consented to by the developer.
Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval for the subdivision.
3. Ancillary Powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, the Planning Board shall grant or
deny approval of the application within 120 days after submission
by the developer of a complete application or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
approval of the application and a certificate of the Planner as to the
failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant.
4. Final Approval. Application for final subdivision approval shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of submission of a complete
application which has been certified as complete or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Final
approval of major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date of
signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have
been duly filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer.
§ 18-3.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.2
A:66
§ 18-3.3. Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. No. 636 A 303; Ord.
No. 676 § 1; Ord. No. 841 §§ V, VI]
The Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the period
for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from
the date of signing of the plat.
i. Applications; Procedure for Filing. Applications for development within
the jurisdiction of the Planning Board pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. shall be filed with the Secretary of the
Planning Board. Applicant shall file 12 copies of a sketch plat; four
copies of applications for minor subdivision approval; four copies of
application for major subdivision approval; or four copies of application
for site plan review, or conditional use approval. The applicant shall also
file all fees, plot plans, maps or other papers required by virtue of any
provision of this chapter or any rule of the Planning Board. The
Secretary shall obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the
Planning Board. The Planner shall inform the applicant of the steps to
be taken to initiate applications and of the regular meeting dates of the
Board.
j. Advisory Committee. The Council may appoint one or more persons as a
Citizens Advisory Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning
Board in its duties, but such person or persons shall have no power to
vote or take other action required of the Board. Such person or persons
shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.
k. Environmental Commission. Whenever the Environmental Commission
has prepared and submitted to the Planning Board an index of the
natural resources of the municipality, the Planning Board shall make
available to the Environmental Commission an informational copy of
every application for development to the Planning Board. Failure of the
Planning Board to make such informational copy available to the
Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding.
l. Rules and Regulations. The Board shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and
purposes of this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration
of oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and
Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall
apply.
a. Establishment. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. consisting of seven regular
members and not more than two alternate members of the Township of
Sparta appointed by the Council to serve for terms of four years from
July 1 of the year of their appointment. The terms of the members first
appointed shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first
four years for regular members and first two years for alternate
§ 18-3.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.3
A:67
members after their appointment; provided that the initial term of no
member shall exceed four years. Thereafter, the term of each member
shall be for four years. Nothing in this chapter shall, however, be
construed to affect the term of any present member of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion
of the terms for which they were appointed.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment by
the appointing authority as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2.
No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality.
A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
A member may, after public hearing if he requests it, be removed by the
Governing Body for cause.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
b. Officers. The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from its members and shall also select a Secretary who may
be either a Board member or a municipal employee.
c. Board of Adjustment Attorney. There is hereby created the office of
Attorney to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree
upon the rate of compensation of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the municipal attorney.
Such compensation, however, shall not exceed the amount appropriated
by the Governing Body for this use.
d. Experts and Staff. In addition, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may also
employ or contract for and fix the compensation of such experts and
other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not
authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the
amount appropriated by the Governing Body for its use.
e. Rules and Regulations. The Board shall adopt such rules and
regulations as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and
purposes of this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration
of oaths and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and
Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall
apply.
f. Powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 18-3.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.3
A:68
1. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. and amendments
thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
2. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning
Board of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully
be conferred upon such Board, including, not by way of limitation,
the authority, in connection with any case, action or proceeding
before the Board, to interpret and construe the provisions of this
chapter or any term, clause, sentence or work hereof, and the
Zoning Map, in accordance with the general rules of construction,
applicable to legislative enactments.
3. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein, and with the general rules hereby laid down that equity
shall be done in cases where the strict construction of the
provisions of this chapter would work undue hardship, including a
variance for a conditional use. The powers and duties of the Board
having been delegated to and imposed upon it by statute, the Board
shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it in said
Chapter 291, P.L. 1975, or subsequent statutes in such case made
and provided, and it shall from time to time furnish to any person
requesting the same a copy of its rules and information as to how
appeals or applications may properly be filed with the Board for its
decision thereon.
g. Appeals and Applications.
1. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20
days by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the
appeal is taken specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer
from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appeal from was taken.
2. Application addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment without prior application to an administrative
officer, shall be filed with the Zoning Officer of the Township. Four
copies of the application shall be filed. At the time of filing the
appeal or application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to the
date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file plot plans, maps, or
other papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or
any rule of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall
obtain all necessary forms from the Zoning Officer of the Township.
The Zoning Officer shall inform the applicant of the steps to be
§ 18-3.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.3
A:69
taken to initiate proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of
the Board.
3. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in
respect of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the
officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
him that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in
his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining
order which may be granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment or
by the Superior Court of New Jersey on application or notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken on the due cause shown.
h. Power to Reverse or Modify Decisions. In exercising the abovementioned power, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may, in conformity
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or amendments thereto
or subsequent statutes applying reverse or affirm wholly or partly or
may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought
to be made, and to that end have all the powers of the administrative
officer from whom the appeal was taken.
i. Expiration of Variance. Any variance from the terms the terms of this
chapter hereafter granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or structures, or
permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire by limitation
unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance, or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced, within 18
months from the date of entry of the judgment or determination of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment; except however, that the running of the
period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of
filing an appeal from the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to
the Governing Body or to a court of competent jurisdiction until the
termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
j. Powers Granted by Law. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have
such powers as are granted by law to:
1. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the applicant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
2. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the map or Zoning
Ordinance, or for decisions upon other special questions upon
which such board is authorized by the Zoning Ordinance to pass.
3. Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape
of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions, or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the
§ 18-3.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.3
A:70
strict application of any regulations in the Zoning Ordinance would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such
property, to grant upon application or an appeal relating to such
property, a variance from such strict application, so as to relieve
such difficulties or hardship; provided, however, that no variance
shall be granted under this subsection to allow a structure or use
in a district restricted against such structure or use; and further
provided that the proposed development does not require approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use in conjunction with which the Planning Board shall review a
request for a variance pursuant to Subsection 47 of the Municipal
Land Use Law of 1975.
4. In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from regulations pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., including but not limited to allowing a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structure or use but only by
affirmative vote of at least five members, in the case of a municipal
board, or 2/3 of the full authorized membership, in the case of a
regional board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
5. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of
this section unless such variance or other relief can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and
Zoning Ordinance. Any application under any subsection of this
section may be referred to any appropriate person or agency,
including the Planning Board, for its report provided that such
reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
k. Additional Powers. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to
the powers specified in Subsection j of this subsection have power given
by law to:
1. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
2. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
3. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant to
the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to
Article 6 of c.291, P.L. 1975, or conditional use approval pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 whenever the proposed development requires
approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant
to Subsection d of Section 57 of this Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70). The
§ 18-3.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.3
A:71
§ 18-3.4. Provisions Applicable to Both the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. No. 636 A 304; Ord. No. 676 §§ 3
— 5; Ord. No. 841 §§ VII — IX; Ord. No. 878 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 02-20
§ 5; Ord. No. 2015-12; Ord. No. 2015-13]
developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
approval of the variance and a subsequent application for any
required approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use.
The separate approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon
grant of all required subsequent approvals by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. No such subsequent approval shall be granted unless
such approval can be granted without substantial detriment to the
public good and without substantial impairment of the intent and
purpose of the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance. The number of
votes of Board members required to grant any such subsequent
approval shall be as otherwise provided in this act for the approval
in question, and the special vote.
l. Time for Decision. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render its
decision not later than 120 days after the date: (1) an appeal is taken
from the decision of an administrative officer; or (2) the submission of a
complete application which has been certified as complete for
development to the Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(b).
Failure of the Board to render a decision within such 120-day period or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant shall
constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
a. Conflicts of Interest. No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall act on any matter in which he has either directly or
indirectly any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such
member shall disqualify himself from acting on a particular matter, he
shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter
nor participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
b. Meetings.
1. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less often than once a month and
any meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless
cancelled for lack of applications for development to process.
2. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or
on the request of any two Board members, which shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with all
applicable legal requirements.
3. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
§ 18-3.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:72
4. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
5. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance
with the requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, N.J.S.A.
10:4-6 et seq. An executive session for the purpose of discussing
and studying any matters to come before either Board shall not be
deemed a regular or special meeting in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
c. Minutes. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and
shall include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Board and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the
Board, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes
shall thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal
business hours at the office of the Municipal Clerk. Any interested party
shall have the right to compel production of the minutes for use as
evidence in any legal proceeding concerning the subject matter of such
minutes. Such interested party may be charged a fee for reproduction
of the minutes for his use as provided for in the rules of the Board.
d. Fees. Fees for applications or for the rendering of any service by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or any member of their
administrative staffs which is not otherwise provided by ordinance may
be provided for and adopted as part of the rules of the Board and copies
of said rules or of the separate fee schedule shall be available to the
public.1
e. Hearings.
1. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may
make rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies
which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. or of this chapter.
2. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he
may designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the
"County and Municipal Investigations Law" N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et
seq. shall apply.
3. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application
for development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer and the right of cross-examination shall be
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the
1. Editor's Note: See § 18-7 for Land Use fees.
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:73
discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as
to time and number of witnesses.
4. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence.
5. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of
the proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic
means. The Board shall furnish a transcript of the proceedings to
an interested party at his expense but shall not charge such
interested party more than the maximum permitted in N.J.S.A.
2A:11-1S. Said transcript shall be certified in writing by the
transcriber to be accurate.
6. When any hearing before the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall carry over two or more meetings, a member of the
Board who was absent for one or more of the meetings shall be
eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was
conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one or more of the
meetings, provided, however that such Board member has
available to him a transcript or a recording of the meeting from
which he was absent, and certifies in writing to the Board that he
has read such transcript or listened to such recording.
7. The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and conclusions
based thereon in each decision on any application for development
and shall reduce the decision to writing. The municipal agency
shall provide the findings and conclusions through:
(a) A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in the act for action by the municipal agency on the
application for development; or
(b) A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the
municipal agency voted to grant or deny approval. Only the
members of the municipal agency who voted for the action
taken may vote on the memorializing resolution, and the vote
of a majority of such members present at the meting at which
the resolution is presented for adoption shall be sufficient to
adopt the resolution. An action resulting from the failure of a
motion to approve an application shall be memorialized by
resolution as provided above, with those members voting
against the motion for approval being the members eligible to
vote on the memorializing resolution. The vote on any such
resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of the
action of the municipal agency and not to be an action of the
municipal agency; however, the date of the adoption of the
resolution shall constitute the date of the decision for purposes
of the mailings, filings and publications.
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:74
8. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the municipal agency
within 10 days of the date of decision to the applicant, or if
represented, then to his attorney, without separate charge, and to
all who request a copy of the decision for a reasonable fee. A copy
of the decision shall also be filed by the municipal agency in the
office of the administrative officer. The administrative officer shall
make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested party
for a reasonable fee and available for public inspection at his office
during reasonable hours.
f. Notice of Hearing Involving Applications for Development. Notices of
hearings on applications for development shall be given as follows:
1. The public notice of the hearing shall be given to the owners of all
real property as shown on the current tax duplicate located within
200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of such
hearing provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied
by notice to the: (1) condominium association, in the case of any
unit owner whose unit has a unit above or below it; or (2) horizontal
property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment has
an apartment above or below it. Notice shall be given by serving a
copy thereof on the property owner as shown on the said current
tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the property owner at his
address as shown on the current tax duplicate. Notice to a
partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner.
Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its
president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements are areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is subject of the hearing, may
be made in the same manner as to a corporation without further
notice to unit owners, co-owners, or homeowners on account of
such common elements or areas.
2. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of a municipality adjoining the
Township of Sparta shall be given by personal service or certified
mail to the clerk of such municipality.
3. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Sussex County Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to an existing County road or
proposed road shown on the Official County Map or on the County
Master Plan, adjoining other County land or situated within 200
feet of a municipal boundary of the Township of Sparta.
4. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
New Jersey Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:75
application for development of property adjacent to a State
highway.
5. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
State Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres of 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Township Clerk.
6. Upon the written request of an applicant, the Tax Assessor of the
Township shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from said
current tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners to whom
the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to Subsection f1 of
this subsection. The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the
information contained in such list and failure to give notice to any
owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
A sum not to exceed $10 may be charged for such list.
7. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the
Township agency holding the hearing on the application for
development in the event that the applicant is required to give
notice pursuant to this subsection.
8. Notice pursuant to Subsections f4, 5, 6 and 7 of this subsection
shall not be deemed to be required, unless public notice pursuant
to Subsection f1 and notice to Subsection f2 of this subsection are
required.
9. Notice of hearings pursuant to Subsections f1 and 2 of this
subsection shall be required for all applications for development
for which notice is required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 et seq.
and public notice of a hearing on an application for development
shall also be required for all preliminary major site plan
applications but not including any minor site plans as defined by
this chapter.
g. Decisions. The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon in each decision on any application for
development and shall reduce the decision in writing. The municipal
agency shall provide the findings and conclusions through:
1. A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in the Act for action by the municipal agency on the
application for development; or
2. A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the municipal
agency voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the
municipal agency who voted for action taken may vote on the
memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is
presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution.
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:76
An action pursuant to Section 5 of the Act 9 (N.J.A.C. 40:55D-9)
(resulting from the failure of a motion to approve an application)
shall be memorialized by resolution as provided above, with those
members voting against the motion for approval being the
members eligible to vote on the memorialization of the action of the
municipal agency and not to be an action of the municipal agency;
however, the date of the adoption of the resolution shall constitute
the date of the decision for purposes of the mailings, filings and
publications required by Subsections h and i of this subsection
(C.40:55D-10). If the municipal agency fails to adopt a resolution or
memorializing resolution as hereinabove specified, any interested
party may apply to the Superior Court in a summary manner for
an order compelling the municipal agency to reduce its findings
and conclusions to writing within a stated time and the cost of the
application, including attorney's fees shall be assessed against the
municipality.
h. Publication of Decision. A brief notice of every final decision shall be
published in the official newspaper of the municipality. Such publication
shall be arranged by the Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, without separate charge to
the applicant. Said notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for
publication within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
i. Payment of Taxes. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65, every application for development submitted to the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by
proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or
delinquent on the property which is the subject of such application; or,
if it is shown that taxes or assessments are delinquent on said property
any approvals or other relief granted by either Board shall be
conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provisions for the payment
thereof in such manner that the municipality will be adequately
protected.
j. Complete Application; Waiver of Defects. An application for
development shall be complete for purposes of commencing the
applicable time period for action by a municipal agency when so
certified by the municipal agency or its authorized committee or
designee.
In the event that the agency, committee or designee does not certify the
application to be complete within 45 days of the date of its submission,
the application shall be deemed complete upon the expiration of the
forty-five-day period for purposes of commencing the applicable time
period unless:
1. The application lacks information indicated on the checklist which
shall be provided to the applicant. Said checklists are included as
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:77
an Appendix "B" entitled "Application Checklists," which is an
appendix hereto and hereby declared to be a part of this chapter.
2
2. The municipal agency or its authorized committee or designee has
notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the
application within 45 days of submission of the application.
The applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the agency or its authorized
committee shall grant or deny the request within 45 days. Nothing herein
shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in the
application process that he is entitled to approval of the application. The
municipal agency may subsequently require correction of any information
found to be in error and submission of additional information not specified
in the chapter or any revisions in the accompanying documents, as are
reasonably necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for approval of the application for development
have been met. The application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack
of any such additional information or any revisions in the accompanying
documents so required by the municipal agency.
k. Highlands Preservation Area Checklists and Procedures.
1. Applicability. This Ordinance shall apply to any Application for
Development involving lands located within (or partially within) the
Township Highlands Area (as illustrated in Exhibit 1, "Township of
Sparta Highlands Preservation Area") that seeks approval of a site
plan, subdivision, or change in use, where approval of such
application would: a) result in the ultimate disturbance of one acre
or more of land; b) produce a cumulative impervious surface area
of 1/4 acre, or more; c) in the case of residential development,
create three or more dwelling units; or d) introduce or expand on
any of the following land uses/facilities:3
(a) Landfills;
(b) Permanent storage or disposal of hazardous wastes, industrial
or municipal sludge or radioactive materials, including solid
waste landfills;
(c) Collection and transfer facilities for hazardous wastes, solid
wastes that contain hazardous materials, and radioactive
materials;
(d) Industrial treatment facility lagoons; or
(e) Any Major or Minor Potential Contaminant Source (as
identified in Appendix A and Appendix B of this Ordinance,
2. Editor's Note: Appendix B, referred to herein, may be found attached to this chapter.
3. Editor's Note: Exhibit 1, Highlands Preservation Area Map, referred to herein may be
found on file in the Township Offices.
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:78
respectively) on lands located within 200 feet of the wellhead
of any public community well or public non-community well, as
these are defined at Subsection k6 below.
4
For purposes of this Ordinance, the phrases "Application for
Development," "Highlands Area," "residential development," "ultimate
disturbance," and "cumulative impervious surface area" shall be
defined as provided at Subsection k6 below.
2. Administrative Completeness.
(a) Consistency Determinations Required. No Application for
Development included in Subsection 1 above, shall be deemed
complete or considered for review by the applicable Land Use
Board until and unless the applicant has obtained and provided
a copy of:
(1) A Consistency Determination from the Highlands Council
indicating that the application is consistent with the
Highlands Regional Master Plan; or
(2) A Consistency Determination from the Highlands Council
indicating that the application is not consistent with the
Highlands Regional Master Plan, accompanied by a
certification, as detailed in Subsection 2(b) below.
(b) Findings of Inconsistency. Where a Highlands Council
Consistency Determination indicates that an Application for
Development is inconsistent with the Highlands Regional
Master Plan, no such application shall be deemed complete or
considered for review by the applicable Land Use Board, until
or unless the applicant has obtained from the professional(s)
responsible for preparation of the applicant's plans, a
certification indicating that to the best of the knowledge and
abilities of such professional(s), the application has, since
review by the Highlands Council, been revised to achieve
consistency with the Highlands Regional Master Plan, and
specifically describing the revisions made to achieve such
consistency.
(c) Checklist Waiver. The Township may issue a waiver from the
provisions of this Subsection k where it can be established by
the applicant and can be verified by the designated
representative(s) of the Township that:
(1) The activity, improvement or development proposed by the
subject Application for Development has not yet been
formally determined to be exempt from the Highlands Act
(see Subsection 5(b) below), but eligibility for an
4. Editor's Note: The Appendix A and Appendix B referred to herein may be found at the end
of Subsection k below.
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:79
exemption has been sufficiently established by the
applicant; or
(2) The activity, improvement or development proposed in the
Application for Development will neither encroach upon a
Highlands resource or Highlands Resource Area, nor be of
detrimental impact to any Highlands resource or
Highlands Resource Area as these are identified and
delineated in the Highlands Regional Master Plan. The
applicant's professional(s) responsible for preparation of
the applicant's plan shall establish compliance of the
above through a formal certification specifically
addressing the Highlands resources and Resource Areas
and related policies and objectives as identified in Chapter
4 of the Highlands Regional Master Plan.
(d) Highlands Council Call-Up. All municipal waivers or findings of
application completeness issued pursuant to this Subsection k
shall be issued in writing, inclusive of a statement indicating
the rationale for the determination. All such determinations
shall be subject to Highlands Council call-up review, and shall
include conditions requiring same consistent with this
subsection. The municipality shall within five calendar days of
issuance of all such determinations, provide a copy of the
decision to the applicant and to the Highlands Council. The
Highlands Council call-up review period shall expire 15
calendar days following its receipt of same. Upon determining
to exercise this authority for call-up review, the Highlands
Council shall transmit notice to the applicant and the
municipality. Absent any such notification from the Highlands
Council within that timeframe, the application shall be
considered complete, with the date of the waiver or finding of
application completeness to be as of the date of first issuance
by the municipality.
3. Notice Requirements. The provisions of this Subsection k3 shall
apply in addition to all requirements concerning public notice for
Applications for Development as provided under the MLUL and
required pursuant to the underlying municipal land use ordinances.
(a) Notice to Highlands Council of Application. The applicant for
any Application for Development shall provide notice to the
Highlands Council at least 10 days prior to the date on which
the application is scheduled for consideration by the local
Board. A copy of the complete application shall accompany
such notice regarding any Application for Development
involving the potential disturbance of two acres, or more, or a
cumulative increase in impervious coverage of one acre, or
more. The applicant shall provide copies of any subsequent
revisions to such applications to the Highlands Council at the
same time these are provided to the reviewing Board. If such
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:80
plans or plats have been prepared in digital form, they shall
be provided to the Highlands Council in a digital format that
meets Highlands Council standards for such submissions.
(b) Notice of Decision Required. The reviewing Board shall
provide a certified copy of the fully-executed resolution
memorializing its final decision regarding any Application for
Development to the Highlands Council within 10 days of its
adoption. This provision shall apply in all cases, whether the
Board approves the Application for Development, denies it, or
approves it with conditions.
4. Highlands Council Call-Up Provisions. All Board decisions
pertaining to Applications for Development involving the ultimate
disturbance of two acres or more of land or a cumulative increase
in impervious surface by one acre or more, are subject to call-up
and subsequent review by the Highlands Council in accordance
with procedural requirements and timeframes established
pursuant to the Highlands Act. The Highlands Council may, on
notice to the applicant within 15 calendar days of receipt of the
memorializing resolution of the reviewing Board, review and
require a public hearing on the application. In that case,
subsequent to the hearing the Highlands Council may approve the
Application for Development, deny it, or issue an approval with
conditions.
The following conditions of approval shall be attached to any
Application for Development approved pursuant to the MLUL
which involves lands within or partially within the Highlands
Preservation Area:
(a) No Land Disturbance. No land disturbance approved in
connection with an Application for Development involving the
ultimate disturbance of two acres or more of land or a
cumulative increase in impervious surface by one acre or more,
shall occur until and unless, either:
(1) The Highlands Council call-up period has expired without
issuance of a notice seeking review of the application by
the Highlands Council; or
(2) The Highlands Council has issued notice, and has
reviewed the approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:20-17(a)1
and has determined not to deny or modify the approval.
(b) Amendments. In the event that Highlands Council review of an
approved Application for Development pursuant to this
subsection results in a finding that the plans must be modified,
the applicant shall amend the application accordingly and
submit the amended application to the reviewing Board for
approval. Such submissions shall include the written findings
and notice of decision of the Highlands Council and any
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:81
subsequent approval by the Land Use Board shall incorporate
any conditions imposed by the Highlands Council.
(c) Approvals Conditioned on State Approvals. All approvals shall
be subject to the approval of any and all State agencies or
other authorities having jurisdiction over any aspect or aspects
of the approved Application for Development.
(d) As-Built Surveys Required. Prior to issuance of any final
Certificate of Occupancy or Approval, or to the release of any
performance bonding held in relation to the approved
Application for Development, the applicant shall provide an
"as-built" survey depicting the final site conditions.
(e) Submission of Final Plans/Plats to Highlands Council. The
applicant shall provide a copy of any final site plan or
subdivision plat to the Highlands Council. If such plans or plats
have been prepared in digital form, they shall be provided to
the Highlands Council in a digital format that meets Highlands
Council standards for such submissions in lieu of copies
printed on paper.
5. Exclusions and Exemptions.
(a) Exclusions. The following specific improvements and related
applications shall be excluded from the provisions of this
Ordinance:
(1) The reconstruction, within the same footprint, of any
building or other structure lawfully existing as of the
effective date of this Ordinance, in the event of its
destruction or partial destruction by fire, storm, natural
disaster, or any other unintended circumstance.
(2) Any improvement or alteration to a building or other
structure lawfully existing as of the effective date of this
Ordinance, where such improvement or alteration is
necessary for compliance with the provisions of the
Americans with Disabilities Act, or to otherwise provide
accessibility to the disabled.
(3) Any Agricultural or Horticultural Use or Development that
would not result in either:
[a] An increase, since the date of enactment of the
Highlands Act (August 10, 2004), either individually or
cumulatively, of new agricultural impervious cover of
greater than 3% to the total land area of a Farm
Management Unit. Solar panels shall not be included
in any calculation of agricultural impervious cover (all
terms as defined in Subsection k6, below); or
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:82
[b] Construction of three or more residential dwelling
units (including accessory dwelling units) served by
individual on-site septic system(s).
(b) Exemptions. Any activity, improvement or development project
listed and demonstrated to constitute a Highlands Act
exemption shall be exempt from the provisions of this
Ordinance. Formal demonstration of a Highlands Act
exemption for an Application for Development involving lands
located (or partially located) in the Preservation Area shall
consist of one of the following:
(1) State Agency Determination. State Agency Determinations
shall consist of a Highlands Applicability Determination
(HAD) issued by the NJDEP indicating that the proposal
qualifies as a Highlands Act Exemption.
(2) Municipal Determination. Pursuant to Sparta Township
Ordinance entitled "Township of Sparta Highlands Area
Exemption Ordinance," for any application under this
Ordinance involving Highlands Act Exemptions #4, #6,
#7, or #8, the applicant may request and shall be deemed
to have satisfied the evidentiary requirement by obtaining
a Municipal Exemption Determination issued by the
Municipal Exemption Designee, provided such
Determination indicates that the proposal qualifies as a
Highlands Act Exemption. The applicant may rely upon the
findings of a Municipal Exemption Determination to the
same extent and with the same protections as would apply
in the case of a HAD issued by the NJDEP.
5
6. Definitions. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings
stated herein unless their use in the text of this Ordinance clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
used in the plural number include the singular number, and words
used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
AGRICULTURAL IMPERVIOUS COVER — Shall mean agricultural
or horticultural buildings, structures or facilities with or without
flooring, residential buildings and paved areas, but not meaning
temporary coverings.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Shall
mean construction for the purposes of supporting common farmsite
activities, including but not limited to, the production, harvesting,
storage, grading, packaging, processing, and the wholesale and
5. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2015-13, Township of Sparta Highlands Exemption
Ordinance, is codified as Subsection 18-3.4l.
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:83
retail marketing of crops, plants, animals, and other related
commodities and the use and application of techniques and
methods of soil preparation and management, fertilization, weed,
disease, and pest control, disposal of farm waste, irrigation,
drainage and water management, and grazing.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL USE — Shall mean the use
of land for common farmsite activities, including but not limited
to, the production, harvesting, storage, grading, packaging,
processing, and the wholesale and retail marketing of crops, plants,
animals, and other related commodities and the use and
application of techniques and methods of soil preparation and
management, fertilization, weed, disease, and pest control,
disposal of farm waste, irrigation, drainage and water
management, and grazing.
APPLICANT — Means a developer submitting an Application for
Development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the application
form and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for
approval of a subdivision plat, site plan, planned development,
conditional use, zoning variance, or direction of the issuance of a
permits pursuant to Section 25 or Section 27 of P.L.1975, c.291
(C.40:55D-34 or C.40:55D-36).
DISTURBANCE — Shall mean the placement of impervious surface,
the exposure or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing,
cutting, or removing of vegetation.
DISTURBANCE, ULTIMATE — Shall mean the total existing or
proposed area of disturbance of a lot, parcel, or other legally
designated (or otherwise legally recognized) tract or subdivision of
land, for the purpose of, and in connection with, any human activity,
property improvement, or development, including the surface area
of all buildings and structures, all impervious surfaces, and all
associated land disturbances such as excavated, filled, and graded
areas, and all lawn and landscape areas. Ultimate disturbance shall
not include areas of prior land disturbance which at the time of
evaluation: a) contain no known man-made structures (whether
above or below the surface of the ground) other than such features
as old stone rows or farm field fencing; and b) consist of exposed
rock outcroppings, or areas which, through exposure to natural
processes (such as weathering, erosion, siltation, deposition, fire,
flood, growth of trees or other vegetation) are no longer impervious
or visually obvious, or ecologically restored areas which will
henceforth be preserved as natural areas under conservation
restrictions.
FARM MANAGEMENT UNIT — Shall mean a parcel or parcels
of land, whether contiguous or noncontiguous, together with
agricultural or horticultural buildings, structures and facilities,
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:84
producing agricultural or horticultural products, and operated as a
single enterprise.
HIGHLANDS ACT — Shall mean the Highlands Water Protection
and Planning Act, P.L. 2004, c.120, as amended, codified in part at
N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq.
HIGHLANDS APPLICABILITY DETERMINATION (HAD) — Shall
mean the determination made by the NJDEP of whether a project
proposed for the Preservation Area is a major Highlands
development, whether any such major Highlands development is
exempt from the Highlands Act, and whether the project is
consistent with the applicable Areawide Water Quality
Management Plan.
HIGHLANDS AREA — Shall mean that portion of the municipality
for which the land use planning and regulation are in conformance
with, or are intended or proposed to be in conformance with, the
Highlands Regional Master Plan, specifically in the context of this
Ordinance, the Township of Sparta Highlands Preservation Area.
HIGHLANDS COUNCIL — Shall mean the New Jersey Highlands
Water Protection and Planning Council.
HIGHLANDS REGION — Shall mean all that area within the
boundaries of the municipalities listed in Subsection a of Section 7
of the Highlands Act.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean any structure, surface, or
improvement that reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater
into land, including, but not limited to, porous paving, paver blocks,
gravel, crushed stone, decks, patios, elevated structures, and other
similar structures, surfaces, or improvements.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES, CUMULATIVE — Shall mean the total
area of all existing or proposed impervious surfaces situated or
proposed to be situated within the boundary lines of a lot, parcel,
or other legally recognized subdivision of land, expressed either as
a measure of land area such as acreage, or square feet, or as a
percentage of the total lot or parcel area.
MAJOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCES (PCS) — Shall
mean land uses and activities determined by the Highlands Council
to pose a major risk of ground water contamination (see Appendix
A).
MINOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCES (PCS) — Shall
mean land uses and activities determined by the Highlands Council
to pose a minor risk of ground water contamination (see Appendix
B).
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW (MLUL) — Shall mean the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:85
NJDEP — Shall mean New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
NJDEP PRESERVATION AREA RULES — Shall mean the
regulations established by the NJDEP to implement requirements
of the Highlands Act, titled "Highlands Water Protection and
Planning Act Rules," and codified at N.J.A.C. 7:38-1 et seq.
PLAN CONFORMANCE — Shall mean the process by which a
municipality revises the master plan, development regulations and
other regulations related to the development and use of land to
conform them with the goals, requirements, and provisions of the
Regional Master Plan in accordance with the Highlands Plan
Conformance Guidelines.
PLANNING AREA — Shall mean lands within the Highlands Region
not within the Preservation Area (N.J.S.A. 13:20-7).
PRESERVATION AREA — Shall mean that portion of the Highlands
Region so designated by Subsection b of Section 7 of the Highlands
Act.
PUBLIC COMMUNITY WELL — Shall mean a well that provides
water to a public water system serving at least 15 service
connections used by year-round residents or regularly serving at
least twenty-five-year-round residents.
PUBLIC NON-COMMUNITY WELL — Shall mean a well that is not
a public community well and that provides water to a public water
system regularly serving at least 25 individuals for at least 60 days
in any given calendar year.
REGIONAL MASTER PLAN (RMP) — Shall mean the Highlands
Regional Master Plan or any revision thereof adopted by the
Highlands Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:20-8.
SOLAR PANEL — Shall mean an elevated panel or plate, or a
canopy or array thereof, that captures and converts solar radiation
to produce power, and includes flat plate, focusing solar collectors,
or photovoltaic solar cells and excludes the base or foundation of
the panel, plate, canopy, or array. (As defined by the Highlands Act,
N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq, as amended.)
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a
construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed
on, above, or below the surface of a parcel of land.
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:86
APPENDIX A
MAJOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCES [Ord. No.
2015-12]
Land uses and activities determined by the Highlands Council
(based on New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act regulations at
N.J.A.C. 7:10 and NJDEP regulations) to be Major Potential
Contaminant Sources include those listed below.
1. Underground fuel and chemical storage and oil tanks
regulated by NJDEP under provisions of the Underground
Storage of Hazardous Substances Act (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-21 et
seq.).
2. Above-ground storage facility for a hazardous substance or
waste with a cumulative capacity greater than 2,000 gallons.
3. Automotive service center (repair & maintenance).
4. Dry cleaning processing facility.
5. Road salt storage facility.
6. Cemetery.
7. Highway maintenance yard.
8. Truck, bus, locomotive maintenance yard.
9. Site for storage and maintenance of heavy construction
equipment and materials.
10. Site for storage and maintenance of equipment and
materials for landscaping, excluding household storage and
maintenance of such equipment.
11. Livestock operation containing 300 or more Animal Units
(AU) [1 AU = 1,000 pounds of live animal weight] as defined
by the NJ Department of Agriculture in its Criteria and
Standards for Animal Waste Management, at N.J.A.C. 2:91.
12. Quarrying and/or mining facility.
13. Asphalt and/or concrete manufacturing facility.
14. Junkyard/auto recycling and scrap metal facility.
15. Residential or agricultural motor fuel in NJDEP exempted
underground storage tanks (i.e., under 1,000 gallons).
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:87
APPENDIX B
MINOR POTENTIAL CONTAMINANT SOURCES [Ord. No.
2015-12]
Land uses and activities determined by the Highlands Council
(based on New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act regulations at
N.J.A.C. 7:10 and NJDEP regulations) to be Minor Potential
Contaminant Sources include the following:
1. Underground storage of hazardous substance or waste of
less than 50 gallons.
2. Underground heating oil storage tank with a capacity of less
than 2,000 gallons.
3. Sewage treatment facility regulated by a NJPDES permit
granted under N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
4. Industrial waste line.
5. Septic system disposal field.
6. Facility requiring a ground water discharge permit issued by
the NJDEP pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:14A et seq.
7. Stormwater retention-recharge basin on an industrial
property receiving runoff from surfaces other than roof
areas.
8. Dry well on an industrial property receiving runoff from
surfaces other than roof areas.
9. Waste oil collection, storage and recycling facility.
10. Agricultural chemical bulk storage and mixing or loading
facility including crop dusting facilities.
11. Above-ground storage of hazardous substance or waste in
quantities of less than 2,000 gallons.
12. Livestock operation containing 8 or more Animal Units (AU)
[1 AU = 1,000 pounds of live animal weight] or those
receiving 142 or more tons of animal waste per year as
defined by the NJ Department of Agriculture pursuant to its
Criteria and Standards for Animal Waste Management, at
N.J.A.C. 2:91.
l. Township of Sparta Highlands Area Exemption Ordinance.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to set forth the
procedural and substantive requirements by which the
municipality will issue Highlands Act Exemption Determinations.
Such determinations pertain only to Highlands Act Exemptions 1,
2, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. Highlands Act Exemption Determinations
indicate whether proposed activities, improvements or
development projects affecting lands located within the Township
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:88
Highlands Area are exempt from the Highlands Water Protection
and Planning Act ("Highlands Act," N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq.), and
are therefore exempt from the Highlands Water Protection and
Planning Council's ("Highlands Council") Regional Master Plan,
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's (NJDEP)
Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act Rules ("Preservation
Area Rules," N.J.A.C. 7:38-1 et seq.), and from any amendments
to the Township's master plan, development regulations, or other
regulations adopted pursuant to the approval of the Township's
Petition for Plan Conformance by the Highlands Council.
2. Scope/Applicability. The provisions of this Ordinance pertain to
activities, improvements and development projects involving lands
located within the Township Highlands Area. The Highlands Area
comprises that portion of the municipality for which the applicable
provisions of the Township Master Plan, land use ordinances and
other pertinent regulations have been deemed by the Highlands
Council to be in conformance with the Highlands Regional Master
Plan (RMP) (see § 3.1.1). The provisions of this Ordinance shall not
be construed to alleviate any person or entity from the provisions
and requirements of any other applicable ordinances, rules, or
regulations of the municipality, or from any other applicable law,
regulation, or requirement of any county, State, or Federal
authority having jurisdiction. Nor shall the provisions of this
Ordinance deprive any person or entity from seeking a Highlands
exemption determination from the NJDEP or the Highlands
Council.
3. Statutory Authority. This Ordinance is adopted under the authority
of the Highlands Act and the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law
("MLUL", N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). In the Highlands Act, the
Legislature identified numerous categories of activities that are
exempt from the Act, the RMP, the Preservation Area Rules, and
any amendments to a master plan, development regulations, or
other regulations adopted by a local government to conform them
with the RMP. See N.J.S.A. 13:20-28.
The Legislature granted the Highlands Council the authority to
administer the plan conformance process and to approve, reject, or
approve with conditions municipal plan conformance petitions. See
N.J.S.A. 13:20-14, -15. The Legislature, through the MLUL, granted
authority to New Jersey municipalities to govern land use and
development within their borders and, through the Highlands Act,
established requirements for Highlands municipalities to conform
their land use and development regulations with the RMP. In a
July 19, 2012 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the
Highlands Council and the NJDEP, the Council and the NJDEP
recognized the circumstances in which it would be appropriate
for conforming, Highlands Council-certified municipalities to make
determinations regarding specified Highlands Act exemptions.
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:89
4. Word Usage. Terms used in the body of this Ordinance which are
defined by the Highlands Act (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3) are intended to
have the same definitions as provided in the Highlands Act. Unless
expressly stated to the contrary or alternately defined herein,
terms which are defined by the MLUL are intended to have the
same meaning as set forth in the MLUL. For purposes of this
Ordinance, the terms "shall" and "must" are indicative of a
mandatory action or requirement while the word "may" is
permissive.
5. Definitions. For purposes of this Ordinance the following definitions
shall apply:
AGRICULTURAL IMPERVIOUS COVER — Shall mean agricultural
or horticultural buildings, structures or facilities with or without
flooring, residential buildings and paved areas, but not meaning
temporary coverings. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Shall
mean construction for the purposes of supporting common farmsite
activities, including but not limited to, the production, harvesting,
storage, grading, packaging, processing, and the wholesale and
retail marketing of crops, plants, animals, and other related
commodities and the use and application of techniques and
methods of soil preparation and management, fertilization, weed,
disease, and pest control, disposal of farm waste, irrigation,
drainage and water management, and grazing. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL USE — Shall mean the use
of land for common farmsite activities, including but not limited
to, the production, harvesting, storage, grading, packaging,
processing, and the wholesale and retail marketing of crops, plants,
animals, and other related commodities and the use and
application of techniques and methods of soil preparation and
management, fertilization, weed, disease, and pest control,
disposal of farm waste, irrigation, drainage and water
management, and grazing. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
APPLICANT — Shall mean any entity applying to the Board of
Health, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, Zoning
Officer, Construction Official or other applicable authority of the
municipality for permission or approval to engage in an activity
that is regulated by the provisions of this Ordinance.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the application
form and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for
approval of a subdivision plat, site plan, planned development,
conditional use, zoning variance, or direction of the issuance of
a permit pursuant to Section 25 or Section 27 of P.L.1975, c.291
(C.40:55D-34 or C.40:55D-36).
BUILDING PERMIT — Used interchangeably with the term
"construction permit"; see definition below.
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:90
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued pursuant
to the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, Chapter 23 of Title
5 of the New Jersey Administrative Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et seq.),
providing authorization to begin work subject to the conditions and
requirements established under the provisions therein.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into
two or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any building or
other structure, or of any mining excavation or landfill, and any
use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or land
or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required
pursuant to the MLUL. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4.)
DISTURBANCE — Shall mean the placement of impervious surface,
the exposure or movement of soil or bedrock, or the clearing,
cutting, or removing of vegetation. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
DISTURBANCE, ULTIMATE — Shall mean the total existing or
proposed area of disturbance of a lot, parcel, or other legally
designated (or otherwise legally recognized) tract or subdivision of
land, for the purpose of, and in connection with, any human activity,
property improvement, or development, including the surface area
of all buildings and structures, all impervious surfaces, and all
associated land disturbances such as excavated, filled, and graded
areas, and all lawn and landscape areas. Ultimate disturbance shall
not include areas of prior land disturbance which at the time of
evaluation: a) contain no known man-made structures (whether
above or below the surface of the ground) other than such features
as old stone rows or farm field fencing; and b) consist of exposed
rock outcroppings, or areas which, through exposure to natural
processes (such as weathering, erosion, siltation, deposition, fire,
flood, growth of trees or other vegetation) are no longer impervious
or visually obvious, or ecologically restored areas which will
henceforth be preserved as natural areas under conservation
restrictions.
ENVIRONMENTAL LAND USE OR WATER PERMIT — Shall mean a
permit, approval, or other authorization issued by the Department
of Environmental Protection pursuant to the "Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act," P.L.1987, c.156 (C.13:9B-1 et seq.), the "Water
Supply Management Act," P.L.1981, c.262 (C.58:1A-1 et seq.), the
"Water Pollution Control Act," P.L.1977, c.74 (C.58:10A-1 et seq.),
"The Realty Improvement Sewerage and Facilities Act (1954),"
P.L.1954, c.199 (C.58:11-23 et seq.), the "Water Quality Planning
Act," P.L.1977, c.75 (C.58:11A-1 et seq.), the "Safe Drinking Water
Act," P.L.1977, c.224 (C.58:12A-1 et seq.), or the "Flood Hazard
Area Control Act," P.L.1962, c.19 (C.58:16A-50 et seq.). (N.J.S.A.
13:20-3.)
FARM MANAGEMENT UNIT — Shall mean a parcel or parcels
of land, whether contiguous or noncontiguous, together with
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:91
agricultural or horticultural buildings, structures and facilities,
producing agricultural or horticultural products, and operated as a
single enterprise. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
FARMSITE — Shall mean a Farm Management Unit as defined
above.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — Shall mean a written guidance
document describing the forest resources present on a property,
the landowner's management goals and objectives, and the
recommended practices or activities to be carried out over time on
the land. This tool is used to evaluate a forest land's current state
and provide a management process which, over time, meets the
landowner's objectives, while maintaining health and vigor of the
resource. Forest Management Plans are typically written for a tenyear period. (RMP, Glossary.)
HIGHLANDS APPLICABILITY DETERMINATION — Shall mean a
determination made by the NJDEP (pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:38-2.4)
indicating whether a project proposed for the Preservation Area
is a major Highlands development, whether any such major
Highlands development is exempt from the Highlands Act, and
whether the project is consistent with the applicable Areawide
Water Quality Management Plan.
HIGHLANDS AREA — Shall mean that portion of the municipality
for which the land use planning and regulation are in conformance
with, or are intended or proposed to be in conformance with, the
Highlands RMP.
HIGHLANDS PRESERVATION AREA APPROVAL (HPAA) — Shall
mean an approval issued by the NJDEP pursuant to 7:38-6
pertinent to a regulated activity in the Highlands Preservation
Area, and including an HPAA that contains a waiver pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:20-33b.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER — Shall mean a spouse, child,
parent, sibling, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, first cousin,
grandparent, grandchild, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, stepparent, stepchild, stepbrother, stepsister, half
brother, or half sister, whether the individual is related by blood,
marriage, or adoption. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean any structure, surface, or
improvement that reduces or prevents absorption of stormwater
into land, including, but not limited to, porous paving, paver blocks,
gravel, crushed stone, decks, patios, elevated structures, and other
similar structures, surfaces, or improvements. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES, CUMULATIVE — Shall mean the total
area of all existing or proposed impervious surfaces situated or
proposed to be situated within the boundary lines of a lot, parcel,
or other legally recognized subdivision of land, expressed either as
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:92
a measure of land area such as acreage, or square feet, or as a
percentage of the total lot or parcel area.
MAJOR HIGHLANDS DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean except as
otherwise provided pursuant to Subsection a of Section 30 of the
Highlands Act ("Exemptions"): (1) any non-residential development
in the Preservation Area; (2) any residential development in the
Preservation Area that requires an environmental land use or water
permit [from the NJDEP, see definition above], or that results in the
ultimate disturbance of one acre or more of land or a cumulative
increase in impervious surface by 1/4 acre or more; (3) any activity
undertaken or engaged in the Preservation Area that is not a
development but results in the ultimate disturbance of 1/4 acre
or more of forested area or that results in a cumulative increase
in impervious surface by 1/4 acre or more on a lot; or (4) any
capital or other project of a State entity or local government unit
in the Preservation Area that requires an environmental land use
or water permit [from the NJDEP, see definition above], or that
results in the ultimate disturbance of one acre or more of land or
a cumulative increase in impervious surface by 1/4 acre or more.
Major Highlands Development shall not include any agricultural
or horticultural development or agricultural or horticultural use.
Solar panels shall not be included in any calculation of impervious
surface. (As defined by the Highlands Act, N.J.S.A. 13:20-1 et seq.,
as amended.)
MASTER PLAN — Shall mean for purposes of this Ordinance,
all references to the "Township Master Plan," "master plan," or
"Master Plan," refer to the municipal master plan, as defined in the
MLUL (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-5), as adopted by the Township Planning
Board.
MASTER PLAN, HIGHLANDS REGIONAL (RMP) — Shall mean
for purposes of this Ordinance, all references to the Highlands
Regional Master Plan (RMP), shall be by use of the words
"Highlands Regional Master Plan," "Highlands RMP," "Regional
Master Plan," or "RMP."
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW (MLUL) — Shall mean the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
NJDEP — Shall mean New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
NJDEP PRESERVATION AREA RULES — Shall mean the
regulations established by the NJDEP to implement requirements
of the Highlands Act, titled "Highlands Water Protection and
Planning Act Rules," and codified at N.J.A.C. 7:38-1 et seq.
PLANNING AREA — Shall mean lands within the Highlands Region
that are not located in that portion designated by the Highlands
Act as the "Preservation Area" (see metes and bounds description
at N.J.S.A. 13:20-7b).
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:93
PRESERVATION AREA — Shall mean lands within the Highlands
Region that are located in that portion designated by the Highlands
Act as the "Preservation Area" (see metes and bounds description
at N.J.S.A. 13:20-7b).
SOLAR PANEL — Shall mean an elevated panel or plate, or a
canopy or array thereof, that captures and converts solar radiation
to produce power, and includes flat plate, focusing solar collectors,
or photovoltaic solar cells and excludes the base or foundation of
the panel, plate, canopy, or array. (N.J.S.A. 13:20-3.)
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a
construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed
on, above, or below the surface of a parcel of land.
6. Geographic Area of Applicability - Highlands Planning Area and
Preservation Area. The Highlands Act establishes the Preservation
Area and Planning Area of the Highlands Region. It describes the
varied attributes of each and sets forth the major land use planning
goals that pertain to the lands located within each. The Act defines
the geographic extent of the Highlands Region to include the
aggregated land area making up its constituent municipalities
(N.J.S.A. 13:20-7a). It provides a physical delineation of the
Preservation Area by use of a specific metes and bounds
description (N.J.S.A. 13:20-7b), designating all remaining lands
within the Highlands Region as the Planning Area.
7. Highlands Area. The Township Master Plan incorporates the
Highlands Preservation Area, inclusive of the goals applicable to
the Preservation Area, as an integral component of the planning
and land use policies of the municipality. For purposes of this
Ordinance, this/these Area/s is/are designated as the Township
Highlands Area. A map of the Township Highlands Area appears in
Exhibit 1.6
8. Applicability Specified. This Ordinance applies specifically and
solely to lands designated as the Township Highlands Area, as
delineated in Exhibit 1, the Highlands Preservation Area Map.
9. Highlands Act Exemption Determinations. Section 30 of the
Highlands Act identifies as exempt, specific activities,
improvements and development projects affecting lands within the
Highlands Region. Such activities, improvements and projects may
be proposed as a component of any type of land use application
submitted to the municipality for approval, including but not
limited to zoning permit applications, building permit applications,
and Applications for Development (as defined at Subsection
18.-3.4l5). Any such qualifying activity, improvement or
development project is exempt, with regard specifically to that
6. Editor's Note: Exhibit 1, Highlands Preservation Area Map, referred to herein, may be
found on file in the Township Offices.
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:94
activity, improvement or development project, from the
requirements of the Highlands Act, the Highlands RMP, the NJDEP
Preservation Area Rules, and any amendments to the Township's
master plan, development regulations, or other regulations
adopted pursuant to the approval of Township's Petition for Plan
Conformance by the Highlands Council. Such an exemption
specifically applies to any Highlands Area land use ordinance
adopted by the Township pursuant to the Highlands Council's
approval of Township's Petition for Plan Conformance.
Where any application submitted to the municipality for approval
proposes to rely upon a Highlands Act Exemption, the applicant
must, as a condition of application completeness, and prior to
review or approval of the application by the applicable municipal
authority, provide sufficient evidence that the proposed activity,
improvement, or development project in fact qualifies as a
Highlands Act Exemption. Such evidence shall consist of either a
State Agency Exemption Determination or a Municipal Exemption
Determination (see Subsection 18-3.4l10 or 18-3.4l11 below)
indicating that the proposed activity, improvement, or development
project qualifies for a Highlands Act Exemption.
10. State Agency Exemption Determination. State Agency Exemption
Determinations shall consist of either, a Highlands Applicability
Determination issued by the NJDEP for a Preservation Area
proposal, or a Highlands Exemption Determination issued by the
Highlands Council for a Planning Area proposal. State Agency
Determinations may be requested with regard to any Highlands Act
Exemption, however for applications involving any exemption not
identified at Subsection 18-3.4l12 below, a State Agency Exemption
Determination is required. Any applicant seeking a formal
exemption determination for a capital or other project of any State
entity or local government unit, or for any other publicly-owned or
controlled land or facility, also must request a State Agency
Exemption Determination.
11. Municipal Exemption Determination. For an application involving
any of the specific exemptions listed in Subsection 18-3.4l12 below,
the applicant may request a Municipal Exemption Determination.
The applicant may rely upon the findings of a Municipal Exemption
Determination to the same extent as would apply to an exemption
determination issued by the Highlands Council or the NJDEP.
12. Highlands Act Exemptions Eligible for Municipal Determination.
Effective as of the date on which the municipality receives written
authorization from the Highlands Council to proceed, an applicant
may seek a Municipal Exemption Determination for the Highlands
Act Exemptions listed hereunder.
(a) Exemption 1. The construction of a single family dwelling, for
an individual's own use or the use of an immediate family
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:95
member, on a lot owned by the individual on the date of
enactment of the Highlands Act (August 10, 2004) or on a lot
for which the individual entered into a binding contract of sale
to purchase on or before May 17, 2004.
(b) Exemption 2. The construction of a single family dwelling on a
lot in existence on the date of enactment of the Highlands Act
(August 10, 2004), provided that the construction does not
result in the ultimate disturbance of one acre or more of land
or a cumulative increase in impervious surface by 1/4 acre or
more.
(1) A Municipal Exemption Determination indicating that an
applicant qualifies under Highlands Act Exemption 2 shall
require approval and filing of a Deed Notice along with a
site plan delineating the total exempt area and the extent
of the disturbance recognized in the Municipal Exemption
Determination (see Subsection 18-3.4l16 below).
Municipal Exemption Determinations in such instances
shall not take effect until the applicant has provided proof
of filing of the approved Deed Notice.
(c) Exemption 4. The reconstruction of any building or structure
for any reason within 125% of the footprint of the lawfully
existing impervious surfaces on the site, provided that the
reconstruction does not increase the lawfully existing
impervious surface by 1/4 acre or more. This exemption shall
not apply to the reconstruction of any agricultural or
horticultural building or structure for a non-agricultural or
non-horticultural use.
(1) For purposes of this Ordinance, this exemption shall not be
construed to permit multiple 125% footprint expansions,
but rather, to permit one or more reconstruction activities
cumulatively resulting in a maximum 125% increase in the
footprint of the impervious surfaces lawfully existing on
the site, provided they do not cumulatively exceed the 1/4
acre limitation. Any determination of whether the
expansion of impervious cover meets the statutory criteria
for the exemption must account for the preexisting
impervious cover, and such expansion must be contiguous
to the location of the existing impervious cover. See In re
August 16, 2007 Determination of NJDEP ex rel. Christ
Church, 414 N.J. Super. 592 (App. Div. 2010), certif.
denied, 205 N.J. 16(2010).
(2) For Preservation Area determinations, the applicable date
of lawful existence shall be August 10, 2004, the date of
enactment of the Highlands Act. For Planning Area
determinations, the date of lawful existence shall coincide
with the effective date of the municipally-adopted
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:96
Highlands Area Checklist Ordinance or Highlands Area
Land Use Ordinance, whichever is earlier.
7
(d) Exemption 5. Any improvement to a single family dwelling in
existence on the date of enactment of the Highlands Act
(August 10, 2004), including but not limited to an addition,
garage, shed, driveway, porch, deck, patio, swimming pool or
septic system.
(e) Exemption 6. Any improvement, for non-residential purposes,
to a place of worship owned by a nonprofit entity, society or
association, or association organized primarily for religious
purposes, or a public or private school, or a hospital, in
existence on the date of enactment of the Highlands Act
(August 10, 2004), including but not limited to new structures,
an addition to an existing building or structure, a site
improvement, or a sanitary facility.
(f) Exemption 7. An activity conducted in accordance with an
approved woodland management plan pursuant to Section 3 of
the "Farmland Assessment Act," P.L.1964, c.48 (C.54:4-23.3) or
a forest stewardship plan approved pursuant to Section 3 of
P.L.2009, c. 256 (C.13:1L-31), or the normal harvesting of
forest products in accordance with a forest management plan
or forest stewardship plan approved by the State Forester.
(g) Exemption 8. The construction or extension of trails with
nonimpervious surfaces on publicly owned lands or on
privately owned lands where a conservation or recreational
use easement has been established.
13. Exemption Designee(s). Municipal Exemption Determinations
regarding Highlands Act Exemptions shall be issued by the
Township Engineer and/or Zoning Officer. The Exemption Designee
shall be authorized to issue Municipal Exemption Determinations
on behalf of the municipality, and shall only begin to do so, after
satisfactory completion of a Highlands Council training class for
which the individual(s) has/have received formal certification from
the Highlands Council.
14. Updates to Training Certification. In the event of programmatic
changes, updated information, or modifications to procedures,
updated training certification may be required of Exemption
Designees in order to maintain qualifications for providing
Municipal Exemption Determinations. The Highlands Council will
provide training modules on an as-needed basis, to provide base
training to new employees, and/or to further the expertise of
already-certified individuals. Exemption Designees and the
municipalities they serve will be advised of any need for upgraded
7. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2015-12 Highlands Area Checklist Ordinance was adopted
October 27, 2015 and is codified at Subsection 18-3.4k.
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:97
training, which will be provided and funded by the Highlands
Council.
15. Interim Determinations. For the duration of any period during
which the municipality is without a qualified Exemption Designee
due to changes in personnel or other extenuating circumstances,
applicants seeking Highlands Act Exemption Determinations shall
be referred to the NJDEP or the Highlands Council, for a State
Agency Determination pursuant to Subsection 18-3.4l10, above.
16. Application Procedures.
(a) Municipal Exemption Applications. Requests for Municipal
Exemption Determination shall be submitted on forms
provided by the Planning Department and shall be
accompanied by sufficient information and documentary
evidence to demonstrate whether the proposed activity,
improvement or development project qualifies for the
applicable exemption. Required submission materials
applicable to each exemption, appear at Subsection
18-3.4l16(j), below.
(b) Completeness Determination. The Exemption Designee shall
review the application and all accompanying materials to
determine whether sufficient information has been submitted
to make a determination on the application. In the event of a
finding that the application is incomplete, the Exemption
Designee shall, within 20 calendar days of receipt, issue such
findings in writing to the applicant, indicating what
information is required to properly consider the application.
(c) Time for Determination. The Exemption Designee shall issue
Municipal Exemption Determinations within 20 calendar days
of receipt of a complete application. The Exemption Designee
may consult with the Executive Director (or applicable
designee) of the Highlands Council as needed in making any
exemption determination, however. In such circumstance, the
Exemption Designee shall seek such assistance within the
twenty-day period and shall issue the determination within at
least 20 calendar days of receiving the requested guidance. In
no case shall failure to meet this date constitute approval of the
exemption.
(d) Determinations. All Municipal Exemption Determinations shall
be provided in writing, shall certify to the applicability or
inapplicability of the exemption, and shall include a statement
of the rationale for the decision. Any Municipal Exemption
Determination certifying to the applicability of Highlands Act
Exemptions #2 shall be contingent upon submission of proof of
filing of the required Deed Notice, as set forth at Subsection
18-3.4l16(e), below.
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:98
(e) Notice of Determination Required. The Exemption Designee
shall provide copies of all Municipal Exemption Determinations
including a copy of the full application, to the Highlands
Council and for decisions regarding lands in the Highlands
Preservation Area, to the NJDEP, in either case, within 10
business days of issuance.
(f) Deed Notice for Exemption #2. Any Municipal Exemption
Determination that certifies to the applicability of Highlands
Act Exemption #2 (Subsection 18-3.4l12 above), shall be
issued conditionally, pending fulfillment of the requirement
that a deed notice be recorded in the office of the County Clerk
or Register, as applicable, indicating the extent of the
exemption that has been consumed. The deed notice shall
incorporate each of the components listed below and the
applicant shall provide a copy of the filed Deed Notice to the
Highlands Council within five business days of filing.
(1) Clear identification of the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner(s) in fee of the property;
(2) Designated tax block and lot number(s), street
address(es), municipality and county of location of the
property;
(3) Reference to the Municipal Exemption Determination (by
date, numbering if applicable) issued and under which the
deed notice is being filed;
(4) Description of the approved area of ultimate disturbance
and the impervious surface area, with verification that
these remain below the statutory limits;
(5) For properties of one acre or more in area, metes and
bounds delineation indicating the portion of the property
for which the ultimate disturbance has been authorized;
(6) Agreement to abide by the ultimate disturbance and
impervious surface limits imposed, any furtherance
thereof rendering the Municipal Exemption Determination
null and void; and
(7) Notice that the owner(s) and subsequent owner(s) and
lessees shall cause all leases, grants, and other written
transfers of interest in the property to contain provisions
expressly requiring all holders thereof to take the property
subject to the limitations therein set forth.
(g) Appeal of Municipal Exemption Determination. A Municipal
Exemption Determination may be appealed by any affected
person/entity by filing a notice of appeal within 20 calendar
days of issuance or receipt of said determination, whichever is
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:99
later, specifying the grounds therefor. Appeals must be filed
with the NJDEP in the case of any Preservation Area
Exemption, and with the Highlands Council, in the case of
any Planning Area Exemption. All appeals shall be copied to
the Exemption Designee, who shall immediately transmit to
the NJDEP or the Highlands Council, as applicable, copies of
the notice of appeal, the Municipal Exemption Determination
Application, and all supplemental materials constituting the
record that the Exemption Designee relied upon in issuing
the Municipal Exemption Determination. Where the Municipal
Exemption Determination deems an activity, improvement or
development project exempt, the filing of an appeal to the
NJDEP or the Highlands Council shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of its approval by the municipality.
(h) Effect of Certified Exemption. Issuance of a Municipal
Exemption Determination that certifies to the applicability of a
Highlands Act exemption shall recognize the applicant's
exemption from the provisions of the RMP, NJDEP Preservation
Area Rules, and any municipal ordinances and requirements
adopted under the authority of the Highlands Act to achieve
Highlands Plan Conformance. The exemption is restricted
solely to the extent of the specified activity, improvement, or
development project as described in the language of the
Highlands Act exemption, or to any lesser activity,
improvement, or development project as proposed and
certified through a Municipal Exemption Determination
Application. Any activity, improvement, or development
project, or any part thereof, that is not specifically listed as an
exemption or exceeds the limits of an exemption, remains
subject to all of the above regulatory programs to the full
extent of the respective applicability of each. Issuance of a
Highlands Exemption Determination shall not relieve the
applicant from securing all other required Federal, State, or
local approvals.
(i) Application Fees. Applicants for a municipal exemption shall
pay the following fees and escrow charges:
Highlands Exemption Determination Fee (without
a zoning permit)
$50
Highlands Exemption Determination Fee (with a
zoning permit)
$100
Highlands Exemption Determination Escrow
Deposit for Professional Review (if needed)
$750
The fees schedule entitled "Assorted Fees" in Township Code
Subsection 18-8.2 is hereby amended to add the above fees to
the list in Subsection 18-8.2.
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:100
(j) Submission Requirements. All applications shall be
accompanied by the Municipal Exemption Determination
Application Form, the applicable fees, and the information
listed below, as applicable to the particular exemption or
exemption(s) being sought by the applicant. All references to
professional preparers indicated herein shall be construed to
include any and all qualified individuals licensed, certified, or
otherwise eligible and authorized to complete such work, in
accordance with the applicable laws and legal requirements of
the State of New Jersey including but not limited to the MLUL
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and Title 13 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code, Law and Public Safety. Where the
Exemption Designee finds that any submission item is not
necessary to address the evidentiary requirements that must
be satisfied for issuance of an Exemption Determination, either
because alternate items have been provided by the applicant,
or the relevant information is readily available through
records, maps, or any other documents on file in the offices of
the municipality, the Exemption Designee may waive the
applicant's obligation to submit such information.
(1) Exemption 1.
[a] A copy of a deed, closing or settlement statement, title
policy, tax record, mortgage statement or any other
official document showing that the lot was legally
owned by the applicant on or before August 10, 2004
and indicating the lot and block as designated by the
municipal tax mapping, the municipality and county in
which the lot is located, and the street address;
[b] If the applicant did not own the lot, a copy of the
binding contract of sale executed by the seller and the
applicant on or before May 17, 2004 for the lot on
which the house is to be constructed; and
[c] A certification by the applicant stating that the single
family dwelling proposed for construction on the lot
specified and described therein by tax lot and block,
municipality and county of location, and street
address, is intended for the applicant's own use or the
use of an immediate family member as identified
therein by name and relationship to the applicant.
(2) Exemption 2.
[a] A copy of the recorded deed or plat showing that the
lot was created on or before August 10, 2004 or proof
of subdivision approval on or before August 10, 2004;
[b] A property survey certified by a licensed New Jersey
Professional Land Surveyor indicating the property
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:101
boundary lines and overall lot size, and showing what
structures currently exist on the lot, if any;
[c] A parcel plan certified by a licensed New Jersey
Professional Engineer showing all existing and
proposed development, including all structures,
grading, clearing, impervious surface and
disturbance, and including the calculations supporting
the claim that impervious surfaces and areas of
disturbance are within the limits necessary for
Exemption 2; and
[d] A metes and bounds description of the area of the lot
to be disturbed, limited to less than one acre and a
draft conservation restriction or deed notice
(Subsection l,16(f), above) to cover the balance of the
lot.
(3) Exemption 4.
[a] A parcel plan certified by a licensed New Jersey
Professional Engineer depicting:
[1] All existing property improvements, including all
structures, grading, clearing, impervious surfaces
and limits of disturbance, lawfully existing on the
site as of August 10, 2004 for Preservation Area
projects and as of the effective date of the
municipal Highlands Area Checklist Ordinance or
Highlands Area Land Use Ordinance, whichever is
earlier; and
[2] All proposed development including all
structures, impervious surfaces, clearing limits,
and limits of disturbance, including grading; and
[b] A copy of any official documentation of the original
date of construction of the building or otherwise
establishing the lawfulness of existing impervious
surfaces.
(4) Exemption 5.
[a] A copy of any official documentation proving the
single family dwelling was in existence on August 10,
2004;
[b] A description of the proposed improvement; and
[c] A certification from the applicant that the property
and all improvements will continue to be used for
single family dwelling purposes.
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-3.4
A:102
(5) Exemption 6.
[a] A copy of any official documentation indicating that
the place of worship, public or private school or
hospital was in existence on August 10, 2004;
[b] For improvements to a place of worship,
documentation showing that the entity, society or
association, or association organized primarily for
religious purposes has nonprofit status;
[c] A site plan certified by a licensed New Jersey
Professional Engineer depicting:
[1] All existing property improvements including all
structures, grading, clearing, impervious surfaces
and limits of disturbance, existing on the site on
August 10, 2004; and
[2] All proposed development including all
structures, impervious surfaces, clearing limits,
and limits of disturbance, including grading.
(6) Exemption 7.
[a] For a private landowner with an approved woodland
management plan or forest stewardship plan:
[1] A copy of the applicant's tax bill showing that the
site has farmland assessment tax status under the
New Jersey Farmland Assessment Act, N.J.S.A.
54:4-23.1 et seq., if applicable;
[2] A brief description of the total area of woodlands
that is the subject of the approved woodland
management plan or forest stewardship plan;
[3] A brief description of the length of time that the
area to be managed has been in use for woodland
management or forest stewardship plan; and
[4] A copy of the approved woodland management
plan or forest stewardship plan.
[b] For the normal harvesting of forest products in
accordance with a forest management plan or forest
stewardship plan approved by the State Forester:
[1] A brief description of the total area where the
normal harvesting of forest products occurs;
[2] A brief description of the length of time that the
area to be managed has been in use for normal
harvesting of forest products; and
§ 18-3.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-3.4
A:103
§ 18-4. ZONING.
§ 18-4.1. Title and Purpose. [Ord. No. 636 A 401]
§ 18-4.2. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 636 A 402; Ord. No. 691 § II;
Ord. No. 720 § II; Ord. No. 751 § I; Ord. No. 772 §§ II — IV; Ord. No.
790 §§ I, II; Ord. No. 841 § XI; Ord. No. 878 § 3; Ord. No. 00-15 § 1;
Ord. No. 01-14 § 5; Ord. No. 02-20 §§ 2 — 4; Ord. No. 08-05 § 1; Ord.
No. 10-14; Ord. No. 2016-09; Ord. No. 2016-20 § 1]
[3] A copy of a forest management plan or forest
stewardship plan approved by the State Forester.
(7) Exemption 8.
[a] A site plan certified by a licensed New Jersey
Professional Engineer showing the proposed trail
construction with details including the location, and
width of existing and proposed trails and those off-site
trails to which they connect, if any;
[b] A written description of the non-impervious materials
to be used; and
[c] For privately owned property, a copy of a deed for the
property and the conservation or recreational use
easement on the property.
a. Short Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as "The
Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Sparta."
b. Purpose. The provisions of this section are intended to provide
adequate light, air and convenience of access, to lessen the congestion
on streets, to secure safety from fire and other dangers, to avoid undue
concentration of population by regulating and limiting the use of land,
the height and bulk of buildings wherever erected, to limit and
determine the size of yards and other open spaces, to regulate the
density of population, to conserve the value of the property and
encourage the most appropriate use and scale of development
throughout the Township of Sparta.
c. Scope; Construction. It is not intended by this section to repeal,
abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing
provisions of other ordinances except those specifically repealed by this
section, or with private restrictions placed upon the property by deed,
covenant or other agreement. However, where this section imposes a
greater restriction upon land, buildings or structures than those
imposed by existing provisions of ordinance, contract or deed, the
provisions of this section shall control. Where the provisions of this
section conflict with State or Federal law and cannot be reconciled
therewith, the provisions of such law shall govern.
§ 18-3.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:104
a. Provisions of this Section Applicable to All Zones. Each of the
subsections and provisions of this section shall apply to all zones unless
otherwise stated.
b. Site Plan Approval Requirement. Site plans shall be required in the
following instances with the exception of those conforming with the
waiver requirements of Subsection d.
1. In all cases involving the change in the principal intended use of
any nonresidential unit whether or not a building permit shall be
required or issued.
2. For any nonresidential off-street parking area.
3. Where a use variance is required.
4. Whenever a nonresidential use is established on a parcel of
property or within its structure in the Township of Sparta, except
for home occupations as defined in this Code.
5. Any development proposal with the exception of a detached one or
two dwelling unit building must have a site plan approved by the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment when exercising
its ancillary jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law
before the grant of a building permit or certificate of occupancy.
6. Prior to the expansion of any nonresidential use and any
nonconforming use.
7. Prior to any change or alteration in the exterior of an existing
nonresidential structure requiring a construction code permit
except for a re-roof or roof replacement with the same materials
and similar color with no alteration to the slope or pitch of the roof
structure.
8. Prior to any site clearing, grading, excavating, filling or similar site
activities except those approved pursuant to a subdivision approval
or those activities being conducted for: (a) agricultural purposes,
(b) tree thinning, (c) tree harvestry purposes pursuant to an
approved forester's plan, (d) a single family residential use or
structure or (e) a use or structure accessory to a single family use.
c. Minor Site Plan Review by the Planning Board or Subcommittee of the
Planning Board. All minor site plans as defined by this chapter shall be
reviewed by either the Planning Board or a subcommittee of the
Planning Board appointed by the Chairman of the Board to review
minor site plans. The Chairman of the Planning Board is hereby
authorized to appoint a Minor Site Plan Subcommittee of the Planning
Board which shall be composed of at most four members of the Board
including at least the Mayor or Council member of the Planning Board
and two other members of the Planning Board. The Minor Site Plan
Subcommittee shall have the authority to approve minor site plan
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:105
applications including minor site plans involving alterations of the
exteriors of existing conforming nonresidential structures as required
by this chapter and provide recommendations to the Planning Board for
waivers, or refer the application without decision to the entire Planning
Board for decision by the Board. The Minor Site Plan Subcommittee
shall also have the authority to act upon the minor site plans, provided
that they do not involve an application in the ED Zone or change in
use in the ED Zone for a use that will utilize hazardous materials or
other materials regulated under the ED Zone. The Minor Site Plan
Subcommittee shall not have authority to review or act upon
applications for minor site plans that include any variances.
d. Site Plan Waiver. Site plans shall not be required in the following
instances:
1. A construction permit for a single family detached dwelling, two
family dwelling or customary accessory buildings incident to farms
shall not require approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment or
Planning Board where such construction conforms with the
requirements of this chapter.
2. If the Planning Board waives formal site plan review and approval
for the site plans.
3. Any change of use to a use permitted in the zone shall not require
approval by the Planning Board if, in the majority opinion of the
Minor Site Plan Subcommittee, the parking and traffic circulation
conditions existing on the site are adequate.
A site plan application or a letter request for a waiver shall be filed
together with appropriate fees and maps with the administrative
officer. If the Site Plan Subcommittee determines that it may be
treated as a minor site plan or that a waiver of site plan may be
granted, a majority report of the Minor Site Plan Subcommittee
shall be issued within two weeks after the application is filed. The
decision of the Minor Site Plan Subcommittee as to minor site plan
approval or as to its recommendation as to a waiver of site plan
shall be forwarded to the applicant and shall be included on the
agenda and in the minutes of the next regularly scheduled Planning
Board meeting. Minor site plan approval shall be effective upon
approval by the Minor Site Plan Subcommittee.
4. The Planning Board of the Township of Sparta may waive notice
and public hearing and a formal site plan approval for any site plan
defined by this chapter. The Zoning Board, pursuant to its ancillary
jurisdiction may waive site plan submission requirements or a
formal site plan, but only after public hearing upon notice.
e. Subdivision Approval Requirements.
1. When a new lot or lots are formed from a parcel of land;
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:106
2. Where two or more lots are combined into a single parcel of land;
3. Where a lot line is adjusted between two parcels of land, these
modifications must be approved by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment when exercising its auxiliary jurisdiction
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law except where subdivision
approval is specifically waived by the Municipal Land Use Law.
Subdivision applications shall be filed with the appropriate
application form, fees and requirements indicated in § 18-6 of this
chapter.
f. Building Permits and Building Plans.
1. Building permits will not be issued for any new single family
detached residence or commercial or industrial building unless the
size, shape of the floor plan, the roof shape and the exterior
appearance of the proposed building is substantially different from
all other buildings located within 500 feet of the proposed building
and measured in either direction along the street upon which the
proposed building fronts including the opposite side of the street.
2. The physical contour of any lot shall not be altered in any manner
affecting drainage to the detriment of the property or adjoining lot,
nor shall any natural contours be disturbed or excavations
permitted which are likely to involve risk of erosion, landslide,
injury to natural vegetation or other hazardous or adverse
conditions. Specifically, any lot within an area designed on an
officially adopted flood plain map of Sparta Township shall show
the extent to which the lot in question lies within said flood plain.
Furthermore, any such lot shall be utilized only to such extent as it
conforms with the regulations contained in the Administrative
Manual, part 3, entitled Basin Regulations, Flood Plain Regulations
of the Delaware Basin Commission adopted November 10, 1976,
and effective January 1, 1977, whether or not the subject property
lies within or without the Delaware River Basin. The above cited
regulations are hereby adopted by reference. In addition, the
following specific requirements shall be met:
(a) There shall be no change in the grade of a lot within five feet of
an adjoining street or property line unless said change in grade
is in accordance with an approved plan.
(b) No grade shall be increased to a slope greater than 2:1.
(c) There shall be no filling of land nor the erection of retaining
walls in any location or to such height as would reduce the
normal sight distance along a street from any point at the
right-of-way line of adjoining lot.
(d) Land disturbance is permitted on an entire lot if the
development has been approved by the appropriate Board and
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:107
does not conflict with or violate another section of the Land
Management Code.
3. If the Construction Official finds that the construction of any
building or the disturbance of natural contours is likely to result in
any condition mentioned in Subsection f2 above, he shall refer the
application and plot plan to the Township Engineer. Upon advice of
the Township Engineer, the Construction Official shall require
changes in the construction plans or he shall require the
construction of berms, gutters, retaining walls, drywells, catch
basins and similar structures as may be necessary to control
drainage, reduce excavation, maintain a natural environment to the
greatest degree possible and to otherwise prevent or eliminate
danger from hazardous conditions.
4. No structure or part thereof shall be erected, raised, moved,
extended, enlarged, altered or demolished and no excavation or
clearing shall be undertaken until a building permit has been
granted by the Construction Official. For the purposes of
performing soil tests only, the limited clearing of property without a
building permit shall be permitted. Application therefor shall be
filed in duplicate by the owner or his agent and it shall state the
intended use of the structure on the land. The application shall be
accompanied by detailed plans and specifications, plot plan
showing open spaces, the established building lines within 200 feet
of either side of the proposed structure(s), existing and proposed
elevations of the corners of the lot, at the corners of all buildings,
along driveways and in any area where change of elevation is
proposed, elevations and peculiarities of topography, and such
other information as may be necessary or desirable to permit the
enforcement of this section.
5. Plans shall be drawn to scale and shall show actual dimensions in
figures. The building plan scale shall be at least 1/4 inch to the foot.
6. All plans, specifications and plot plans shall be prepared and sealed
by a duly licensed architect of the State of New Jersey or a licensed
professional engineer, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:3-10, except
that the owner may sign the building plans for a single family
dwelling in the event said owner has prepared the building plans,
will personally be the original occupant thereof, and provided said
owner files an affidavit to that effect in accordance with law.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a licensed
land surveyor of the State of New Jersey may prepare and certify
said required plot plan only. The Construction Official shall require
a certified survey of the location of a building as required to insure
compliance with approved plans.
g. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. Where a building permit has been
issued, temporary permits may be authorized by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment after a hearing for a period not to exceed one year for
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:108
nonconforming uses, incidental to construction projects on the same
premises and including such uses as storage of building supplies and
machinery, and the assembly of building materials. In addition, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment after a hearing may authorize a certificate
of occupancy for a dwelling house to be temporarily used as a sales
and management office for the sale of those homes within a subdivision
provided all of the following requirements are complied with:
1. The house to be used as such office is built upon a lot approved as
part of a subdivision that has been approved by the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
2. Said house is of substantially the same quality of construction as
those homes to be sold within the subdivision.
3. No business other than that accessory to the management and
sales of lands owned by the applicant shall be permitted.
4. Said dwelling house shall meet all other zoning restrictions of the
zone in which it is located.
5. The temporary certificate of occupancy issued under this section
shall be for no longer than a one-year period. However, such permit
may be renewed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment annually after
the hearing.
h. Industrial Permits and Operations. An application for any building
permit or certificate of occupancy in the district shall be submitted to
the Construction Official in duplicate. The applicant shall also submit in
duplicate all plans of the proposed construction and development,
including a description of the proposed machinery operation and
products as well as an affidavit by the applicant acknowledging his
understanding of the applicable performance standards and agreement
to conform with same at all times.
i. Building Records. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to
keep a record of all applications for building permits and certificates of
occupancy and of all such permits and certificates issued, with a
notation of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep
copies of all plans and specifications submitted with such applications,
and the same shall form a part of the records of his office. Copies of
certificates of occupancy shall be furnished upon request to any person
having a proprietary or leasehold interest in the structure or land
affected.
j. Certificate of Occupancy. No land shall be used and no new structure
shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any use, nor shall the
use of any land or structure be changed from an existing to a new use
until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Construction Official
stating that the structure and the occupancy and use of the land and
structure, if any, conforms with the provisions of this chapter. In
addition, a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained prior to the
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:109
occupancy of any existing nonresidential land or building or part
thereof by a new owner or tenant, even if there is no change in use.
Such certificates of occupancy shall be granted or denied within 10
days from the date written application therefor has been received by
the Construction Official in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code Act. Unless a certificate is granted within such
period, it shall be deemed to be denied. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued for any existing use not meeting all requirements of this
Code until a site plan has been approved by the Planning Board. This
provision shall not apply where, in the judgment of the Zoning Officer
there exists no reasonable possibility of curing the deficiency.
k. Public Utilities and Public or Institutional Uses. Public utility
distribution facilities required for local service may be located
anywhere within the Township where reasonably necessary provided
such facilities are placed within the right-of-way of existing roads and
streets or in utility easements. Public utilities, building or structures,
other than those provided for in the foregoing sentence, and
institutional uses including public and private schools may be located in
any zone if granted by the Planning Board as a conditional use under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 and as provided for in Subsection 18-4.3 of this
chapter. In connection with such conditional use, a site plan shall be
submitted to and approved by the Planning Board after due
consideration of the following:
1. Preservation of existing natural resources on the site;
2. Safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and
loading;
3. Screening, landscaping and location of structures and exterior
lighting.
The Planning Board must find that the proposed structure or conditional
use will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the
community and is reasonably necessary for the convenience thereof. Where
such a conditional use is granted, the exterior design of any building and
the site development plan shall be proposed so as to conform as much as
possible with specifically permitted uses and structures within the zone.
l. Height Exceptions.
1. The height provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the erection
of building appurtenances such as church spires, belfries, cupolas,
domes and flagpoles designed exclusively for ornamental purposes;
provided, however, that no such exempted structure shall exceed a
height of 50 feet.
2. The height provisions of this chapter shall moreover not apply to
chimneys, flues, bulkheads, elevator enclosures, water tanks or
similar accessory structures occupying an aggregate of 10% or less
of the area of the roof on which they are located and further
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:110
provided that such structures do not exceed the height limit by
more than 10 feet.
3. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the erection above the height
limitation of a parapet, wall or cornice extending above such height
limit not more than three feet or to the construction of farm
buildings of variable heights.
4. The height provisions of this chapter shall moreover not apply to
water tanks, standpipes, and elevated water tanks which are
existing or approved to provide central water facilities for a
subdivision or site plan in accordance with the provisions of
Subsections 18-5.3j, Fire Protection Systems and 18-5.3k, Central
Water Facilities.
m. Structure Placement. Structures shall be so located that specimen trees
(16 inches in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet above the ground) or
unique tree stands shall be preserved to the fullest extent possible and
shall be fit into the topography of the lot parcel.
n. Corner Lots. The minimum required front yard shall be provided along
both street frontages. The lot width requirement on corner lots shall be
increased to 125% of the zone requirement.
o. Yard Requirements.
1. Every lot must provide front, rear and side yards as required for its
zone. All front yards must face upon an improved street approved
by the Planning Board or, where applicable, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
2. Front, side and rear building locations shall be surveyed and
certified by a licensed land surveyor. The survey may be performed
at any time prior to the erection of the building above the
foundation. A certified copy of the survey showing elevations shall
be presented to the Construction Official when the foundation to
the building is completed.
3. Required yards shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for
the ordinary projection of parapets, windowsills, doorposts,
rainwater leaders, cornices, canopies, eaves, bay windows,
stairways and similar ornamental or structural fixtures which may
not project more than two feet into such yards.
p. Design Standards. Design standards for sidewalks, topsoil protection,
off-street parking, swimming pools, signs, fences and walls and cut and
fill contained within § 18-5 Subdivision and Site Plan Standards shall
apply to any development in all zones.
q. Affordable Housing Provisions.
1. This subsection and Subsection 18-8.5 of the Township of Sparta
Comprehensive Land Management Code set forth regulations
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:111
regarding very low, low and moderate income housing units in
the Township of Sparta that are consistent with the provisions of
N.J.A.C. 5:93 et seq. as effective on June 6, 1994 and all Council
on Affordable Housing ("COAH") rules and regulations, the Sparta
Township Declaratory Judgment of September 26, 2016 and this
ordinance. These rules are pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of
1985 and the Township of Sparta's Constitutional obligation to
provide through its land use ordinances a realistic opportunity
for its fair share of very low, low and moderate income housing
under COAH regulations and the Township's Declaratory Judgment
and Order of Repose dated September 26, 2016. The Declaratory
Judgment is incorporated herein by reference. All units provided by
applicants shall meet all requirements needed for the Township to
obtain credit under COAH rules and judicial decisions.
(a) Sparta Township's new construction or inclusionary
component will be divided equally between very low, low and
moderate income households consistent with COAH rules and
this Subsection q.
(b) At least 13% of the total affordable units shall be affordable to
very low income households.
(c) Except for inclusionary developments constructed pursuant to
low income tax credit regulations (to the extent inconsistent
with tax credit regulation:
(1) At least 1/2 of all units within each inclusionary within
each inclusionary development will be affordable to very
low and low income households; and
(2) At least 1/2 of all rental units will be affordable to all very
low and low income households; and
(3) At least 1/3 of all units in each bedroom distribution
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.3 will be affordable to very low
and low income households.
(d) Inclusionary developments that are not restricted to senior
citizens will be structured in conjunction with realistic market
demands so that:
(1) The combination of efficiency and one bedroom units is at
least 10% and no greater than 20% of the total very low,
low and moderate income units; and
(2) At least 30% of all very low, low and moderate income
units are two bedroom units; and
(3) At least 20% of all very low, low and moderate income
units are three bedroom units; and
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:112
(4) Very low, low and moderate income units restricted to
senior citizens may utilize a modified bedroom
distribution. At a minimum, the number of bedrooms will
equal the number of senior citizen very low, low and
moderate income units within the inclusionary
development.
(e) In conjunction with realistic market information, the following
criteria will be used in determining maximum rents and sale
prices:
(1) Efficiency units will be affordable to one person
households; and
(2) One bedroom units will be affordable to 1.5 person
households; and
(3) Two bedroom units will be affordable to three person
households; and
(4) Three bedroom units will be affordable to 4.5 person
households; and
(5) Median income by household size will be established by a
regional weighted average of the uncapped Section 8
income limits published by HUD as per N.J.A.C.
5:93-7.4(b); and
(6) The maximum average rent and price of low and moderate
income units within each inclusionary development will be
affordable to households earning 57.5% of median income
as adjusted to conform with the 13% very low income
minimum; and
(7) Moderate income sales units will be available for at least
three different prices and low income sales units will be
available for at least two different prices; and
(8) For both owner-occupied and rental units, the very low,
low and moderate income units will utilize the same
heating source as market units within an inclusionary
development; and
(9) Very low income units will be reserved for households with
a gross household income of 30% or less of median gross
household income approved by COAH; low income units
will be reserved for households with a gross household
income less than or equal to 50% of the median income
approved by COAH; moderate income units will be
reserved for households with a gross household income
less than 80% of the median income approved by COAH as
per N.J.A.C. 5:93-9-16; and
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:113
(10) The regulations outlined in COAH Rules, New Jersey
Mortgage Finance Agency ("NJMFA") Uniform Affordable
Housing Controls ("UHAC") rules and this ordinance will
be applicable for purchased and rental affordable units.
(f) For rental units, developers and/or municipal sponsors may:
(1) Establish one rent for very low income unit, one rent for a
low income unit and one for a moderate income unit for
each bedroom distribution; and
(2) Gross rents, including an allowance for tenant-paid
utilities, will be established so as not to exceed 30% of the
gross monthly income of the appropriate household size as
per COAH rules and UHAC rules. The tenant-paid utility
allowance will be consistent with the utility allowance
approved by the United States Department as Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) for use in New Jersey.
(g) For sale units:
(1) The initial price of a very low, low and moderate income
owner-occupied single family housing unit will be
established so that after a down payment of 5%, the
monthly principal, interest, homeowner and private
mortgage insurances, property taxes (based on the
restricted value of the low and moderate income unit) and
condominium or homeowner fee do not exceed 28% of the
eligible gross monthly income; and
(2) Master deeds of inclusionary developments will regulate
condominium or homeowner association fees or special
assessments of low and moderate income purchasers at
100% of those paid by market purchasers. This 100% is
consistent with the requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(e).
Once established within the master deed, the 100% will
not be amended without prior approval from COAH; and
(3) The Township of Sparta will follow the general provisions
concerning uniform deed restriction liens and
enforcement through certificates of occupancy or
reoccupancy on sale units in accordance with COAH and
UHAC rules and this ordinance; and
(4) Sparta Township will require a certificate of reoccupancy
for any occupancy of a very low, low or moderate income
sales unit resulting from a resale in accordance with
COAH rules and this ordinance; and
(5) Municipal, State, nonprofit and seller options regarding
sale units will be consistent with COAH and UHAC rules
and this ordinance. Municipal rejection of repayment
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:114
options for sale units will be consistent with COAH and
UHAC rules and this Subsection q; and
(6) The continued application of options to create, rehabilitate
or maintain very low, low and moderate income sale units
will be consistent with COAH and UHAC rules and this
Subsection q; and
(7) Eligible capital improvements prior to the expiration of
controls on sale units will be consistent with COAH and
UHAC rules and this Subsection q; and
(8) The regulations detailed in COAH and UHAC rules and this
ordinance will be applicable to very low, low and moderate
income units that are for sale units as revised to require
13% of all affordable units to be affordable to very low
income households.
(h) In zoning for inclusionary developments the following is
required:
(1) Very low, low and moderate income units will be built in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(d):
Minimum % of Very Low,
Low/Moderate Income
Units Completed
% of Market Housing
Units Completed
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 75
100 90
100
(2) A design of inclusionary developments that integrates very
low, low and moderate income units with market units is
encouraged as per N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.6(e).
(i) A development fee ordinance was approved by COAH and
adopted by Sparta Township on May 12, 1998.
(j) To provide assurances that low and moderate income units are
created with controls on affordability over time and that low
and moderate income households occupy these units, the
Township of Sparta will designate the Sparta Housing Officer
with the responsibility of ensuring the affordability of sales and
rental units over time. The Sparta Housing Officer will be
responsible for those activities detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(a).
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:115
(1) In addition, the Sparta Housing Officer will be responsible
for utilizing the verification and certification procedures
outlined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.1(b) in placing households in
low and moderate income units; and
(2) Newly constructed low and moderate income sales units
will remain affordable to low and moderate income
households for at least 30 years. The Sparta Housing
Officer will require all conveyances of newly constructed
units to contain the deed restriction and mortgage lien
adopted by COAH and referred to as Technical Appendix E
as found in N.J.A.C. 5:93; and
(3) Housing units created through the conversion of a
nonresidential structure will be considered a new housing
unit and will be subject to thirty-year controls on
affordability. The Sparta Housing Officer will require
COAH's appropriate deed restriction and mortgage lien.
(k) Regarding Rehabilitated Units:
(1) Rehabilitated owner-occupied single family housing units
that are improved to code standard will be subject to
affordability controls for at least six years; and
(2) Rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are
improved to code standard will be subject to affordability
controls for at least 10 years; and
(l) Regarding Rental Units:
(1) Newly constructed low and moderate income rental units
will remain affordable to very low, low and moderate
income households for at least 30 years. The Sparta
Housing Officer will require the deed restriction and lien
and deed of easement referred to as Technical Appendix H,
as found in N.J.A.C. 5:93 and this ordinance; and
(2) Affordability controls in accessory apartments will be for a
period of at least 10 years, except if the apartment is to
receive a rental bonus credit pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:93-5.13, then the controls on affordability will extend for
30 years; and
(3) Alternative living arrangements will be controlled in a
manner suitable to COAH, that provides assurances that
such a facility will house very low, low and moderate
income households for at least 10 years except if the
alternative living arrangement is to receive a rental bonus
credit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.13, then the controls on
affordability will extend for 30 years.
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:116
(m) Section 14(b) of the Fair Housing Act N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et
seq. incorporates the need to eliminate unnecessary cost
generating features from Sparta Township's land use
ordinances. Accordingly, Sparta Township will eliminate
development standards that are not essential to protect the
public welfare and to expedite or fast track municipal
approvals/denials on inclusionary development applications.
Sparta Township will adhere to the components of N.J.A.C.
5:93-10.1 — 10.3.
(n) The Township of Sparta has a fair share obligation as set forth
in its Declaratory Judgment of the Superior Court dated
September 26, 2016 which is incorporated herein by
reference.
(o) Affirmative marketing plans shall be followed consistent with
COAH rules and shall include at least the following provisions:
(1) The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing
strategy designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all
majority and minority groups, regardless of sex, age or
number of children, to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer/sponsor, municipality and/or
designated administrative agency of affordable housing.
The plan will address the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.
In addition, the plan prohibits discrimination in the sale,
rental, financing or other services related to housing on
the basis of race, color, sex, religion, handicap, age,
familial status/size or national origin. The Township of
Sparta is in the housing region consisting of the Sussex,
Bergen, Hudson, Passaic and Morris Counties.
(2) The affirmative marketing program is a continuing
program and will meet the following requirements:
(i) All newspaper articles, announcements and requests
for applications for very low, low and moderate income
units will appear in the following newspapers/
publications:
Sunday Herald.
New Jersey Herald.
Sparta Independent.
(ii) The primary marketing will take the form of at least
one press release sent to the above publications and a
paid display advertisement in each of the above
newspapers. Additional advertising and publicity will
be on an "as needed" basis.
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:117
The advertisement will include:
A. The street address;
B. Directions to housing units;
C. Number of bedrooms per unit;
D. Range of selling prices/rents;
E. The size of units;
F. Household income limits;
G. The location of applications;
H. The telephone number and office hours for
obtaining information and requesting
applications;
(iii) Applications must be mailed to prospective applicants
upon request.
(iv) Public service announcements may be made through
the use of the following radio and/or cable television
stations broadcasting throughout the region: TKR
Cable TV Channel 3, Public Bulletin Board, and
Service Electric Cable TV Channel 8, Public Bulletin
Board.
(v) Announcements, requests for applicants and
newspaper articles may be placed in the following
neighborhood-oriented weekly newspapers, religious
publications and organizational newsletters within
Sussex and Morris Counties, as needed:
Sparta Independent
If applicable, the following regional radio and/or
cable television station(s) will be used:
WSUS Radio
WNNJ Radio
SECTV, Inc, Channel 8
(vi) The following is the location of applications,
brochure(s), sign(s), and/or poster(s) used as part of
the affirmative marketing program including specific
employment centers within the region:
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:118
Sparta Township Municipal Building
65 Main Street
Sparta, New Jersey 07871
Sparta Township Library
22 Woodport Road
Sparta, New Jersey 07871
Sparta Newsletter
Sparta Ecumenical Council
Sparta Senior Center
Knoll Road
Sparta Senior Welfare Director
(vii) Applications will be mailed to prospective applicants
upon request.
(viii) Additionally, applications will be sent to the chief
administrative employees of each of the following
agencies in the counties of Sussex, Morris, Bergen,
Hudson and Passaic:
Sussex County Office on Aging
(ix) The following is a description of the random selection
method that will be used to select occupants of verylow-, low- and moderate-income housing: Occupants
of very-low-, low- and moderate-income income
housing shall be administered by the administrative
agencies listed below. [Amended 11-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 19-20]
(x) The Township of Sparta is ultimately responsible for
administering the affirmative marketing program. The
Township of Sparta has delegated this responsibility
to the Sparta Housing Officer. The Sparta Housing
Officer will income qualify very low, low and moderate
income households; place income eligible households
in very low, low and moderate income units upon
initial occupancy; provide for the initial occupancy of
very low, low and moderate income units with income
qualified households; continue to qualify households
for reoccupancy of units as they become vacant during
the period of affordability controls; assist with
advertising and outreach to low and moderate income
households if in contract; and enforce the terms of the
deed restriction and mortgage loan as per N.J.A.C.
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:119
5:93-9. The Director of Planning within the Township
of Sparta is the designated Housing Officer to act
as liaison to the Sparta Housing Officer. The Sparta
Housing Officer will provide counseling services to
very low, low and moderate income applicants on
subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage
qualifications, responsibilities of homeownership,
rental lease requirements and landlord/tenant law.
The following service providers have agreed to
perform the above services:
Sparta Housing Officer, Morris County Housing
Partnership Housing Rehabilitation Admin.,
Hardyston Township, Community Development
Director.
(xi) Households who live or work in the COAH-established
housing region of Sussex, Bergen, Hudson and Passaic
Counties may be given preference for sales and rental
units constructed within that housing region.
Applicants living outside the housing region will have
an equal opportunity for units after regional
applicants have been initially serviced. The Township
of Sparta intends to comply with N.J.A.C. 5:93-11.7.
Veterans and surviving spouses shall have a
preference, if they meet all eligibility requirements,
which preference shall take priority over all other
preferences. [Amended 11-12-2019 by Ord. No.
19-20]
(xii) Developers of very low, low and moderate income
housing units shall assist in the marketing of the
affordable units in their respective developments if so
designated by the Township of Sparta.
(xiii) The marketing program will commence at least 120
days before the issuance of either temporary or
permanent certificates of occupancy. The marketing
program will continue until all very low, low and
moderate income housing units are initially occupied
and for as long as affordable units are deed restricted
and occupancy or reoccupancy of units continue to be
necessary.
(xiv) The Sparta Housing Officer will comply with
monitoring and reporting requirements as per N.J.A.C.
5:93-11.6 and 12.1 and in the Declaratory Judgment
and settlement with Fair Share Housing Center.
2. Violations and Penalties.
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:120
(a) Any person or entity who violates any term, condition, or
requirement of this chapter or violates any term, condition or
requirement of the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.) (the "Act") or violates any term, condition
or requirement of the substantive or procedural rules of the
New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (N.J.A.C. 5:96 and/
or 5:97 et seq., as same may be amended or replaced) or
violates the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls Act
("UHAC") or any term, condition or requirement imposed by
the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
(N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as same may be amended or
replaced) (all of the above ordinances, Acts and regulations are
collectively referred to in this Chapter as the "Affordable
Housing Laws") shall be subject to punishment as set forth in
this section.
(b) Upon the occurrence of a violation of any of the Affordable
Housing Laws, or the breach of any affordable housing
agreement governing an affordable unit, the Township of
Sparta shall have all remedies provided at law or equity,
including but not limited to foreclosure, ejectment, a
requirement for household recertification, acceleration of all
sums due under a mortgage, recoupment of any funds from a
sale in violation of the regulations, injunctive relief, or the
issuance of a municipal summons to prevent further violation
of the Affordable Housing Laws and/or affordable agreement
governing the home or unit.
(c) After providing written notice of a violation to an owner,
developer or tenant of a very-low-, low- or moderate-income
unit and advising the owner, developer or tenant of the
penalties for such violations, the Township of Sparta may take
the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that is not cured for a period of 30 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The Township of Sparta may file an action in either the
Superior Court or the Municipal Court, as applicable,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11, alleging a violation or
violations of the Affordable Housing Laws. If the owner is
found by the court to have violated any provision of the
Affordable Housing Laws, as applicable, the owner shall be
subject to one or more of the following penalties, at the
discretion of the court:
(i) A fine of not more than $2,000; imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days; a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days; or any or more of the
foregoing penalties. Each and every day that the
violation continues or exists shall be considered a
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:121
separate and specific violation of these provisions and
not as a continuing offense;
(ii) In the case of an owner who has resold his or her verylow-, low- or moderate-income unit in violation of the
above laws, payment into the Township of Sparta
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the difference
between the unauthorized resale price and the
maximum allowed resale price allowed by this
chapter;
(iii) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her verylow-, low- or moderate-income unit in violation of the
above laws, payment into the Township of Sparta
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the unauthorized
rental charge as defined in the UHAC under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.18(d)(6); or
(iv) In the case of an owner who has rented his or her verylow-, low- or moderate-income unit in violation of this
chapter, payment into the Township of Sparta
Affordable Housing Trust Fund of the innocent
tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as determined by
the court.
(2) The Township of Sparta may file a court action in the
Superior Court seeking a judgment which would result in
the termination of the owner's equity or other interest in
the unit, in the nature of a mortgage foreclosure. Any
judgment shall be enforceable as if same were a judgment
of default of the first-purchase money mortgage and shall
constitute a lien against the very-low-, low- or moderateincome unit.
(i) Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of
the Township of Sparta, by means of an execution sale
by the Sheriff, at which time the very-low-, low- or
moderate-income unit of the owner shall be sold at a
sale price which is not less than the amount necessary
to fully satisfy and pay off any first-purchase money
mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the Township of
Sparta, including attorney's fees. The owner shall
have his or her right to possession terminated as well
as his or her title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's
sale.
(ii) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied
to satisfy the first-purchase money mortgage lien and
any prior liens upon the very-low-, low- or moderateincome unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied to
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:122
reimburse the Township of Sparta for any and all costs
and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment or Sheriff's sale.
In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's sale
are insufficient to reimburse the Township of Sparta
in full as aforesaid, the owner shall be personally
responsible for and to the extent of such deficiency, in
addition to any and all costs incurred by the Township
of Sparta in connection with collecting such
deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall
be placed in escrow by the Township of Sparta for the
owner and shall be held in such escrow for a maximum
period of two years or until such earlier time as the
owner shall make a claim with the Township of Sparta
for such. Failure of the owner to claim such surplus
within the two-year period shall automatically result
in a forfeiture of such surplus to the Township of
Sparta. Any interest accrued or earned on such
surplus while being held in escrow shall belong to and
shall be paid to the Township of Sparta, whether such
surplus shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
Township of Sparta.
(iii) Foreclosure by the Township of Sparta due to violation
of the Affordable Housing Laws shall not extinguish
any affordability controls in effect as to any very-low-,
low- or moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed
to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the
restrictions and provisions of this chapter and the
Affordable Housing Agreement. The owner
determined to be in violation of the provisions of the
Affordable Housing Laws and from whom title and
possession were taken by means of the Sheriff's sale
shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
(iv) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if
insufficient amounts are bid to satisfy the firstpurchase money mortgage and any prior liens, the
Township of Sparta may acquire title to the very-low-,
low- or moderate-income unit by satisfying the firstpurchase money mortgage and any prior liens and
crediting the violating owner with an amount equal to
the difference between the first-purchase money
mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the very-low-, low- or
moderate-income unit could have been sold under the
terms of this chapter. This excess shall be treated in
the same manner as the excess which would have
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:123
been realized from an actual sale as previously
described.
(v) Failure of the very-low-, low- or moderate-income unit
to be either sold at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the
Township of Sparta shall obligate the owner to accept
an offer to purchase from any qualified purchaser
which may be referred to the owner by the Township
of Sparta, with such offer to purchase being equal to
the maximum resale price of the very-low-, low- or
moderate-income unit as permitted by the terms and
provisions of this chapter.
(vi) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible
and liable for complying with the terms and
restrictions of this chapter until such time as title is
conveyed from the owner.
(3) In the event of an unlawful rental of a very-low-, low- or
moderate-income unit in violation of the Affordable
Housing Laws, and where the tenant has entered into the
tenancy without knowledge of its unlawful nature, the
Township of Sparta, upon request by the tenant, may
pursue a rent-to-equity remedy. Under such a rent-toequity program, the tenant, including the immediate
family of such tenant, shall be given an opportunity to
purchase the unit from the affordable owner, and the
affordable owner shall be compelled to sell the unit to the
tenant, with the total of all rent paid to the owner being
credited to tenant as down payment money paid to the
affordable owner. Any person seeking to obtain a unit
under a rent-to-equity program must first be certified as
eligible under the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16.
(4) In addition to, and not in the place of, the foregoing
remedies, the Township of Sparta may also issue a
summons for each and every violation of the provisions of
this chapter which will be enforceable in the Sparta
Township Municipal Court. The persons or entities that
may be cited with a violation of this chapter include any
condominium association or homeowners' association that
has a duty to report any unit owner or other person with an
interest in an affordable housing unit such as a lessee or
tenant, in any building, premises, home, or unit, where
such violation has been committed or shall exist. Any
person or entity found to have violated this chapter shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000; imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 90 days; a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days; or any one or more of the
foregoing penalties, at the discretion of the Sparta
Township Municipal Court. Each and every day that such
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:124
violation continues or exists may be treated by the
Municipal Court as a separate and specific violation of
these provisions and not as a continuing offense.
r. Historic Preservation. The historic preservation regulations are set
forth to effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement and
preservation of the historic districts and the central business area of
the Township which contribute to the unique village environment and
rural character of the community.
The purpose of the provisions of this subsection is to set forth
guidelines for evaluating the impact of conversion, new construction,
alterations, additions and demolition of structures within the historic
zone districts.
1. Conversion of the existing buildings within the historic zone shall
be reviewed to determine the effect on the neighborhood and the
subject property. In regard to all applications for site plan,
subdivision or variances affecting a structure, the following factors
shall be considered:
(a) The impact of the proposed change on the significance of the
structure or neighborhood.
(b) The structure's importance to the Township and the extent to
which its historic or architectural significance would be
adversely affected to the detriment of the public interest.
(c) Use of the structure involved.
(d) The extent to which the proposed action would adversely affect
the public's view of a landmark or structure within the
neighborhood or district.
(e) The impact the proposed change to a structure would have on
the architectural significance and visual compatibility with
related structures in the neighborhood.
2. In regard to an application for new construction, alterations or
additions affecting the structures in the historic zone districts, the
following factors shall be considered for visual compatibility with
the existing structure and buildings and places to which it is
visually related:
(a) Height. The height of the proposed building or addition.
(b) Proportion of the Building's Front Facade. The relationship of
the width of the building to the height of the front elevations.
(c) Proportion of Openings Within the Facility. The relationship of
the width of windows to the height of windows in a building.
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:125
(d) Rhythm of Spacing of Buildings on Streets. The relationship of
the building to the open space between it and adjoining
buildings.
(e) Rhythm of Entrance and/or Porch Projections. The relationship
of entrance and porch projections to the street.
(f) Roof Shape and Scale of Building. The size of a building, the
mass of a building in relationship to open spaces, the windows,
door openings, porches and balconies.
(g) Directional Expression of Front Elevation. A building shall be
visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is
visually related in its directional character, whether this be
vertical character, horizontal character, or nondirectional
character.
(h) Relationship of Materials, Texture and Color. The relationship
of materials, texture and color of the facade and color of the
building.
(i) Walls of Continuity. Appurtenances of a building such as walls,
open type fencing, evergreens, landscape masses, shall form
cohesive walls of enclosure along a street to the extent
necessary to maintain visual compatibility of the main
buildings, with the building and places to which it is visually
related.
(j) Exterior Features. A structure's related exterior features such
as lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks, driveways and parking
areas shall be compatible with the features of those structures
to which it is visually related and shall be appropriate for the
historic period for which the structure is significant. New
signage shall also abide by the historic design of the principal
structure and neighborhood.
3. In regard to an application to demolish a structure or any
improvement within the historic zone districts, the following
matters shall be considered:
(a) Its historic architectural, cultural or scenic significance in
relation to the criteria established in Subsection 3c.
(b) The significance of the structure in relation to the historic
character of the zone district and the probable impact of its
removal on the neighborhood.
(c) Its potential for use for those purposes currently permitted by
the zoning ordinance.
(d) Its structural condition and the economic feasibility of
alternatives to the proposal.
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:126
(e) Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal would
be detrimental to the public interest.
(f) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon
design, craftsmanship, texture or material that it could be
reproduced only with great difficulty and expense.
(g) The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing the real estate values,
generating business, attracting tourists, attracting new
residents, or making the municipality an attractive and
desirable place in which to live.
(h) The Board with jurisdiction over an application in the White
Deer Plaza Historic District shall refer the application to the
Lake Mohawk Board of Trustees for comments concerning the
impact on the National and State Historic Designation. This
shall include any variance, site plan, subdivision or site plan
waiver request. Prior to the application being deemed
complete and prior to any Board approval, the applicant shall
demonstrate that it has obtained written approval from the
Lake Mohawk Association in compliance with the Lake
Mohawk Association design approval deed restriction.
s. Land Disturbance — Construction Permit.
1. Permit Required. No person shall commence any construction,
grading, filling, or other form of land disturbance, nor shall any use
be commenced in furtherance of any approved preliminary and/or
final subdivision or site plan, unless a permit for same shall have
first been obtained from the issuing authority, which shall be the
office of the Township Planner.
2. Prerequisites. Prior to the issuance of any such permit, the
Township Planner shall have first determined that:
(a) All conditions of Board approval have been met.
(b) All fees and escrow monies due the Township have been paid or
deposited.
(c) All required permits have been obtained and documentation of
permit issuance has been submitted.
(d) All proposed construction will be in accordance with approved
plans.
(e) A pre-construction meeting has been held with the Township
Engineer.
(f) All off-tract improvements contributions have been deposited
with the Township.
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:127
(g) All required surety has been posted and accepted by the
Township Council.
(h) A developer's agreement, if required has been executed with
the Township Council.
(i) The developer has made arrangements with the Sparta police
and provider of other emergency services with respect to
traffic control and circulation considerations during
construction activities as required by the Board.
3. Issuance of Permit. No such permit shall be issued unless, at least
10 days prior to the date on which construction is proposed to
commence, the applicant shall have applied, in writing, on an
approved application form, accompanied by written documentation
that the conditions attending the underlying approval (subdivision
or site plan review), including but not limited to, all requisite third
party permits have been secured. Three copies of all approvals
should be found and submitted to the Planning Department.
4. Term. Such permit shall be valid for a period of one year from date
of issuance and shall automatically expire, by limitation, unless
construction pursuant thereto shall have been actually commenced
within such period and shall have been diligently pursued.
5. Fee. The application fee for such permit, which shall be payable at
the time of application therefore, shall be as set forth in the fee
ordinance.
6. Site restoration guarantees may be required as a condition of
approval.
(a) It is the intent of this subsection, in the event of cessation of
land disturbance and/or construction activities for a period of
more than 120 consecutive days, when adverse weather
conditions are not the cause of such cessation of operation or
the applicant has not satisfactorily explained to the Township
Engineer and Planner the reason for cessation of operation and
when the Township Engineer and Planner shall not have found
that such cessation of operation is of a temporary nature, only,
to assure restoration of so much of the site as is reasonably
required to result in a safe and stable condition and one which
does not create a risk to the public health and safety.
In the event of the anticipated cessation of land disturbance
and/or construction activities, for a period of more than 90
consecutive days, the applicant shall have provided advance
notice thereof, in writing, to the Township Engineer and
Township Planner setting forth, in detail the reasons for the
proposed cessation of such activities and stating, to the best
of the applicant's ability, the anticipated date upon which the
activities will recommence.
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:128
(b) Consequently, it shall be required that, prior to the issuance of
a land disturbance-construction permit, the applicant shall first
have posted with the Township a restoration guarantee,
meeting the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-6 and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53, to assure the prompt and proper restoration of only
so much of the site as, in the opinion of the Township Engineer,
is unsafe, unstable or presents a risk to the public health and
safety.
(c) The amount of restoration guarantee shall be equal to 120% of
the estimated cost of restoration of the site to a safe and stable
condition, assuming all land disturbance and construction
activities are in full progress when the cessation thereof has
taken place. A written estimate of the cost of the restoration
shall be prepared by the applicant's engineer and approved by
the Township Engineer and Township Planner.
(d) The applicant shall have the option of posting separate
restoration guarantees for various separate phases of land
disturbance or construction activities upon the site, in order
that, upon the satisfactory completion of a particular phase of
land disturbance or construction, the applicant may apply for
and secure the release of the restoration guarantee posted for
that particular phase.
(e) Such restoration guarantee shall be posted with the Township,
shall be approved by the Township Attorney and accepted by
the Township Council prior to the issuance of any land
disturbance-construction permit pursuant to this subsection.
7. Exemptions. The following activities shall not be subject to the
requirements of this subsection:
(a) Septic repair.
(b) Farm activities meeting the standards of State laws governing
the right to farm.
(c) A project less than one acre.
8. Violations and Penalties.
(a) Any person violating this subsection, upon conviction, shall be
subject to a fine up to $1,000 per day for any such violation and
each and every day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate and distinct violation; or shall be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both.
(b) In addition to the foregoing, the Township shall be entitled to
apply to the Superior Court for an injunction to prohibit the
commencement and/or continuation of such construction
undertaken in violation of this subsection.
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:129
t. Tree Preservation.
1. Purpose. The findings of the Township Council, the Planning Board
and the Environmental Commission conclude the indiscriminate,
uncontrolled and excessive destruction, removal and cutting of
trees upon lots and tracts of land within The Township causes
increased drainage control costs, increased soil erosion and
sedimentation, degradation of water resources, decreased
groundwater recharge, increased buildup of air pollutants and dust
tending to impact the character of the Township and a decrease in
property values, which adversely affects the public health, safety
and general welfare of the Township residents, business owners
and visitors. The Township desires to regulate and control
indiscriminate and excessive removal and cutting of trees within
the Township, preserve the maximum possible number of quality
trees in the course of development of a site or lot, seek to protect
larger specimen trees and encourage innovative design and
grading to promote the preservation of existing trees.
2. The Governing Body and the Planning Board recognizes a strong
relationship between the integrity of the Township and the region's
water resources and the development on constrained land (steep
slopes, wetlands, depth to ground water etc.), tree removal, soil
disturbance, storm water management, and the general use of the
land resources. Therefore, the appropriate management of the
Township's resource is an important health, safety and general
welfare issue to be regulated.
3. Definitions. The listed definitions or terms in § 18-2 as used in the
ordinance section shall apply.
4. Cutting or Removal Restricted. With the exceptions of the
exemptions established in this subsection no person shall cut or
remove, or cause to be cut or removed, any existing tree with a
diameter at the point of measurement of four-inch caliper or
greater upon any lands within the Township unless the cutting and
removal can be accomplished in accordance with the provisions set
forth in this subsection.
5. Exemptions. The following shall be exempted from the
requirements of this subsection:
(a) Commercial nurseries or fruit orchards.
(b) Christmas tree farms.
(c) Any tree which is a part of a cemetery.
(d) Trees directed to be removed by the Township, County, State or
Federal authority pursuant to law.
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:130
(e) Removal of dead, dying or diseased, or damaged trees, or trees
whose angle or growth makes them an immediate hazard to
structures or human life.
(f) Pruning or removal of trees within the right-of-way by utility
companies or maintenance of utility wires or pipelines and the
pruning of trees within sight easements.
(g) Trees removed in conjunction with farmland greater than 25
acres that will be actively devoted primarily to agricultural
uses and that yield a minimum annual income of $500 per year
from said farming activities. A plan must be submitted to the
Planning Department for review and approval. In the event the
expanded farmlands are not actively farmed for a period of two
years, the tree replacement provisions contained in this
subsection will apply.
(h) Parcels of land with a forest management plan approved by the
NJDEP Division of Forestry. The approved plan must be
submitted to the Planning Department as a matter of record.
(i) Single family lots with tree removal of an area less than 5,000
square feet for the purposes of additions, accessory structures
and expanded yard areas except in restricted areas such as
conservation easements, wetlands or wetland buffers.
Separate tree removal events on a lot over a three-year period,
which exceeds 5,000 square feet are not exempt from the
subsection.
(j) Parcels of land with preliminary site plan or subdivision
approval. Removal of trees prior to Board approval is
prohibited, unless it is part of site investigation such as
percolation test for septic system suitability.
6. Residential Lots (excluding major and minor subdivisions and site
plans):
(a) Tree removal on residential lots exceeding an area of 5,000
square feet requires an application to the Site Plan
Subcommittee of the Planning Board to waive the requirement
of a tree removal site plan. The Subcommittee may choose to
require a notice hearing before the full Board based on the
information presented.
(b) Application Form. The application form shall be available at the
Planning Department and shall include the following
information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of owner of the
premises.
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:131
(2) Block and lot, and address of property where the tree
removal is located.
(3) Name, address and telephone number of person
performing the work.
(4) A list of trees to be removed with a DPM equal or greater
than four inches identified by size and species, including
total number of each species to be removed.
(5) Purpose of tree removal (construction, driveway,
recreation area, patio, parking area or other similar
activity).
(6) A property survey indicating the area of the tree removal
activity and existing tree line to remain.
7. Site Plan. Tree removal shall be permitted only after board
approval and only for those trees necessary to construct the
project. Appropriate protective measures for trees to be preserved
shall be in place prior to construction. Refer to the Checklist for the
required information.8
8. Minor or Major Subdivisions. Tree removal shall be permitted only
after Board approval and only for those trees necessary to
construct the project. Appropriate protective measures for trees to
be preserved shall be in place prior to construction. Refer to the
Checklist for the required information for play submission9
9. Review and Design Standards.
(a) Trees shall be permitted to be removed as necessary to permit
the construction of buildings, structures, decks, pools,
driveways, septic field, lawn area for recreational use for the
residents of the dwelling and any other authorized
improvements. Existing vegetation shall be preserved to the
greatest extent feasible.
(b) Existing lots with tree cover shall maintain a minimum of 30%
of the lot area with a tree canopy. This standard may be waived
if the Board finds that the intent of the subsection has been
met or relief can be granted without negatively impacting the
purposes of zoning.
(c) Site or tree protection measures including a field delineated
area of disturbance with a silt fence or construction fence in
place prior to removal and any other measure as deemed
appropriate by the Board or Subcommittee.
8. Editor's Note: Checklists referred to herein may be found in Appendix B attached to this
chapter.
9. Editor's Note: Checklists referred to herein may be found in Appendix B attached to this
chapter.
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.2
A:132
(d) Healthy trees outside of the building setback requirements
should be retained to maintain resource protection and
buffering to neighboring properties, unless the trees pose a
hazard to person or property or whereby the approved
construction grading or disturbance would cause damage to a
tree creating an unsafe condition.
(e) Trees and vegetation shall not be removed in wetlands,
wetland buffers or dedicated conservation easements except
for exempted activities or as approved by NJDEP.
10. Protection of Trees. Whenever an application for tree removal has
been granted, whether by site plan, subdivision or site plan waiver
the following tree protection measures shall be observed.
(a) Where practical, no material or temporary soil deposits shall
be placed within the drip of a tree to be preserved. A minimum
of six feet must be maintained.
(b) Except while engaged in tree removal, no equipment shall be
operated within six feet of any tree to be preserved.
(c) A temporary tree protection detail is included in paragraph.
Other methods must be submitted and approved by Board.
11. Violations and Penalties.
(a) Where a site plan has been cleared and/or constructed on a site
which results in accidental removal or severe damage which
will result in death of any tree noted for preservation, the
owner/developer shall replace the tree(s) on a one to one basis
per individual tree in accordance with the following table:
Caliper of Existing Tree
Removed
# of Replacement Trees
2 1/2 inches Caliper
Between 18 and 24 inches 3
Between 24 and 30 inches 5
Between 30 and 36 inches 7
36 inches or greater 10
(1) Replacement tree(s) shall be located on the site.
(2) The type of replacement tree(s) shall be the same as the
species removed or as approved by the Director of
Planning.
(b) Penalty. Section 18-7 Administration and Enforcement shall
apply to any violation of the tree removal subsection.
12. Permit Approval.
§ 18-4.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.2
A:133
§ 18-4.3. Principal and Accessory Building or Structure. [Ord. No.
636 A 403; Ord. No. 649; Ord. No. 665; Ord. No. 691 § III; Ord. No.
720 §§ V, VI; Ord. No. 841 XII-XVI; Ord. No. 02-20 § 6; Ord. No.
04-05 § 14; Ord. No. 05-03 § 6; Ord. No. 07-08 §§ 4, 9]
No lot in the Township may contain more than one principal structure
except as provided herein by Subsection 18-4.8d. No accessory structure
may be built on any lot on which there is no principal building or structure.
Unless otherwise regulated in this chapter, accessory structures shall meet
the following conditions:
(a) Where tree removal is a part of an application for site plan or
subdivision, the Municipal Land Use Law governs.
(b) Where the application is made in connection with a singlefamily lot (not part of a subdivision) the Township Planner shall
have 10 days for completeness review. After the application is
complete the Board shall have 30 days to act or extend with
consent of the applicant.
(c) No approval shall be granted, if the Board finds that the
proposed tree removal is contrary to the best interests of the
public health, safety or general welfare.
(d) The duration of the tree removal approval for a site plan or
subdivision or variance application is based on the Municipal
Land Use Law. The single-family lot with no variances shall be
one year from the date of Board action.
(e) The applicant must notify the Planning Department in writing
five days prior to start of work.
13. Fees.
(a) Application for site plan waiver for tree removal — $50.
(b) Application for site plan to full Board for tree removal — $200.
(c) Escrow fee — $300.
a. Accessory Structures in Residential Zones.
1. Except for accessory structures in connection with agricultural
uses, accessory structures shall not exceed 16 feet and 1 1/2
stories in height.
2. Accessory structures shall not be permitted in the front yard.
Accessory structures located in a side yard, other than decks, shall
meet the side yard requirements of the principal building and shall
not be connected to or mounted on the principal building unless
otherwise permitted in the zone. Where decks are permitted as an
accessory structure, the following minimum side yard setbacks are
required:
§ 18-4.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.3
A:134
R-1 zone 20 feet
R-2 zone 10 feet
R-3 zone 10 feet
RR zone 20 feet
3. Accessory structures, other than decks, erected in the rear yard
shall be set back from a side or rear property line in accordance
with the following schedule:
R-1 zone 15 feet
R-2 zone 10 feet
R-3 zone 10 feet
RR zone 15 feet
RC-1 zone 15 feet
RC-2 zone 15 feet
Where decks are permitted as an accessory structure, the
following minimum rear yard setbacks may be provided:
R-1 zone 65 feet
R-2 zone 40 feet
R-3 zone 25 feet or 35 feet if lot abuts a lake
RR zone 65 feet
The construction of a deck as an accessory structure shall not
modify the existing yard setback for the principal structure. Decks
which encroach within the minimum yard setback requirements
of the zone may not be converted to become part of the principal
structure.
4. Accessory structures such as boathouses or docks may be placed
along the waterfront of a lot having such frontage, regardless of
rear yard requirements.
5. Except for accessory structures used in connection with
agricultural uses, the total ground floor area of all accessory
structures on a lot shall not exceed the ground floor area of the
principal building.
6. No accessory structure shall be used as a dwelling.
7. With the exception of farm uses, there shall be no more than three
accessory structures per lot. Excepting farms, the combined
ground floor area of all accessory structures, exclusive of a sole
inground pool and a two car detached garage, shall not exceed 1/2
of the ground floor area of the principal building. With the
exception of accessory structures on farms, in no event shall the
§ 18-4.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.3
A:135
ground floor area of any accessory building exceed the ground floor
area of the principal structure.
8. Satellite receiving dish antennas greater than three feet in
diameter shall be considered accessory structures and shall
conform to the yard requirements for the zone wherein they are
located.
9. Pool houses shall be permitted as an accessory structure and shall
adhere to the following standards.
(a) The lot must have a principal structure.
(b) Minimum lot size shall be five acres.
(c) The pool house is only permitted in the side and rear yards.
(d) The pool house shall adhere to the setback standards of the
zone for the principal structure.
(e) The pool house shall have direct access to the pool decking.
(f) The architecture shall be compatible with the principal
structure.
(g) The structure may not be used for sleeping quarters.
(h) The height of the structure shall not exceed 16 feet and 1 1/2
stories.
(i) The maximum size shall not exceed 600 square feet.
10. Residential Lots with Double Frontage on Parallel Streets.
Accessory structures and uses shall be permitted within the
building setback area of the front yard of the rear portion of the
house. The rear portion of the house is considered the facade
opposite the front door and shall be consistent with the
neighborhood character.
b. Accessory Structures in All Other Districts. For the purposes of this
chapter, accessory structures in all other districts shall meet the height
and yard requirements for principal buildings. No such accessory
building shall be located closer to another building or property line than
the height of the shorter building.
c. Prohibited Accessory Structures in all Zones.
1. Any accessory structures not associated with the function of the
principal use or structure.
2. Tent structures, do not include temporary party or display tents as
permitted under the chapter.
3. External Furnaces and Boilers. External furnaces and boilers are
prohibited in all zones and no accessory structure shall be
§ 18-4.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.3
A:136
§ 18-4.4. Storage of Commercial Vehicles. [Ord. No. 636 A 404; Ord.
No. 841 § XVII]
Any commercial vehicle used in connection with a business or any vehicle
containing advertising matter intended to promote the interest of any
business shall not be parked or stored in a parking area serving said
business unless the vehicle is parked in a side yard or rear yard on the
lot not fronting on a street. In commercial zones, no commercial vehicle
in excess of five tons shall park within a public street right-of-way except
when making deliveries or pick-ups or when undergoing emergency repairs
(under 24 hours in duration). There shall be no use made of a public
right-of-way for commercial purposes that are typically on-site commercial
activities.
In residential zones, not more than one commercial vehicle may be kept on
the premises, provided:
§ 18-4.5. General Restrictions. [Ord. No. 636 A 405; Ord. No. 649;
Ord. No. 665; Ord. No. 691 § IV; Ord. No. 02-20 §§ 7, 8; Ord. No.
13-03]
permitted to house or enclose a furnace or boiler for the purposes
of heating the principal structure in any zone district.
a. It does not exceed a rated capacity of 3/4 ton.
b. It is regularly housed in a garage or carport.
c. It is used by a resident of the premises.
d. It is not parked on the street or on any exposed portion of the lot.
a. Tourist Cabins, Trailers, Etc. Except as provided in Subsections c and d
below, tourist cabins, travel trailers, trailer courts and all other movable
dwellings may not be occupied, erected or moved into any zone;
provided, however, the unoccupied travel trailers may be stored in any
zone, provided no more than one per dwelling unit be stored outside.
b. Disabled and Nonregistered Vehicles. Disabled and/or nonregistered
vehicles may not be stored in any zone except in an enclosed garage
unless the same are awaiting repair at a licensed public garage for a
period not to exceed two weeks, or unless the same are new vehicles
being stored or displayed at a licensed motor vehicle dealership. For
the purpose of this chapter, the term "disabled" shall refer to a motor
vehicle which is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot readily be
made operable and conforming to all requirements of the New Jersey
Division of Motor Vehicles.
c. Use of Trailers in Connection with Site Construction. The use of trailers
in any zone in connection with site construction shall be permitted
subject to the following restrictions and regulations.
§ 18-4.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.5
A:137
1. Such trailers shall be located on the lot on which construction is
progressing and shall not be located within 25 feet of the boundary
line of any abutting residential lot.
2. Such trailers shall be used only as field offices and not for any
dwelling use whatsoever.
3. Such trailers shall not be moved onto a construction site until the
date on or after which construction actually commences and shall
be removed from such site on or before the completion of
construction.
4. A permit for the location and use of any such trailer shall be
obtained from the Zoning Officer. Such permit shall be renewed
every six months.
d. Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage or display of any article or material
as an accessory use to any commercial operation is permitted in the ED,
ED-1, TCC, TCCO, TCLC, TCPB, TCLM, C-1 and C-2 zones only subject
to the following regulations:
1. All commercial districts and uses shall have an enclosed outdoor
trash and recycling area. The area shall include a concrete pad and
an enclosure that is architecturally compatible with the principal
structure. Appropriate landscape buffers are required to enhance
the buffer and appearance.
2. The outdoor storage of any article or material, other than
merchandise for sale on the premises, shall be limited to the side
and rear yards and shall be screened by fencing, planting, or both
as approved by the Planning Board. The height of the fence shall be
equal to or greater than the height of the material stored, but not
greater than six feet and the height of material to be stored shall
not exceed six feet. Said storage shall be located at least 10 feet
from the property line. Materials so stored shall be kept in an
orderly manner at all times and such material shall not include any
discarded or abandoned articles.
3. The outdoor storage of merchandise for sale on the premises is
permitted in the front, side and rear yards provided the same is
located at least 25 feet from a right-of-way line and 10 feet from a
property line. The area devoted to such storage shall be approved
by the Planning Board and shall be screened along any side or rear
line adjoining a residential zone. The height of material so stored
shall not exceed six feet except for individual articles which have a
height of more than six feet. No article or material shall be stored
in any required parking area or so located as to interfere with
vehicular or pedestrian traffic movement or safety. In addition, no
article or material shall be stored or displayed on a sidewalk.
4. The outdoor storage of live plants being displayed for sale on the
premises may be located within 10 feet of a street right-of-way line
§ 18-4.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.5
A:138
and up to a property line provided the height of such material does
not exceed three feet within 25 feet of the street right-of-way or
within 10 feet of a property line.
5. Excepting the outdoor storage of live plants, not more than 50% of
any yards shall be devoted to outdoor storage or display.
6. The outdoor storage of materials listed in N.J.A.C. 7:26-6.13.14
shall be prohibited unless specifically approved by the Planning
Board after notice of a resident within 200 feet and a public
hearing on the matter. Any Planning Board approval shall
specifically list materials to be stored, methods of storage and
method of eventual disposal.
e. Parking and Storage of Boats, Trailers and Recreation Vehicles. The
parking and storage of boats, trailers and recreational vehicles in any
zone shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions:
1. Trailers, boats or boat trailers which are 32 feet or more in length
as measured from outside dimensions including hitching devices
shall be stored within an enclosed garage at all times. Trailers,
boats or boat trailers less than 32 feet in length may be parked or
stored outside the confines of a building only in accordance with
Subsections e2 through 6 below.
2. All trailers, boats or boat trailers shall be stored in the side or rear
yard only. No trailer, boat or boat trailer shall be parked or stored
in the front yard of a lot or in the front of the front yard building
line.
3. The area devoted to storage of boats or trailers shall not exceed 7%
of the lot area or 400 square feet, whichever is the lesser.
4. Any trailer, boat or boat trailer parked in the side or rear of any lot
shall meet the requirements and regulations applicable to
accessory buildings in regard to setbacks.
5. To obscure from view to the maximum extent possible, any trailer,
boat or boat trailer, parked or stored, in a side or rear yard and not
in an enclosed garage shall be screened to a maximum of six feet.
Such screening may be waived if topographic or other physical
conditions would render the screening ineffective.
6. The area in which any trailer, boat or boat trailer is to be parked or
stored shall not preempt any off-street parking space required to be
provided by any provision of this chapter.
f. All Residential Zones. No more than two roomers or boarders per family
unit shall be permitted.
g. All Residential Zones; Home Occupation Requirements. Not more than
one person other than a resident of the premises may be employed by
such professional person and that not more than 1/2 of the floor area of
§ 18-4.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.5
A:139
§ 18-4.6. Nonconforming Uses and Structures. [Ord. No. 636 A 406;
Ord. No. 841 § XVIII; Ord. No. 07-08 §§ 1 — 3; Ord. No. 10-01; Ord.
No. 12-02]
one story or the basement shall be devoted to such use. No
merchandise or materials either assembled or unassembled may be
received into a residence for the purpose of assembling, fabricating,
storing or reselling. No use permitted shall result in any permitted
professional use operating in this zone in other than a building strictly
residential in appearance. Except for permitted signs, there shall be no
physical evidence of said use visible from the exterior of the building so
used.
h. Prohibited Uses in All Districts. All uses not specifically permitted in the
zone district are prohibited. In addition the following uses are
prohibited in all districts. The Township hereby finds and concludes
based upon a survey of the surrounding region that the region has
adequate sexually oriented businesses and uses and that additional
facilities are not required within the Township.
1. Sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, sexually
oriented retail sales, sexually oriented video and book stores,
sexually oriented entertainment uses, houses of prostitution, strip
clubs, nude entertainment uses and any similar sexually oriented
uses or businesses.
2. Tattoo parlors.
i. Appurtenances.
1. Permanent residential standby generators shall be considered
accessory uses subordinate and customarily incidental to the
principal use on the same lot and permitted in all single-family
residential zones. Setbacks shall be measured from the pad
supporting the unit and shall meet a minimum of five feet from the
side and rear property lines. Generators are not permitted in the
front yard and must adhere to the following standards:
(a) The size of the generator unit must not exceed 20kW.
(b) Scheduled maintenance (exercise time) is only permitted
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. from Monday to
Saturday.
2. Generators are permitted in all nonresidential zones and are not
limited by size, but shall adhere to all other standards under
Subsection 18-4.5i1(b).
a. Continuance of Use. Any lawful nonconforming use which existed on
the date of adoption of this chapter may be continued and any existing
structure designed, arranged, intended or devoted to a nonconforming
use may be structurally altered subject to the following regulations.
§ 18-4.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.6
A:140
1. A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged unless the use is
changed to a conforming use, provided, however, that where a
building meets the use requirements of this section and is
nonconforming because of height, area and/or yard regulations,
said use may be enlarged providing the height, area or yard
regulations are not further violated.
2. A nonconforming use changed to a conforming use shall not
hereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
3. A nonconforming use in existence on the date of adoption of this
chapter shall not be permitted to be changed to another
nonconforming use.
4. In the event that there is a cessation of operation of any
nonconforming use for a period of 12 consecutive calendar months,
the same shall be prima facie evidence of an abandonment of the
use without the review of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Any
subsequent exercise of such abandoned nonconforming use shall
be deemed a violation of the terms of this section.
5. Expansion of Residential Use. A nonconforming residential use or
structure may be expanded to provide additional living space
provided the expansion does not infringe further upon any
nonconforming side, front, or rear yard for the first floor
expansions only. Second story and half-story expansions must
comply with the setback requirements of the zone. However, no
additional building exteriors shall be closer than five feet to any
side or rear lot line.
b. Completion of Existing Buildings. Nothing in this chapter shall require
any change in plans, construction or designated use of a structure for
which a building permit has been issued when construction has been
diligently prosecuted within six months following the date of such
permit, and completed within the terms of such permit.
c. Restoration of Existing Buildings. Any nonconforming use or structure
existing on the date of adoption of this chapter may be continued upon
the lot or in the building so occupied and any structure may be restored
or repaired in the event of partial destruction thereof.
d. Unlawful Use Not Authorized. Nothing in this chapter shall be
interpreted as implied authorization for or approval of the continuance
of the use of a structure or premises in violation of zoning regulations in
effect on July 6, 1965.
e. Nonconforming Due to Reclassification. The foregoing provisions of this
section, except for as provided in Subsection d above, shall also apply to
structures, land or uses which hereafter become nonconforming due to
any reclassification of zones under this chapter, or any subsequent
change in the regulations of this chapter.
§ 18-4.6 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.6
A:141
§ 18-4.7. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 636 A 407; Ord. No. 649; Ord.
No. 665; Ord. No. 669 §§ V — VII; Ord. No. 772 §§ V, VI; Ord. No. 788
§ IV; Ord. No. 790 § IV; Ord. No. 841 §§ XIX — XXIII; Ord. No. 1001
§ 1; Ord. No. 1003 § 5; Ord. No. 02-21 § I; Ord. No. 07-24 § 1]
f. Building and Structure Expansion. Additional living space expansion
shall not be permitted on any residential lot over existing impervious
surfaces that exceeds the impervious cover requirement of the
residential zone district.
a. Purpose and Scope. The purpose of this subsection is to set forth a
complete and comprehensive scheme of orderly procedure for
obtaining from the Planning Board permits for conditional uses of lands
and premises in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67. No such permit
shall be granted in a zone unless specifically permitted in the zone.
b. Requirements. The following requirements specify minimal standards
which each proposed use should meet. The appropriate standards in §
18-5 will also apply. These conditional uses may be allowed in zones
which specifically list them as conditional uses. All other site plan and
subdivision regulations will apply to conditional uses.
c. Application for a Permitted Conditional Use. Such application shall be
made in accordance with procedures set forth in § 18-6 of this chapter
and the Planning Board shall act on the application in accordance with
said procedures. No conditional use shall be granted unless the same
will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the
Township, is not likely to involve unusual risks of traffic safety or traffic
congestion and is reasonably necessary for the convenience of the
community. In reviewing every application for a conditional use, the
reviewing board shall give reasonable consideration to:
Character of the neighborhood.
Conservation of property values.
Health and safety of residents and workers on adjacent properties in
the surrounding neighborhood.
Potential congestion of vehicle traffic or creation of undue hazard.
Pedestrian safety.
Effect on the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties.
The nature and intensity of the use.
Adequacy of utility, drainage and other facilities.
Stated principles and objectives of this chapter and the Master Plan of
the Township of Sparta.
§ 18-4.6 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:142
In reviewing an application for any conditional use as herein provided,
the reviewing board may impose such conditions and safeguards as
it deems appropriate with respect to, among other matters, the
minimizing of traffic congestion by appropriate arrangements of
entrances and exits to assure public safety. Requirements for
conditional uses shall take precedence over any regulations for the
zone in which said use is located. Said conditional use requirements for
the following permitted conditional uses shall be as follows:
1. Automotive Service Stations and Public Garages.
(a) The lot or parcel so used shall have a street frontage of 175
feet and a minimum lot size of 40,000 square feet.
(b) The walls of any building are set back at least 100 feet from a
residential zone boundary, at least 25 feet from every adjoining
property line and at least 40 feet from a street right-of-way
line.
(c) The nearest boundary line of the lot or parcel of land so to be
used is at least 300 feet measured in a straight line from the
boundary line of property which is used as, or upon which is
erected:
(1) A public or private school or playground.
(2) A church or other place of worship.
(3) A hospital.
(4) A public building or place of public assembly.
(5) A theatre or other building or structures used or intended
to be used for public entertainment.
(6) A public playground or civic center.
(7) A firehouse or fire station.
(8) An existing public garage or automatic service station.
(d) The lot or parcel shall be at least 300 feet measured in a
straight line from any residentially zoned property which is
located on either the same or opposite side of the street.
(e) Gasoline pumps and other apparatus shall be so located as to
permit safe and convenient traffic circulation. Every gasoline
or oil tank, pump or other device, appliance or apparatus shall
be located at least 25 feet from a street right-of-way line, at
least 50 feet from a residential zone boundary and at least 50
feet from any property line.
(f) No part of any automotive service station operation or paved
area shall be conducted within 25 feet of a residential zone
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:143
boundary. A six-foot high solid fence shall be installed along
any residential zone boundary.
(g) All paved areas within the property shall be at least five feet
from a property line, 10 feet from a street right-of-way and 25
feet from a residential zone boundary and bounded by concrete
curbing at least six inches above the surface. These set buffer
areas shall be appropriately landscaped.
(h) Concrete curbing shall be installed in the street right-of-way in
accordance with Township specifications.
(i) Adequate parking for automobiles of employees and patrons
shall be provided.
(j) Entrance and exit driveways shall be at least 35 feet in width
with a five-foot radius at the curbline. There shall be a safety
zone between driveways of at least 25 feet and driveways shall
be at least 10 feet from adjoining property lines.
(k) Corner lots shall have a curve radius of at least 25 feet and
driveway entrances shall start at least 25 feet from the radius
tangent points.
(l) All unpaved areas shall be attractively landscaped with grass
lawns, trees and shrubs or other vegetation or material as the
Planning Board may approve or require.
(m) Repair work, other than incidental minor repair, shall take
place within the building and all repair or service apparatus
shall be located within the building.
(n) There shall be no outdoor storage of supplies, materials, or
automobile parts, whether for sale, storage or waste.
(o) Floor drains shall not be connected to any sanitary sewer
system or storm drain.
(p) All storage tanks shall be installed below ground level. Where
the possibility of contamination of underground water
resources exists, the Board may require ample precautions
against leakage and seepage.
(q) The Board may impose such conditions and safeguards as it
deems appropriate with respect to, among other matters, the
minimizing of traffic congestion by appropriate arrangement of
entrances and exits, to assure public safety.
(r) Twenty-five-foot buffer along right-of-way.
(s) There shall be no more than three vehicles per bay parked in
overnight outdoor storage. The Board may approve additional
overnight outdoor storage of vehicles exceeding the number of
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:144
vehicles permitted under this ordinance section, provided a
site plan is approved by the appropriate Board. The site plan
shall indicate striped parking spaces in compliance with
Subsection 18-5.3h (Parking Standards). All parking and
storage of vehicles shall be limited to one vehicle per approved
parking space and shall comply with this chapter and the site
plan and conditional use approval.
2. Drive-In Restaurants.
(a) The lot or parcel of land so to be used has a street frontage of
at least 300 feet and an average depth of at least 300 feet.
(b) The ground floor area of the building shall be at least 450
square feet.
(c) The walls of the building shall be located at least 50 feet from
an adjoining street right-of-way, 25 feet from a side property
line and 50 feet from a rear property line.
(d) Separate entrance and exit driveways and one-way traffic
circulation on the lot shall be maintained. Driveway openings
shall be at least 24 feet in width with a radius at the curbline of
at least five feet. There shall be a safety zone of at least 150
feet between driveway openings and no entrance or exit shall
be located within 50 feet of an adjoining property.
(e) Corner lots shall have a curb radius of at least 25 feet and
driveway openings shall be at least 50 feet from the radius
tangent points.
(f) The lot shall be at least 300 feet, measured in a straight line,
from the nearest property line of another drive-in restaurant
which is located on either the same or opposite side of the
street. Said lot shall also be at least 300 feet from any
residentially zoned property which is located on either the
same or opposite side of the street.
(g) Off-street parking shall conform to the requirements of
Subsection 18-5.3 and in addition, the following conditions
shall be met.
There shall be at least one parking space for each three seats,
whether inside or outside the building, plus one space for each
75 square feet of building area. Drive-in restaurants providing
no seating spaces shall provide at least one off-street parking
space for each 50 square feet of building area.
(h) Trash receptacles for customer use shall be provided in the
parking area conveniently located for all parking spaces. There
shall be at least one receptacle for each six parking spaces, but
in no event less than four receptacles. Such receptacles shall
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:145
be of appropriate design which will not detract from the
general appearance of the site and shall be well-secured to the
ground surface.
(i) An area shall be provided for the orderly and convenient
deposit and pick-up of trash. Said area shall be located in the
rear yard, shall be enclosed on all four sides and shall be
designed to conform in appearance to the principal building.
Said area shall be at least five feet from an adjoining property
line.
(j) Such other conditions and safeguards as the Planning Board
may deem appropriate with respect to, among other matters,
traffic and parking arrangement, building design and
appearance, landscaping and pedestrian and vehicular safety.
3. Public Utilities. The provisions of this subsection are intended to
apply to utility installations such as power generating stations,
electric substations, power transmission lines, radio or television
signal towers, telephone exchanges and similar facilities, but shall
not apply to telephone, gas, water, sewer, electric or community
antenna television facility distribution lines and similar facilities
intended to provide direct service to properties when the same are
approved by the appropriate Township agency.
(a) The lot shall conform to the lot area requirements of the zone
in which it is located.
(b) All buildings shall meet the yard and height requirements of
the zone in which the use is located.
(c) Adequate provision shall be made for off-street parking in
accordance with Subsection 18-5.3.
(d) Any such building, structure or use shall be designed and
arranged so as not to detract from the value of adjoining
property.
(e) The Board may impose such conditions as it may deem
appropriate with respect to, among other matters, traffic and
parking arrangement, the amount of off-street parking,
building design and appearance and landscaping.
4. Kennels.
(a) The lot or parcel to be so used has an area of at least 80,500
square feet.
(b) Buildings, pens or other enclosures in which dogs are kept
shall be located at least 100 feet from a property line.
(c) Not more than 10 dogs or cats or combination thereof for each
acre of lot area shall be kept at any time.
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:146
(d) Dogs and cats shall be contained in buildings, pens or other
enclosures at all times and shall be kept within the confines of
a building between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(e) Outdoor runs or pens shall be screened from view of adjoining
properties by fencing or planting.
(f) One off-street parking space for each employee not residing on
the premises plus one off-street parking space for each 10 dog
capacity shall be provided.
(g) Any such kennel shall be approved by the Board of Health to
insure proper sanitation and compliance with applicable State
and local health codes.
(h) The Board may impose such other conditions and safeguards
as it deems appropriate with respect to the particular
premises.
5. Miniature Golf Courses.
(a) The lot or parcel meets the minimum lot area requirement of
the zone in which it is located.
(b) All buildings, structures and golf facilities shall meet the yard
requirements of the zone in which the use is located.
(c) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each golf tee.
(d) All lighting shall be so arranged and shielded as to reflect the
light downward and away from adjoining streets and
properties.
(e) The Board may impose such other conditions and safeguards
as it deems appropriate with respect to the particular
premises.
6. Golf Driving Ranges.
(a) The lot or parcel meets the minimum lot area requirements of
the zone in which it is located.
(b) All buildings and structures shall meet the yard requirements
of the zone in which the use is located.
(c) The fairway, measured in a straight line along the direction of
each tee, shall be at least 350 yards. There shall be a 100 yard
buffer zone around the tees and fairway to the nearest
adjoining property lines.
(d) Fencing and/or a buffer, as required by the Planning Board,
shall be provided along any property line to prevent golf balls
from landing on adjoining property.
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:147
(e) Three off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each two
tees.
(f) All lighting shall be so arranged and shielded as to reflect the
light downward and away from adjoining streets and
properties.
(g) The Board may impose such other conditions and safeguards
as it deems appropriate with respect to the particular
premises.
7. Trucking Terminals.
(a) The lot or parcel so to be used is located within 500 feet of a
State highway.
(b) The lot or parcel is located at least 1,000 feet from a residential
zone boundary.
(c) The lot or parcel has an area of at least 10 acres.
(d) All buildings shall be located at least 200 feet from any
property line.
(e) Paved areas shall not exceed 10 times the ground floor area of
all buildings.
(f) The combined ground floor area of all buildings and paved
areas shall not exceed 50% of the lot area.
(g) Fencing is not required, but when provided shall be in a
location and of a type as approved by the Board, shall not
exceed 10 feet in height and shall not be located within 100
feet of a street right-of-way line.
(h) Dense evergreen screening shall be provided along the
boundaries of all parking and loading areas in order to obscure
same from all adjoining streets and properties.
(i) Separate vehicular entrances and exits shall be provided.
Entrances and exits shall be at least 100 feet apart and shall be
at least 24 feet wide.
(j) Truck and trailer parking shall be located at least 25 feet from
side and rear property lines and at least 100 feet from a street
right-of-way line.
(k) There shall be at least three truck or trailer parking spaces for
each loading bay.
(l) Aisles between truck and trailer parking spaces shall be at
least 60 feet in width.
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:148
(m) There shall be at least two off-street automobile parking spaces
for each loading bay.
(n) All off-street parking and loading areas shall meet the
requirements of Subsection 18-5.3.
(o) A truck terminal may include the following accessory uses:
offices related to the principal use, cafeterias serving trucking
terminal employees and transient truckers and repair and
maintenance garages for trucks and trailers otherwise using
the trucking terminal.
8. Soil Removal Operations. Except in connection with excavation or
grading incidental to construction or alteration of a building or
improvements on premises for which a building permit has been
issued, no person shall excavate for removal of soil or otherwise
remove soil for sale or for use other than on the premises from
which the soil shall be taken unless a site plan has been approved
by the Planning Board in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) An application to the Planning Board shall be accompanied by
a map or maps showing existing contour lines at two-foot
intervals, an aerial photograph of the site, proposed contour
lines at two-foot intervals after removal of the soil, and existing
structures on the subject premises and within 200 feet of the
property, location of top soil storage areas, methods of
controlling silting of downstream properties, and the elevation
of the water table if it is within 15 feet of the proposed final
contour, or certification that the water table is not within 15
feet of the proposed final contour. The determination of the
water table shall be certified by a professional engineer which
certification shall show the procedure used and the date such
tests were made. The maps shall also show all existing trees six
inches or more in diameter measured 4 1/2 feet from ground
level, and the plan for replacing the same number of such trees
with trees having a diameter of 2 1/2 inches measured 4 1/2
feet from the top of root level.
The application shall also indicate the total number of cubic
yards to be removed and the length of time within which the
proposed operation shall be completed, which shall normally
not be for longer than five years. Where a total project is not
capable of being completed within five years, it shall be broken
down into two sections, one of which shall be completed within
five years and the other within such further period not
exceeding five years as the Planning Board may recommend or
specify.
(b) In considering and reviewing the application and arriving at its
decision, the Planning Board shall be guided by and take into
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:149
consideration the public health, safety and general welfare
and the general purposes of municipal planning, and particular
consideration shall be given to the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind;
(2) Surface water drainage;
(3) Soil fertility;
(4) Lateral support of abutting streets and lands;
(5) Public health and safety;
(6) Land values and uses;
(7) Contours, both existing and proposed;
(8) Existing contours and topographic character of the land
prior to the removal of any soil and the proposed contours
which will result following the removal of soil in
accordance with the soil removal application;
(9) Whether the proposed removal of soil is necessary and
incidental to the development of the property for its
intended use or whether the proposed removal constitutes
primarily an industrial activity;
(10) Effects of tree removal;
(11) Effects on water resources such as streams and wetlands;
(12)Intent and purpose of the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance
and the effects upon the neighborhood;
In the event that, after considering and reviewing the application,
the Board finds that the proposal would result in the creation of
a lake, pond, hole, pit or similar type of depression, and further
in the event that the nature of the operation would be a wet
mining operation, then, and in that event, in addition to the above
referenced factors, these factors alone may be sufficient basis for
the denial of the application.
(c) The owner or person in charge shall so conduct the operation
that there shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions, and
in such manner that the area shall be properly leveled off,
cleared of debris, including boulders and graded to conform
with the contour lines and grades as required and shown on
the approved plan.
(d) Arable soil within eight inches of the surface shall not be
removed from the premises but promptly on completion of
operations, or as otherwise directed by the Planning Board, the
arable soil so retained shall be respread on the surface as
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:150
uniformly as possible and seeded with winter rye or other
suitable planting. If the soil within eight inches of the top is not
arable soil, arable soil must be spread thereon promptly when
the operation is completed in each such area. Provisions must
be made for adequate drainage after the top soil is replaced.
In addition to the above, a landscaping plan will be provided to
return the land to a suitable state.
(e) Soil removal shall not be deposited or in any way thrown or
placed upon adjoining property or public roads. Any soil or
material resulting from any such operation accumulating on
any adjoining property or public road shall be removed
therefrom immediately upon notice by the Construction
Official or other designated official to the owner of such
accumulation.
(f) All operations shall be conducted in strict accordance with any
State law or other ordinances of the Township and the terms
and conditions of any approval granted for such operations. No
operation shall be permitted within 100 feet of any stream or
wetland unless it can be shown that soil removal would not
alter the quantity or quality of the water nor adversely affect
the rate of water flow and that the final finishing grade
requires soil removal within said 100 feet distance.
(g) The operation shall be so conducted as not to constitute a
nuisance to adjoining owners or the Township and in no event
shall said operation create any extra hazardous or unsafe
conditions with regard to any person or persons.
(h) Upon completion of an operation or of excavation from an area
delineated on the approved plan, said area shall be properly
leveled off, cleared of debris, graded to conform to the
contours and grades as approved by the Planning Board and
trees planted in accordance with the plan approved by the
Planning Board. All roads which may have been damaged shall
be returned to their original condition.
(i) Soil shall not be removed except in accordance with the
approved plan, which plan may, upon application, be amended
from time to time by the Planning Board.
(j) No soil shall be removed which is within 15 feet of the water
table and no soil shall be removed which is below the grade
established and shown on the approved map.
(k) While working an area, the working face of the excavation shall
not exceed 60° from the horizontal, nor shall a face have a
vertical height exceeding 30 feet. Any face not currently being
worked on shall not exceed 30° from the horizontal. Where an
excavated area adjoins a public road or road which has been
dedicated to the public, no excavation shall be made below the
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:151
level of the road for a distance of 100 feet from the right-of-way
of said road except in such instances where, on the low side of
the road, the removal of material would not substantially alter
the general terrain characteristics. Where an excavated area is
within 50 feet of any building, the finished grade thereof shall
not exceed 10% or be less than 2%. In any event, no finished
grade shall exceed 10% or be less than 2%. Care should be
taken so that there shall be no diversion of surface water either
during the operation or after the project is complete.
(l) No trash, garbage, junk or debris may be stored on the subject
property and no safety hazards will be permitted, either during
or after the completion of operations. All burning of
combustible debris resulting from said soil operation shall be
subject to the regulations set by the Sparta Township Fire
Department or any regulation of a higher authority in effect,
and be undertaken so as not to create a smoke, nuisance or air
pollution safety hazard.
(m) Each operator shall annually furnish a progress report to the
Township Engineer, the first of which shall be submitted nine
months after approval of the application, which shall consist of
a sketch map at a scale of one inch to 100 feet showing
contours at two-foot intervals, retained arable soil, equipment,
the areas where soil was removed, the location of water supply
and disposal facilities, and drainage facilities, prepared and
certified by a licensed professional engineer.
(n) Hours of operation shall be limited to the following: 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m., Mondays through Saturdays, except in
emergencies when authorized by the Township.
(o) In order to minimize the possibility of mud slides or drainage of
silt, the area of operations for excavation shall not exceed a
total of five acres at any one time without a replacement of top
soil and reseeding of the premises unless otherwise permitted
by the Township for good cause shown.
(p) Upon the completion of work in any specific area, all
respreading of arable soil and reseeding as required by this
chapter shall be completed within 60 days thereafter; except
that, if the completion of work in an area occurs during the
winter months when it would not be practicable to respread
top soil and reseed same, such work shall be completed within
such additional time as may be specified by the Township.
(q) Any of the conditions or regulations contained herein may be
modified or waived by the Planning Board under the following
conditions:
(1) Where the applicant can show undue hardship by reason
of topography, grade or other special conditions; or
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:152
(2) Where clear evidence is presented showing that the
imposition of such requirements would be detrimental to
the public interest; or
(3) Where it can be shown that the intended purpose of the
Township in establishing such requirements can be
achieved through other means; or
(4) Where the data required is obtainable or available to the
Township from other sources; or
(5) Where it can be demonstrated that the financial costs to
the applicant or owner in order to meet said requirements
would impose an undue burden or hardship in comparison
to the volume of business being conducted, provided said
volume is equal to or less than 75 cubic yards in any twoyear period.
(r) Upon action to the Planning Board pursuant to the provisions
of this section, the applicant shall pay a fee to cover the cost of
the initial review of the proposed soil removal operation as
stipulated in the Revised Ordinances of the Township of Sparta
entitled "Fees and Costs." Upon approval of any application,
the applicant shall pay a permit fee as follows:
(1) Up to and including 500 cubic yards — $50.
(2) Above 500 cubic yards — $100 plus a sum computed at a
rate of $0.03 per cubic yard multiplied by the number of
cubic yards to be removed.
These fees will cover the additional costs of the Township for
inspectors as well as any additional or extraordinary costs or
expenses necessitated by operation.
(s) Upon approval of the application, the applicant shall file and
maintain a bond in form and with surety approved by the
Township Attorney in such amount as in the opinion of the
Township Engineer shall be sufficient to insure the faithful
performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to the
conditions of the approval and the terms thereof. The bond
shall be in an amount of not less than $6,000 per acre of land
which is actually being worked in accordance with the
approved plan. Said bond shall cover the respreading of top
soil as required by the provisions of this section and also final
provisions for drainage of the site and grading to final contour.
This bond may be increased from time to time where, in the
opinion of the Township Engineer, conditions and price
increases warrant such increases.
(t) The amount of any performance bond or guarantee may be
reduced when portions of the improvements or works have
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:153
been completed, upon recommendation of the Township
Engineer.
(u) When all required performance has been completed, the
obligor shall notify the Township Manager or his designee in
writing by certified or registered mail of the completion
thereof and shall send a copy thereof to the Township
Engineer. The Township Manager or his designee shall
authorize the Township Engineer to inspect the site to
determine that all requirements of the approved plan have
been carried out. The Township Engineer shall thereupon file a
report in writing with the Township Manager which shall be
detailed and shall recommend approval, partial approval or
rejection. If the work covered by the bond or performance
guarantee or any portion thereof shall not be approved, or shall
be rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall contain
a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
Where said rejection indicates partial approval of said
improvements of works, it shall indicate the costs of the work
for which approval is denied. The Township Manager shall
accept or reject the work, grant partial approval or withhold
approval on the basis of such report and shall notify the obligor
in writing by certified or registered mail of the contents of said
report and the action of the Township Manager with relation
thereto not later than 90 days after receipt of notice from the
obligor of the completion of the work. Where partial approval
is granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability
pursuant to his performance guaranty bond except for that
portion sufficient to secure the work not yet approved.
(v) After reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard before
the Planning Board, an application may be revoked or
suspended for such period as the Board may determine for any
violation of the terms hereof or the terms and conditions of any
plan approved hereunder.
(w) In addition to an action on the bond or guarantee, or the
revocation of approval provided for herein, any person who
violates this chapter, or any director or officer who permits or
participates in a violation of this chapter or the conditions of
the approval shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
not exceeding $1,250 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days
or both in the discretion of the judge before whom such
conviction is had. Each day that a violation continues shall be
considered a separate and distinct violation hereof.
9. Schools and Institutions.
(a) Nonprofit Institutional Uses. Any nonprofit institutional use as
defined in Subsection 18-2.1 may be permitted as a conditional
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:154
use. They shall only be permitted after the following
requirements are met:
(1) Public and Private Schools. Public schools covering any or
all grades pre-kindergarten through grade 12 and full-time
private schools covering any or all grades prekindergarten through grade 12, operated by charitable,
religious or eleemosynary organizations, which are not
conducted as a business and which are intended to satisfy
State mandated educational requirements, are permitted
as a conditional use in all zone districts provided said
conditional use shall meet all of the following
requirements:
(i) Charter. The application shall be accompanied by the
existing or proposed charter and bylaws of the
organization and such other materials as may be
required to guarantee to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board, the following:
A. The organization is or will be a bona fide nonprofit
school organized for educational purposes and
such other activities normally carried on by such
schools.
B. The organization has been granted exemption
from taxation under the laws of both the State of
New Jersey and the United States.
C. The organization will not engage in sales of
products or materials to the general public or
otherwise engage in activities normally carried on
as a business or commercial activity, except that:
(a) The premises may be made available on
rental basis for meetings of other groups,
private social functions and the like.
(b) The organization may conduct intermittent
commercial activities open to the general
public designed solely to raise funds to
support the purposes of the organization or
for related or affiliated organizations with
charitable, educational or religious purposes,
provided such activities are conducted inside
of a building or structure. Such activities
shall also be permitted outside of a building
or structure under the authority of a special
license granted by the Township Council
which shall contain such conditions as are
considered necessary for the public health,
safety and welfare. This subsection shall not
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:155
prevent the organization from hiring or
otherwise engaging profit-making
organizations to conduct fund raising
activities, even though a portion of the funds
raised is taken by such profit-making
organization as a fee.
(c) The sale of items, products or materials
required for the educational programs or
welfare of the students, or accessory to and
having a relation to the activities conducted
on the premises, such as, but not limited to,
books, art materials and school supplies, or
tickets for student activities, or other school
related events, or food for school lunches, are
permitted on a continuous basis, provided
such sales are conducted inside the building
or structure.
(ii) Minimum Lot Size. The lot or site on which the
proposed use is to be located shall have a minimum
area of 90,000 square feet, plus an additional 45,000
square feet for every 100 pupils or portion thereof of
maximum capacity, and the lot or site shall have a
minimum street frontage of 225 feet.
(iii) Lot Coverage. The coverage of the lot by buildings and
structures will not exceed 15%, and the total coverage
of the lot by all buildings, structures, sidewalks,
parking areas, driveways or other improvements, shall
not exceed 40% of the total area of the lot.
(iv) Setbacks. Any building or structure shall be set back
from the front street line, a distance not less than two
feet of setback for each one foot of building or
structure height or shall conform to the front yard
setback requirements of the zone in which it is
located, whichever is greater.
Any building or structure shall be set back from the
side property lines a distance not less than two feet
of setback for each one foot of building or structure
height or 40 feet, whichever is greater.
Any building or structure shall be set back from the
rear property line, a distance not less than two feet
of setback for each one foot of building or structure
height or 50 feet, whichever is greater.
(v) Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking space shall be
provided at the rate of one parking space for each 400
square feet of floor area in the school building and any
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:156
appurtenant structures on the same lot for schools
containing grades under the tenth grade. For schools
containing grades 10 and/or 11 and/or 12, off-street
parking space shall be provided at the rate of one
space for each 200 square feet of floor area in the
school building and any appurtenant structures on the
same lot. The Planning Board may require additional
parking, if in its opinion the parking spaces prescribed
above are not sufficient to ensure that the use will
not cause parking in a public street during the course
of normal educational programs. Such parking space
shall not be located within the front yard area nor
within 25 feet of a property line and shall otherwise
comply with all general requirements of Subsection
18-5.3 concerning parking areas. In addition,
landscape plantings shall be provided in sufficient
quantity, quality, location and height, and maintained
or replaced as required, to preclude, to the maximum
extent possible, the transmission of headlight glare or
other lighting to adjacent properties and to preclude,
to the maximum extent possible, view of the parking
area from a public street.
(vi) Exclusions. This section is not intended to apply to
part-time schools which are conducted as an adjunct
or supplement to the religious activities of a church,
religious organization or place of worship, such as, but
not limited to, Sunday schools, nursery schools,
catechism or Hebrew schools, adult education, or the
like, or as an adjunct or supplement to the activities or
programs of chartered membership organizations but
is intended to apply to educational institutions,
whether or not operated in conjunction with religious
organizations, churches, or places of worship, or
chartered membership organizations which are
operated on a full-time basis, which offer general
academic instruction or training in a skill, trade or
vocation, and which are intended to fulfill State
mandated educational requirements.
(b) Churches. Churches and similar places of worship and
rectories or parish houses or convents of religious groups on
the same tract are permitted as a conditional use provided said
conditional uses shall meet all of the following requirements:
(1) Charter. The application shall be accompanied by the
existing or proposed charter and bylaws of the
organization and such other material as may be required
to guarantee to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, the
following:
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:157
(i) The organization is or will be a bona fide nonprofit
religious group organized primarily for the benefit of
its membership, and such other activities normally
carried on by religious groups.
(ii) The organization has been granted exemption from
taxation under the laws of both the State of New
Jersey and the United States.
(iii) The organization will not engage in sales of products
or materials to the general public or otherwise engage
in activities normally carried on as a business or
commercial activity, except that:
A. The premises may be made available on a rental
basis for meetings of other groups, private social
functions and the like and;
B. The organization may conduct intermittent
commercial activities open to the general public
designed solely to raise funds to support the
purposes of the organization or for related or
affiliated organizations with charitable,
educational or religious purposes, provided such
activities are conducted inside of a building or
structure. Such activities shall also be permitted
outside of a building or structure under the
authority of a special license granted by the
Township Council, which shall contain such
conditions as are considered necessary for the
public health, safety and welfare. This subsection
shall not prevent the organization from hiring or
otherwise engaging profit-making organizations
to conduct fund raising activities, even though a
portion of the funds raised is taken by such profitmaking organization as a fee, and;
C. Sale of religious articles, or items having a
relation to the cultural or ethnic background of
the members of the faith are permitted on a
continuous basis, provided that such sales are
conducted inside the building or structure.
(2) Minimum Lot Size. The lot on which the proposed use is to
be located shall have a minimum area of 75,000 square
feet, and shall have a minimum street frontage of 225 feet.
(3) Lot Coverage. The coverage of the lot by all buildings,
structures, sidewalks, parking areas, driveways, and other
improvements, shall not exceed 50% of the total lot area.
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:158
(4) Front Yard. Any building or structure shall conform to the
front yard setback requirements for the zone in which it is
located.
(5) Side and Rear Yard. Any building or structure shall be set
back from the side property lines a distance not less than
the height of the structure or 25 feet, whichever is greater.
Any building or structure shall be set back from the rear
property line a distance not less than the height of the
structure or 50 feet, whichever is greater.
(6) Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking space shall be
provided at a rate of one space for each 90 square feet of
floor area in the church building and one space for each
200 square feet of floor area in any other structure. Such
parking space shall not be located within the front yard
area, nor within 25 feet of a property line and shall
otherwise comply with all general requirements of
Subsection 18-5.3 of this chapter. In addition, landscaped
plantings shall be provided in sufficient quantity, location
and height, and maintained or replaced as required to
preclude to the maximum extent possible, the transmission
of headlight glare or other lighting to adjacent properties
and to preclude to the maximum extent possible, a view of
the parking area from a public street.
(7) Exclusion. It is not intended that part-time schools which
are conducted as an adjunct or supplement to the religious
activities of a church, religious organization or place of
worship, such as, but not limited to, Sunday schools,
nursery schools, catechism, Hebrew schools, adult
education, and the like, be classified as a mixed use as
defined herein for the premises on which they are
conducted.
(c) Municipal and Board of Education Uses. Municipal uses other
than parks and Sparta Board of Education uses other than
schools are permitted under this section as a conditional use
provided said conditional uses shall meet all of the following
requirements:
(1) Lot Coverage. The lot coverage by structures shall not
exceed 25%.
(2) Off-Street Parking. Sufficient off-street parking space shall
be provided to ensure that the use will not cause parking
in a public street during the course of normal activities.
(3) Screening. Landscape plantings shall be provided in
sufficient quantity, location and height to preclude the
transmission of headlight glare or other lighting to
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:159
adjacent properties and to preclude view of the parking
area from a public street.
(d) Nonprofit Chartered Membership Organizations. Buildings
operated by chartered membership organizations for the
benefit of the public and not for profit, and the office or offices
of charitable organizations, are permitted as a conditional use
provided said conditional uses shall meet all of the following
requirements:
(1) Certificate of Incorporation. The application shall be
accompanied by the existing or proposed certificate of
incorporation and bylaws of the organization and such
material as may be required to guarantee to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board, the following:
(i) The organization is, or will be, a bona fide, nonprofit
organization organized solely for charitable purposes
or for the benefit and enjoyment of its members who
shall be primarily residents of Sparta and the
surrounding communities.
(ii) The use will not involve the sale or consumption of
liquor or alcoholic beverages in any form, unless the
Planning Board specifically finds that such sales or
consumption will not be detrimental to the character
of the area and the safety and welfare of the public.
(iii) The organization will not engage in sales of products
or materials to the general public or otherwise engage
in activities normally carried on as a business or
commercial activity, except that:
A. The premises may be made available on a rental
basis for meetings of other groups, private social
functions and the like.
B. The organization may conduct intermittent
commercial activities open to the general public
designed solely to raise funds to support the
purposes of the organization or for related or
affiliated organizations with charitable,
educational or religious purposes, provided such
activities are conducted inside of a building or
structure. Such activities shall also be permitted
outside of a building or structure under the
authority of a special license granted by the
Township Council, which shall contain such
conditions as are considered necessary for the
public health, safety and welfare. This subsection
shall not prevent the organization from hiring or
otherwise engaging profit making organizations
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:160
to conduct fund raising activities, even though a
portion of the funds raised is taken by such profit
making organizations as a fee.
C. Sale of items, products, or materials related to or
accessory to the primary function or activity of
the organization conducted on the premises, such
as but not limited to, food and alcoholic beverages
(if the sale of such beverages is permitted by the
Planning Board and the organization holds a
license for the sale of same), athletic equipment,
and the like, are permitted on a continuous basis,
provided such sales are conducted inside the
building or structure.
(iv) Overnight accommodations shall not be provided.
(v) The hours of use are fixed in a manner in which the
property rights of nearby property owners will not be
adversely affected.
(vi) Activities of the organization will be carried on
primarily within an enclosed building or structure.
(2) Street Access. The proposed use is located on a
thoroughfare classified as other than a "minor street" by
the Sparta Road Master Plan.
(3) Minimum Lot Size. The lot on which the proposed use is to
be located shall have a minimum area of 45,000 square
feet, plus an additional 150 square feet of lot area, for each
15 square feet of floor area in the building and any
appurtenant structure on the same lot in excess of 1,500
square feet, and shall have a minimum street frontage of
200 feet.
(4) Lot Coverage. The coverage of the lot by structures will
not exceed 20% and the total coverage of the lot by all
buildings, sidewalks, parking areas, driveways, and other
improvements, shall not exceed 50% of the total lot area.
(5) Front Yard. Any building or structure shall conform to the
front yard setback requirements for the zone in which it is
located.
(6) Side and Rear Yard. Any building or structure shall be set
back from the side property lines a distance not less than
the height of the building or structure or 25 feet,
whichever is greater.
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:161
Any building or structure shall be set back from the rear
property line a distance not less than the height of the
building or structure or 50 feet, whichever is greater.
(7) Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided at
the rate of one parking space for each 60 square feet of
floor area in the building and structures on the same lot.
Such parking space shall not be located within 25 feet of a
property line and shall otherwise comply with all general
requirements of Subsection 18-5.3 concerning parking
areas.
(8) Screening. Landscape plantings shall be provided in
sufficient quantity, location and height and maintained and
replaced as required, to preclude, to the maximum extent
possible, the transmission of headlight glare or other
lighting to adjacent properties and to preclude, to the
maximum extent possible, view of the parking area from a
public street.
(9) Exclusion. It is not intended that part-time schools which
are conducted as an adjunct or supplement to the
purposes and objectives of the organization be classified
as a mixed use as defined herein for the premises on which
they are conducted.
(e) Profit-Making Institutional Uses. Any profit-making
institutional use as defined in § 18-2, may be permitted as a
conditional use. They shall only be permitted after the
following requirements are met:
(1) Nursing Homes and Sanatoriums. Nursing homes are
permitted as a conditional use and shall meet the following
minimum standards:
(i) Lot Area. There shall be a minimum lot area of
150,000 square feet.
(ii) Height. No structure shall exceed two stories or 35
feet in height.
(iii) Setbacks. No structure shall be permitted closer than
100 feet to any abutting property line or street rightof-way.
(iv) Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be
provided (see Subsection 18-5.3). No parking area
may be within 25 feet of any property line.
(2) Profit-Making Private Schools and Trade Schools. Private
schools covering any or all grades pre-kindergarten
through grade 12 or trade schools, if approved by the
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:162
State Board of Education, and which are conducted as
a business, are permitted as a conditional use provided
said conditional use shall meet all of the following
requirements:
(i) Proof of State Approval. A license or similar document
from the State Board of Education attesting to State
approval of the school shall accompany the
application.
(ii) Minimum Lot Size. The lot or site on which the
proposed use is to be located shall have a minimum
area of 90,000 square feet, plus an additional 45,000
square feet for every 100 pupils or portion thereof of
maximum capacity, and the lot or site shall have a
minimum street frontage of 225 feet.
(iii) Lot Coverage. The coverage of the lot by buildings and
structures will not exceed 15%, and the total coverage
of the lot by all buildings, structures, sidewalks,
parking areas, driveways, or other improvements,
shall not exceed 40% of the total area of the lot.
(iv) Setbacks. Any building or structure shall be set back
from the front street line, a distance not less than two
feet of setback for each one foot of building or
structure height or shall conform to the front yard
setback requirements of the zone in which it is
located, whichever is greater.
10. Funeral Homes, Health Care Facilities, Veterinary Hospitals.
(a) The minimum area shall be three acres. Veterinary hospitals
would not be required to have a lot size exceeding the zone
requirement unless boarding kennels were proposed.
(b) All State and Federal regulations and requirements including
permits must be obtained and copies filed with the Township.
(c) All buildings shall be at least 50 feet from all property lines.
(d) Lighting shall be arranged so as not to constitute a nuisance to
adjacent uses.
(e) As part of site plan review, the Planning Board may require
buffering, fencing and/or landscaping to shield the building
from adjacent properties.
(f) The property in question shall be adjacent to an improved
County or local arterial street with one or more means of
access. Where physically possible, driveway access shall be
onto County arterial roadways.
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:163
(g) Adequate site distance standards according to Township and
Sussex County road standards shall be adhered to.
11. Apartments/Commercial Buildings.
(a) Apartments shall be constructed with a minimum floor area as
prescribed below:
Dwelling Minimum Floor Area
Efficiency 550
1 bedroom 700
2 bedroom 850
3 bedroom 1,000
(b) There shall be not more than two second floor apartment units
per retail establishment or office unit, with a maximum of four
second floor apartment units in a given building, provided that
said retail establishment or office unit has a minimum of 550
leasable square feet per proposed apartment.
(c) The Health Department shall provide recommendations on the
need for separate septic tanks and disposal fields for the
apartments.
(d) Each apartment unit shall be provided with a minimum
screened open space yard area equal to the square foot area of
the apartment.
12. Conversion of Existing Residential Structures.10
(a) Existing residential structures may be converted to the
following uses:
(1) Offices for business, executive and professional purposes.
(2) Antique shops, boutiques and studios.
(3) Apartment/commercial buildings per Subsection
18-4.7c11.
(b) All conversions, new construction, alterations and additions to
existing structures or demolition of existing structures shall be
visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is
visually related as set forth in Subsection 18-4.2s "Historic
Preservation" of the general provisions of this chapter.
13. Banking and/or Financial Institutions.
(a) The banking and/or financial institution shall include
administrative offices for the bank or financial institution
10.Editor's Note: These provisions pertain to conditional uses in the R-4 Zone.
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:164
within the same building as any teller areas or drive-up
windows.
(b) At least 40% of the bank and/or financial institution shall be the
offices of the bank or institution, not including the vaults,
tellers' area and drive-up window areas.
(c) The drive-up window area shall not be the primary use and
shall be accessory to the banking and/or financial institution
and offices.
14. Eating Facilities/Delicatessens, Sandwich and Coffee Shops.
(a) Eating facilities, delicatessens, sandwich and coffee shops
shall be a conditional use within the ED-1 Zone provided that
the use is intended to serve, at least in part, the other principal
permitted uses within the ED-1 Zone.
(b) Each such conditional use shall constitute no more than 10% of
the total floor area of the building in which it is located. There
shall be no more than two such facilities in any one building
within the ED-1 Zone.
(c) Any such conditional use shall be incorporated within the
building used for a permissible permitted use within the zone
and the architectural design shall be similar to and integrated
with the design of the building.
(d) No drive-up windows for eating facilities, delicatessens and
sandwich or coffee shops.
15. Hotels/Motels and Conference Centers.
(a) The hotel/motels and related conference centers shall be
intended to serve, at least in part, the principal permitted uses
in the ED-1 Zone. The conference center facilities shall be
associated with a hotel/motel. The motel or hotel need not be
associated with a conference facility. The motel, hotel, and
conference center uses shall obtain site plan approval
consistent with the general design standards of the ordinances
of the Township of Sparta.
(b) The hotel or motel may include one or more commercial
restaurants.
16. Health Clubs and/or Fitness Centers.
(a) The health club and/or fitness center shall be intended to
serve, at least in part, the other principal permitted uses in the
ED-1 Zone.
(b) The health center or fitness center shall be located within
buildings within the ED-1 Zone used for other principal
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:165
permitted uses. The portion of the building devoted to the
health and/or fitness centers shall be architecturally similar
to and integrated with the other principal permitted use
structures within the ED-1 Zone. The parking for the health
club and fitness center shall have one parking space for each
100 square feet of floor area for assembly halls, fitness rooms,
and pools. Tennis courts and handball courts shall have four
parking spaces per court. In addition, there shall be one space
for each employee on duty at the center.
17. Accessory Retail Sales.
(a) Retail sales shall be clearly incidental and accessory to the
principal permitted use and the products sold shall be the
same products which the principal use manufactures, stores,
or distributes.
(b) No more than 25% of the total floor area shall be devoted to the
accessory retail operation.
(c) There shall be no window displays, no printing or advertising
material posted in the windows.
(d) There shall be no outdoor display of merchandise.
(e) No accessory building shall be used for retail sales or storage.
There shall be no outdoor storage except as otherwise
provided herein.
(f) Signs referring to an accessory retail operation shall be on the
same sign as the principal business identification sign and the
sign devoted to the accessory retail sales shall be smaller than
the business identification sign. The combined sign area shall
not exceed the maximum sign area permitted in the zone.
(g) Traffic Generation. The Board may approve an application
requesting an accessory retail use only after an affirmative
showing that there will be no significant detrimental impact or
hazard resulting from a particular tenant's occupancy.
(h) There shall be no repair or service facilities in connection with
an accessory retail operation.
(i) The total number of parking spaces shall take into
consideration the square footage of that portion of the building
devoted to the accessory retail use, using the design standards
for retail use (five spaces per 1,000 square feet). The total
number of spaces shall not be less than the minimum required
for the combination of uses.
(j) Any change in tenancy or significant change in operations shall
require Planning Board approval.
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:166
18. Essential services shall be permitted in all zones. Because of the
wide range of uses which constitute essential services, no specific
regulations are contained in this chapter. Each use shall be
evaluated by the Planning Board and standards imposed based on
the following:
(a) Degree and intensity of nuisance characteristics.
(b) Probable traffic impact.
(c) Character of surrounding existing and future development.
The Planning Board may require alternate siting arrangements and
provisions for parking and loading spaces, screening, fencing, buffers,
and lighting.
19. Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining is permitted as a conditional use in
some zones provided the following conditions are met:
(a) It is associated with and accessory to a restaurant on the same
lot or sidewalk adjoining said lot.
(b) No food or beverage products can be left outside on tables or in
the buffet set up.
(c) No storage of dishware or silverware is permitted outside of
the establishment.
(d) All litter or food debris is required to be removed from the
"floor" of outdoor dining area immediately.
(e) Seating shall be arranged in a manner to insure free flow of
pedestrian movement and safety.
20. Senior Citizen Age Restricted Housing. Senior citizen age
restricted housing in congregate care facilities, assisted living
facilities, independent living facilities and/or residential care
facilities meeting the following conditions:
(a) The applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning Board that the
definitions, requirements and regulations, as amended from
time to time of the New Jersey Department of Health or the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs have been
complied with.
(b) Minimum tract — 10 acres.
(c) Maximum height 35 feet 2 1/2 stories.
(d) The development shall include at least some level of each of the
following:
(1) Health care facilities and services;
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:167
(2) Facilities and services for providing meals for residents
except for independent living;
(3) Physical therapy facilities and services, except for
independent living units;
(4) Meeting rooms; and
(5) Recreation facilities.
(e) The development may include houses of worship and religious
facilities, facilities to sell or provide personal services to
residents, and other ancillary services customarily accessory
to the principal use.
(f) It shall be a condition of site plan approval and there shall be a
recorded deed restriction that the aged occupants shall be
restricted to persons at least 62 years of age, with or without a
spouse or other member of such person's housekeeping unit,
or to surviving members of that housekeeping unit in the event
of death of such resident.
21. Planned Residential Unit Developments. Planned residential unit
developments pursuant to the following conditions:
(a) Planned residential developments shall not result in the
disturbance, grading or construction of structures or
development improvements on severe slopes 25% or within
freshwater wetlands or freshwater wetlands transition areas
unless a wetland permit is approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection. The R-4 Residential
Professional Zone permits planned residential developments
with a gross density of one unit per one acre or one unit per 1/2
acre if connected to public water and sewer. Planned
residential developments shall be clustered on the lands which
do not have severe slopes or freshwater wetlands. Uses
permitted in the R-4 Zone planned residential development
include single family dwellings, patio homes, duplex homes,
and 2 1/2 story townhouses with an average number of
bedrooms per unit equal to two.
(b) Accessory Uses and Structures. The permitted accessory uses
and structures within a planned residential development
include the accessory uses and structures permitted in the R-4
Zone.
(c) Gross development site areas shall consist of five acres or
more.
(d) Dimensional Limitations. For areas to be used for a planned
unit residential development, the applicant shall submit a
preliminary site plan application (which shall be subject to final
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:168
site plan approval), which may be accompanied by a
preliminary subdivision application as required (subject to final
subdivision approval). The preliminary site plan shall show
compliance with the following dimensional limitations:
(1) Minimum Planned Development Site Area: Five acres.
(2) Unit per Building: Structure shall contain no more than six
dwelling units. Each unit shall have at least two entrances.
(3) Building Length: Townhouse buildings shall not exceed a
length of 120 feet. Each unit shall have a front wall offset
not less than three feet from adjoining units.
(4) Minimum Lot Frontage for residential lots in planned
residential neighborhood: 75 feet.
(5) Maximum Height of buildings and structures shall be 35
feet and not more than 2 1/2 stories.
(6) Minimum Setback from the street right-of-way line and
from the boundary line of an adjoining tract: 50 feet.
(7) Side Yards. There shall be two ten-foot side yards for
single family dwellings and duplex homes.
Patio homes shall have total combined side yards of 20 feet
with one side yard dimension permitted to be zero.
(8) Wherever appropriate to the intended uses, the site plan of
the tract shall divide such uses into visually small groups
by such features as quadrangles, loops, cul-de-sac and
courts. Efforts shall be made to have abutting structures
within and without the zone of a similar scale and type.
However, to enhance the variety and attractiveness of the
development, monotonous repetition of elements shall be
avoided. To avoid a view of more than three identical
structures from any single point on a road, the use of
curved roads, a variety of architectural design and
variable landscape layout, garden walls and gates may be
required.
(9) Privacy within structures having more than one dwelling
unit of two or more bedrooms shall be protected by the
following provisions:
(i) Every unit must have direct access to the ground
without sharing a hallway, stairway, elevator or fire
escape with another unit.
(ii) No unit or portion thereof may be placed above
another unit or portion thereof.
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:169
(iii) Lateral sound protection between units shall be
provided by construction of a sound transmission
barrier at least equivalent to that of an eight inch solid
masonry wall.
(iv) No building shall be closer than 30 feet from any other
building.
(v) Every dwelling shall be served by a public central
sewer and central water system.
(vi) Parking requirements shall be determined in
accordance with the Residential Site Improvement
Standards (RSIS). Each unit must have at least one
garage space, except for senior citizen assisted living
or congregate care facilities. Parking spaces and
driveways must be paved. All parking areas for six or
more cars shall be screened by landscaped earth
berms, fences, or suitable landscaping.
(vii) Unless, by reason of the size, location, configuration
or topographical features of the tract to be developed,
the Board requires otherwise, common open space
shall be provided in a single parcel or parcels of not
less than 20% of the gross development site area.
Common open space to preserve the steep slopes shall
have the highest priority.
(e) Prior to the approval of any planned development, the Planning
Board shall find the facts and conclusions as required in
N.J.S.A. 40:53D-45.
(f) Single family residences, duplex homes, and townhouses
constructed after October 1993 shall not be converted to or
used for office service uses.
22. Wireless Telecommunications Towers, Equipment and Facilities
Conditional Use Requirements.
(a) Location Criteria.
(1) Location Priorities. Locations are enumerated below in the
order of the location priority:
(i) Completely concealed in existing lawful structures in
nonresidential zones.
(ii) In or upon existing municipally owned land of 10 acres
or more or on an existing municipally owned utility
structures wherever located not exceeding the zone
height restriction or the existing municipal structure
by 10% or 10 feet, whichever is less.
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:170
(iii) Within or upon existing structures in the Commercial
and E-D Zones provided stealth technology is used
and structures are within the zone height limitations.
(iv) Constructing new towers or replacing existing towers
in nonresidential zones.
(2) Stealth technology must be used in all installations and
monopoles for all new towers to reduce visual impact.
(3) Point-to-point microwave antennas on the mast of towers
are prohibited and land lines must be used.
(4) Residential areas and uses are to be protected from the
actual or perceived adverse impacts of wireless
telecommunications towers, antennas and facilities.
(5) To minimize the height and visual negative impact of
towers throughout the community, owners and users of
towers, antennas and related facilities are required to
construct and configure these structures in such a way as
to minimize the perceived adverse visual impact of towers
and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape
screening, and innovative stealth camouflage techniques.
(b) Telecommunication towers, equipment and facilities are
permitted conditional uses, subject to the following conditions.
(1) Zoning. Municipal telecommunications towers and
antennas as described below are limited to the
Commercial and ED zones except for facilities on
municipal utility structures and stealth towers on
municipal land of 10 one acres or greater as authorized by
the Governing Body.
(2) Site Location Analysis. Every application for a
telecommunications tower or antenna shall include a site
location alternative analysis, including an analysis of the
location priorities set forth in Subsection c22(a) of this
subsection, describing the locations of other sites
considered; the availability of those sites, the extent to
which other sites do or do not meet the provider's service
or engineering needs and the reason why the subject site
was chosen. The analysis shall address the following
issues:
(i) How the proposed location of the wireless
telecommunication tower or antenna relates to the
objective of providing full wireless communication
services within the Sparta area at the time full service
is provided by the applicant and by other providers of
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:171
wireless telecommunications services within the
Sparta area.
(ii) How the proposed location of the wireless
telecommunications tower/facility relates to the
location of any existing antennas or towers within or
near the Sparta area.
(iii) How the proposed location of the wireless
telecommunications tower/facility relates to the
anticipated need for additional antennas or towers
within and near the Sparta area by the applicant, and
by other providers of wireless telecommunications
services within the Sparta area.
(iv) How the proposed location of the wireless
telecommunications tower/facility relates to the
objective and goal of maintaining concealed or
reduced tower height with groups of towers within
close proximity to one another rather than isolated,
taller towers with many users at greater tower heights
at random locations throughout the Township.
(3) Existing Structures.
(i) Nonmunicipal Structures. Towers or antennas
meeting the zone requirements are permitted in all
Commercial and E-D Zones provided they are
concealed in existing lawful structures or constructed
as stealth tower structures as defined in Subsection
18-2.1, while meeting the height limitation
requirements of the zone.
(ii) Municipal Structures. Existing, municipally owned
utility structures, such as water tanks, and
municipally owned towers located in any zone may be
used for the installation of antennas to service the
wireless telecommunications industry, provided:
A. That the antenna does not increase the structure
by 10% or 10 feet, whichever is less, or otherwise
is less than the permitted height in the zone.
B. A license or lease authorizing such antenna or
tower has been approved by the Township of
Sparta. However, the Township may, as a
condition of such lease, require site plan
approval. The decision to extend such licenses or
leases to an applicant shall be vested solely with
the municipality which shall not be governed by
this subsection c22. The Township of Sparta in its
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:172
absolute discretion reserves the express right to
deny all uses of its property for antenna or towers.
(iii) Towers or antennas may also be located on power
transmission line systems such as pylons provided
they satisfy the stealth requirements and either (a)
meet the zone height limitations or (b) do not exceed
the structure height by the lesser of 10% or 10 feet.
(4) New Wireless Freestanding Telecommunications Towers,
Equipment and Facilities. For towers which do not satisfy
criteria of Subsection c22(b)(3)(i), (ii) or (iii) above.
(i) Lot Size — 10 acre minimum.
(ii) Maximum Tower Height — For towers not meeting the
requirements of Subsection c22(b)(3)(i) above, 100
feet or 25 feet above the mean tree canopy, whichever
is less.
Mean tree canopy shall be derived from marking all
trees 12 inches in diameter or greater measured 4 1/
2 feet above grade within a two acre area surrounding
the tower site. The height of the trees shall be
calculated by a professional licensed surveyor in the
State of New Jersey. Absence of a suitable stand of
trees for concealment renders the site unacceptable.
No tower shall have a height or location which would
require Federal Aviation Administration lighting.
Lightning rods are excluded from tower or antenna
height calculations.
(iii) Setback Distances. For safety reasons concerning
tower fall zones and further to insure that appropriate
setbacks exist, a telecommunications tower and
related facilities must be set back 300 feet as
measured from the base footprint of the tower or
facility to any structure, lot line or parking lot, or
similar area where people congregate at any given
time. For example, a tower must be set back at least
300 feet as measured from its base from any adjacent
lot, sportsfield or ball field, playground, parking lot,
picnic area, building, home, etc.
(iv) Tower locations shall comply with any buffering
required for lots adjacent to residential zones or uses.
(v) Visual Compatibility Requirements and Construction
Details for the Installation of Wireless
Telecommunications Towers. Monopole tower
construction shall be used in all new tower
construction. Additionally, applicants are required to
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:173
use the latest stealth or camouflaging techniques to
make the tower appear to be a tree of native species
and to blend in with surrounding trees. All towers
shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices.
(5) Telecommunications Tower Permitted Accessory
Structures or Uses.
(i) Accessory Equipment Sheds.
A. Maximum height. Sixteen feet.
B. Maximum area. One thousand five hundred
square feet.
C. Fencing. All equipment sheds shall be located
immediately adjacent to the tower it services. All
equipment sheds and tower bases shall be
enclosed with a solid wood fence of at least seven
feet in height, but no higher than eight feet unless
otherwise approved by the Township Engineer. All
fences shall include a locking security gate and a
copy of the key to this gate shall be supplied to the
Township.
(6) General Conditions Applying to All Towers and Antennas.
(i) Noise Levels. All noise generated by a tower and/or
the equipment shed shall meet the minimum
standards contained in all State, Federal or local noise
regulations.
(ii) Co-location Conditions and Limitations. Any new
tower or reconstructed tower approvals shall allow
the future co-location as set forth in this Subsection
c22. Co-location by two or more telecommunications
providers shall be permitted on one tower provided
that by co-locating, all conditions of this subsection
are satisfied.
A. In the event a proposed tower for an existing or
future co-location cannot be constructed within
the permitted height limitations, then such colocation is prohibited and instead, an alternate
site or method shall be used but if unavailable,
then a second tower to comply with the height
limitations shall be constructed.
B. No tower may be designed or built to co-locate
with another telecommunications provider at a
height greater than the maximum permitted by
this Subsection 22.
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:174
C. In the event any co-location is proposed, a letter
of commitment shall be filed by the applicant to
lease excess space on the tower to other potential
users at prevailing market rates and conditions.
The letter of commitment shall be recorded prior
to the issuance of a building permit and shall be
binding upon the tower owner, property owner
and successors in interest.
(iii) Annual Report. Upon the issuance of a building permit
for a wireless telecommunications tower site, the
owner or operator of the site shall provide to the
Township Engineer, Township Planner and Township
Zoning Officer, an initial report signed and sealed by a
licensed professional engineer, certifying the
estimated useful structural life of the tower as well as
providing an initial inventory of all equipment and
antennas on the site. After 50% of the useful structural
life has lapsed, annual recertification reports as to the
structural integrity of the tower shall be required. An
updated report shall also be provided whenever
antenna arrays are modified and shall include a detail
listing of all antennas and equipment. All vendors and
lessees shall also be required to notify the above
Sparta Township officials when the use of such
antennas or equipment is discontinued. If any of the
reports disclose that a condition of any tower presents
an imminent hazard to the public health, safety or
welfare, or that the tower antennas and equipment are
no longer in use, the Township Engineer or Zoning
Officer shall order the owner of the tower or site upon
which it is located, to take appropriate corrective
action including, if necessary, the removal of the tower
to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
Wireless telecommunications towers and sites shall be
maintained to insure continued structure integrity.
The owner of the tower shall also perform such other
maintenance of the structure and of the site so as to
assure that it does not create a visual nuisance.
(iv) Abandonment and Removal. Any antenna or tower
that is not operated for a continuous period of six
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner
of such antenna or tower shall remove the same within
90 days of receipt of notice from the Township of
Sparta notifying the owner of such abandonment.
Towers that are rendered obsolete or outdated by
advances in technology shall be removed or modified.
Failure to remove an obsolete, outdated or abandoned
antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.7
A:175
for the Township to require removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or
more users of a single tower, then this provision shall
not become effective until all users cease using the
tower or same is deemed obsolete or outdated by the
Township. The Township may condition the issuance
of any permit to construct a tower or antenna on the
posting of an appropriate performance bond or other
suitable guarantee in a face amount of not less than
120% of the cost to remove the tower and restore
the property as determined by the Township Engineer
for such construction as required under all applicable
Township ordinances.
(v) Signs Prohibited. No signs shall be permitted on
either the tower or equipment building, except for
those signs required by law or containing such
information as owner contact information, warnings,
equipment information, and safety instructions. These
signs shall not exceed two square feet in total area.
Absolutely no commercial advertising shall be
permitted on any wireless telecommunications tower
or equipment building.
(vi) Lighting. No lighting is permitted except as follows:
A. The equipment building and compound may have
security and safety lighting at the entrance,
provided the lighting is attached to the facility, is
focused downward and is wired with a timing
device and/or sensor so that the light is turned off
when not needed for safety or security purposes.
B. No lighting is permitted on the wireless
telecommunications tower.
(vii) Multiple Towers and Uses. Any prohibition contained
in any ordinance restricting the number of principal
uses per lot shall not apply to the construction of
wireless telecommunications towers and facilities
when the conditions contained in this subsection are
met. The minimum setback distance between
structures shall not apply to PCS ("Personal
Communications Systems") providers and those
providers who are licensed to transmit within the 800
MHz frequency band.
(viii) Site Plan Approval. Site plan approval shall be
required for any wireless telecommunications tower,
equipment or facilities, except as may be exempted in
§ 18-4.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.7
A:176
§ 18-4.8. Districts.11 [Ord. No. 636A 407; Ord. No. 9-8-98; Ord. No.
1003 §§ 1, 5; Ord. No. 01-14 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 02-20 § 27; Ord. No.
02-25 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 04-05 § 1; Ord. No. 05-03 § 1; Ord. No. 11-05
§§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 12-01 §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 2016-21 § 2, 5; Ord. No.
2018-12 § 2]
Subsection c22(b)(3)(ii)B, pursuant to the site plan
standards contained in § 18-6.
(ix) Additional Municipal Experts. The Planning or Zoning
Board, as the case may be, reserves the right to retain,
at the applicant's expense, any technical consultants
as it deems necessary to provide assistance in the
review of site location alternatives analysis and
specifications. By submitting an application for a
telecommunications tower or facility, the applicant is
deemed to have consented to this procedure.
d. Application for Permit. Application for permit for any conditional use
shall be made to the Planning Board by filing an application with the
administrative officer or his designee. Such application shall set forth
and be accompanied by the following:
1. A site plan drawn in accordance with § 18-6. Said plan shall, in
addition, show the location, type or kind of structure and present
use of all buildings within 200 feet of the boundary lines of the lot.
2. Where the applicant is a person other than the owner of the lot, the
written consent of owner or owners authorizing the filing of the
application.
a. Classes of Districts. The Township of Sparta is hereby divided into the
following development districts:
R-1 Residential Zone — 40,250 square foot lot
R-2 Residential Zone — 20,000 square foot lot
R-3 Residential Zone — 8,000 square foot lot
R-4 Residential/Professional Zone
RR Rural Residential Zone — 5-acre minimum lot with cluster
options
RC-1 Rural Conservation/Residential Zone — 5 acre minimum
lot with cluster options
RC-2 Rural Conservation/Residential Zone — 5 acre minimum
lot with cluster options
MF Multi-Family Zone
MF-1 Multi-Family Zone-1, Inclusionary Housing District
11.Editor's Note: Zoning Maps are on file in the Office of the Township Clerk.
§ 18-4.7 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.8
A:177
MF-2 Multi-Family Zone-2, Inclusionary Housing District
MF-3 Multi-Family Zone-3
C-1 Community Commercial — 10,000 square foot lot
C-1H Community Commercial Historic — 10,000 square foot lot
historic zone
C-2 Office and Service Zone — 20,000 square foot lot
C-2H Office and Service Zone/Historic — 20,000 square foot lot
historic zone
TCC Town Center Commercial Zone
TCCO Town Center Commercial Office Zone
TCLC Town Center Limited Commercial Zone
TCPB Town Center Professional Business Zone
TCLM Town Center Lower Main Street Commercial Zone
TCMSB Town Center Main Street Business Zone
E-D Economic Development — 80,000 square foot lot
E-D1 Economic Development — Low and Moderate Cost
Housing
PCD Planned Commercial Development Zone
PCED Planned Commercial Economic Zone
OS/GU Open Space/Government Use District
PVC Planned Village Core PVC (Added as an overlay zone to
the Planned Commercial Development and Economic
Development Districts.)
PDRM-1 Planned Resource Development Management-1 District
PDRM-2 Planned Resource Development Management-2 District
b. Boundaries of Districts; Zoning Map; Schedule; Interpretation.
1. The boundaries of the districts referred to in Subsection a are
hereby established as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map,
Township of Sparta, Sussex County, New Jersey dated October 10,
2002", and as amended from time to time, and lastly on November
2, 2016.12
Where permitted, Planned Commercial Development shall be
permitted as specified as PCED on the amended zone map and shall
apply to Block 12008, Lots 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, and 21.
2. Said zoning map is on file with the Clerk of the Township of Sparta
and is available for inspection; ("copies thereof are available for
purchase to interested members of the public.)"
12.Editor's Note: The map referred to herein may be found in the office of the Township
Clerk.
§ 18-4.8 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.8
A:178
§ 18-4.9. R-1 Residential Zone.13 [Ord. No. 04-05 § 12]
3. The provisions of this chapter shall be minimum requirements.
Where there are minimum and maximum standards, both
standards shall be met even though the combination of standards
may not permit development to take advantage of all standards
simultaneously. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
than other provisions of law, the provisions of this chapter shall
control. Where other provisions of law impose greater restrictions
than this chapter, the provisions of such other laws shall control.
4. Zoning district lines are intended to follow street center lines,
streams and lot or property lines unless otherwise indicated by
dimensions on the map. Dimensions are in feet, measured
horizontally and measured from the street right-of-way line even if
the center line of that street serves as a district line. The location of
any disputed zoning line shall be determined by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment. District lines extend vertically in both directions
from ground level.
5. Where a zoning district line divides a lot, that line may be modified
by the owner by moving it to the property line, provided that the
property line is within 20 feet of the district line as shown on the
map. A use permitted in the district so extended shall thereafter be
a permitted use in the extended area. A district line shall be altered
only once by utilizing this section of the chapter, after which the
use shall be governed by the district in which it is located after the
adjustment.
6. Where a street or public way serves as the zoning district line and it
is lawfully vacated, the former center line shall be considered the
zoning district line.
c. Prohibited Uses. Where a use is not specifically permitted in any zone, it
is prohibited.
d. Principal Use. No residential lot shall contain more than one principal
structure or permitted use. Shopping centers, industrial and office
complexes receiving site plan approval may be permitted to have more
than one building on a lot, provided that the structures are sited to
comply with setback and yard provisions of this chapter, and provided
that each lot has frontage on an approved street. Essential services
shall be permitted in all zones as conditional uses.
a. Purpose. This zone is designated for detached single family residential
use. Other uses are also permitted where the criteria below and other
applicable sections of this Code are also satisfied.
13.Editor's Note: Subsections 18-4.9 through 18-4.31 were previously codified as of
Subsection 18-4.8e and contained Ordinance Nos. 636, 649, 665, 691, 720, 750, 772, 788,
790, 808, 841, 852, 859 and 883.
§ 18-4.8 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.9
A:179
b. Principal Permitted Use.
1. Single family dwelling units.
2. Agriculture (on a lot of five acres or more).
c. Conditional Uses.
1. Kennels.
2. Schools and institutions.
3. Churches.
4. Institutional uses.
d. Accessory Uses. Customarily incident to the above uses.
1. Home occupation.
2. The sale of farm produce grown or produced on the same property
provided said property has an area of not less than five acres.
3. Swimming pools and tennis courts.
4. Tool sheds.
5. Private garages.
6. Decks.
e. Required Conditions. The following requirements must be complied
with in the R-1 Zone:
1. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet, whichever is the lesser.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 75 feet.
3. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall be a
minimum of 30 feet.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 75 feet.
5. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area of 45,000 square feet
shall be required for the R-1 Zone. The maximum impervious
coverage shall be 18% for lots up to two acres in size and 4%
additional coverage for all lot area greater than two acres.
6. Minimum Floor Area. Every dwelling erected shall have a minimum
floor area, excluding cellar and garage areas, of 700 square feet
plus at least 100 square feet for each bedroom and 50 square feet
additional living area for each bedroom, as listed below.
§ 18-4.9 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.9
A:180
§ 18-4.10. R-2 Residential Zone. [Ord. No. 04-05 § 13]
Dwelling Minimum Floor Area
1 bedroom 850
2 bedroom 1,000
3 bedroom 1,150
4 bedroom 1,300
5 bedroom 1,450
7. Land Coverage. The maximum land areas to be covered by all
impervious surfaces shall not exceed 15% of the total site area.
8. Minimum Frontage. Minimum frontage at the right-of-way line
shall be 135 feet. Minimum width at the building line shall be 175
feet. Minimum frontage on the turnaround at the end of a
permanent cul-de-sac shall be 100 feet and minimum width at the
building line shall be 150 feet.
f. Cluster Conditions. Should a cluster subdivision be proposed, the yard
requirements may be waived by the Planning Board as may be
appropriate. However, the total number of cluster subdivision lots may
not exceed the number of standard lots which would be permitted
based on an approved qualifying map. Required conditions of the R-2
Zone shall apply, except that minimum lot area shall be 30,000 square
feet.
a. Purpose. This zone is designed for single family residential use. Other
uses are also permitted where the criteria below and other applicable
sections of this Code are also satisfied.
b. Principal Permitted Use.
1. Single family dwelling units.
2. Agriculture (on a lot of five acres or more).
c. Conditional Uses. (See regulations for conditional uses.)
1. Kennels.
2. Schools and institutions.
3. Churches.
d. Accessory Uses.
1. Home occupation.
2. Swimming pools.
3. Tool sheds.
§ 18-4.9 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.10
A:181
§ 18-4.11. R-3 Residential Zone. [Ord. No. 02-20 § 19; Ord. No.
04-05 § 15; Ord. No. 07-08 § 5; Ord. No. 10-01]
4. Private garages.
5. Decks.
e. Required Conditions. The following requirements must be complied
with in the R-2 Zone:
1. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 35 feet
or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 50 feet.
3. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall be a
minimum of 15 feet.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 50 feet.
5. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area of 25,000 square feet
must be measured within 230 feet of the front street right-of-way.
6. Minimum Floor Area. Every dwelling erected shall have a minimum
floor area, excluding cellar and garage areas, of 550 square feet
plus at least 100 square feet for each bedroom and 50 square feet
additional living area for each bedroom as listed below:
Dwelling Minimum Floor Area
1 bedroom 700
2 bedroom 850
3 bedroom 1,000
4 bedroom 1,150
5 bedroom 1,300
7. Land Coverage. The maximum land area to be covered by all
impervious surfaces shall not exceed 15% of the total site area.
8. Minimum Frontage. Minimum frontage at the right-of-way line
shall be 75 feet. Minimum lot width at the building line shall be 100
feet. Minimum frontage on the turnaround at the end of a
permanent cul-de-sac shall be 65 feet and the minimum width at
the building line shall be 85 feet.
a. Purpose. This zone is designed for single family residential use.
b. Principal Permitted Use.
1. Single family dwelling units.
c. Accessory Uses.
§ 18-4.10 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.11
A:182
1. Home occupation.
2. Swimming pools.
3. Tool sheds.
4. Private garages.
5. Decks.
d. Conditional Uses.
1. Churches.
2. Institutional uses and nonprofit clubs.
3. Schools and institutions.
e. Required Conditions. The following requirements must be complied
with in the R-3 Zone:
1. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet, whichever is the lesser.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 35 feet
except that, where the existing buildings on the same side of the
street and within 200 feet from an average setback, new buildings
shall conform to such established line, provided no new building
may project closer than 25 feet to the street right-of-way line.
3. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, one a minimum of eight
feet and a total combination of 20 feet.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 35 feet.
5. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area of 14,000 square feet is
required. Existing conforming platted lots prior to the July 1, 2002
effective date shall adhere to the following lot standards. No
residential building shall be erected on an existing platted lot less
than 8,000 square feet measured within 100 feet of the street
sideline.
6. Minimum Floor Area. Every dwelling erected shall have a minimum
floor area, excluding cellar and garage areas, of 550 square feet
plus at least 100 square feet additional living area for each
bedroom, as listed below:
Dwelling Minimum Floor Area
1 bedroom 700
2 bedroom 850
3 bedroom 1,000
4 bedroom 1,150
§ 18-4.11 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.11
A:183
§ 18-4.12. R-4 Residential/Professional Zone. [Ord. No. 1003 § 6;
Ord. No. 10-14]
Dwelling Minimum Floor Area
5 bedroom 1,300
7. Land Coverage. The maximum land area to be covered by all
impervious surfaces shall not exceed 25% of the total site area.
8. Minimum Frontage. Minimum frontage at the right-of-way line
shall be 60 feet. Minimum lot width at the building line shall be 80
feet.
9. Corner lots shall have a minimum side yard of 12 feet with a
combined side yard of 24 feet.
10. The building coverage of the principal structure shall not exceed
18% of the lot area.
a. Purpose and General Requirements for All Uses in R-4 Zone. The R-4
Residential/Professional Zone is a zone for a single family residential
use, and a zone which permits the conversion of existing residential
homes, constructed prior to October 1, 1993, fronting on Main Street
and Glen Road and the proposed service road parallel to Main Street as
shown in the Town Center Master Plan Amendment. Professional office
and service uses are permitted as a conditional use. Site plans and
building shall be designed in a manner that will preserve the rural and
historic character of the Township, preserve the tax base of the
Township and promote the viability of the existing and future
commercial areas in the central business district, promote the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare, provide adequate open
space and preservation of environmentally sensitive lands such as
freshwater wetlands, transition areas, severe slopes and woodlands,
promote development in harmony with the existing Town Center by
maintaining the scale, form and proportions of the existing R-4 and the
Town Center Zones. The R-4 Residential/Professional Zone therefore
promotes the establishment of appropriate single family/residential,
planned residential unit developments and office and service uses at
locations in accordance with their respective environmental
requirements, and the promotion of desirable visual environment
through creative development techniques including unified design,
conservation of open space and prevention of urban sprawl. Demolition
or partial demolition of any structures in the R-4 Zone shall comply with
Subsection 18-4.2 regarding Historic Preservation.
b. Principal Permitted Uses.
1. Single family residential uses.
2. Public buildings and uses.
§ 18-4.11 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.12
A:184
3. Institutional uses and nonprofit clubs.
4. Churches and cemeteries.
5. Bed and breakfast inns. See definition (Subsection 18-2.1).
6. Construction of new structures for office and service uses such as
office buildings for doctors, dentists, veterinarians, architects,
engineers, attorneys, or other like professionals, medical clinics,
banking, insurance, institutional and real estate offices, profitmaking institutional uses, health and child care facilities, antique
shops, photography and art studios, per Subsection 18-4.2s
(historic preservation). New professional office and service
buildings shall have a residential appearance in keeping with the
goals of the amendment to the appendix of the 1993 Interchange
Master Plan and the Town Center Plan Amendment.
7. (Reserved)
8. Second floor apartments over office establishments.
c. Conditional Uses.
1. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses within the R-4
Residential/Professional Zone subject to site plan approval and
consideration of the impact of said use on the neighborhood as
outlined in Subsection 18-4.7c, Application for a Permitted
Conditional Use. A primary consideration in reviewing the
suitability of a proposed conditional use is preservation of the
existing buildings within the zone to accomplish the following goals
of the Township of Sparta:
To preserve the resources within the Main Street corridor which
reflect the elements of the architectural history.
To encourage the continued use of the existing buildings and to
encourage appropriate reuse.
To maintain the character of the neighborhood and architecturally
significant buildings.
To manage change by preventing alteration or new construction
not in keeping with the zone.
To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
2. The permitted conditional uses are as follows:
(a) Second floor apartments in office/service buildings in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection 18-4.7c11.
(b) The conversion of existing residential structures constructed
prior to October 1, 1993 on properties fronting on Main Street
or Glen Road to offices for businesses, executive and
§ 18-4.12 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.12
A:185
professional purposes, antique shops, and photography and
art studios. Second floor apartments are permissible in these
converted structures in accordance with Subsections
18-4.7c11 and 12 and 18-4.12g3, 4, 6, 7, 8 and 9.
(c) Nursing homes, sanitariums pursuant to Subsection
18-4.7c9(e).
(d) Planned residential unit developments pursuant to the
conditions set forth in 18-4.7c22.
(e) Essential services pursuant to standards set forth in
Subsection 18-4.7c18.
d. Accessory Uses.
1. Home occupation.
2. Swimming pools, tennis courts, gate houses, community rooms,
and any other accessory structures incidental to the principal use.
3. Tool shed, maintenance structures, and utilities.
4. Private garages.
5. Decks.
e. Prohibited Uses.
1. Uses which are not permitted uses, conditional uses or accessory
uses are hereby prohibited.
f. Required Conditions for Single Family Residential Use.
1. Single family residential development shall not result in the
disturbance, grading or construction of structures or development
improvements on severe slopes (25% or more) or within the
freshwater wetlands or freshwater wetlands transition areas unless
a wetland permit is approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy. The R-4 Residential/
Professional Zone permits a gross density of one unit per two acres.
The residential structures shall be clustered on the lands which do
not have severe slopes or freshwater wetlands and may have a
minimum clustered lot area of 20,000 square feet measured within
200 feet of the front street. The lands within the subdivision not
utilized for cluster lots and roads shall be dedicated to open space
pursuant to Subsection 18-5.4.
2. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 35 feet
or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
3. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 30 feet.
§ 18-4.12 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.12
A:186
4. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards which shall not be less
than 15 feet each. When the lot in question is a corner lot, the side
yard adjoining the side street shall conform to the front yard
setback.
5. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 50 feet.
6. Land Coverage. The maximum land area to be covered by all
impervious surfaces shall not exceed 15% of the total site area.
7. Minimum Frontage. Minimum frontage at the right-of-way line
shall be 75 feet. Minimum lot width at the building line shall be 100
feet. Minimum frontage on the turnaround at the end of a
permanent cul-de-sac shall be 65 feet and the minimum width at
the building line shall be 85 feet.
8. Single family residential structures constructed prior to October 1,
1992 may be expanded provided the structure conforms to the
required yard setback requirements of the R-4 Zone and may be
rebuilt if totally or partially destroyed.
9. Single family residences, duplex homes, and single story
townhouses constructed after October 1993 shall not be converted
to or used for office service uses.
10. Streetscape. All properties with frontage on Main Street, Sparta
Avenue, Woodport Road, Mohawk Avenue, the connector and
parallel service road to Main Street shall provide streetscape
improvements consistent with the Town Center Master Plan
including but not limited to the following:
(a) Street trees every 40 feet or as deemed appropriate by the
Board after review of the landscape plan.
(b) Decorative street lighting, spacing as required.
(c) Sidewalks.
(d) Concrete paver/utility strip.
(e) Benches.
(f) Trash receptacles.
g. Required Conditions for New Office and Services Uses Planned
Commercial Development.
1. New office and service uses shall include features to promote
harmony with the character of the existing town center scale, form,
and proportions of the Town Center Zones. Buildings shall have a
residential appearance in keeping with the goals of Town Center
Master Plan Amendment and the appendix to the 1993 amendment
to the interchange Master Plan.
§ 18-4.12 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.12
A:187
2. Planned commercial developments shall have a unified site
architectural and signage design. Planned commercial
developments shall not result in disturbance, grading or
construction of structures or development improvements on severe
slopes (25% or more) or within the freshwater wetlands or
freshwater wetlands transition areas unless a wetland permit is
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy.
3. Buildings and signs shall be in keeping with the rural character of
the area and the goals of the Town Center Master Plan Amendment.
4. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet, whichever is the lesser.
5. Building Length. No building shall have a continuous facade in any
direction exceeding 120 feet.
6. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard setback of not less than 30
feet.
7. Side Yard. Thirty feet.
8. Rear Yard. Fifty feet.
9. Impervious Cover. The total impervious cover of any planned
commercial development shall not exceed 40%.
10. Lot Area. The gross lot area of a planned commercial development
shall consist of a minimum of four acres. The planned commercial
development may be subdivided into smaller net lot areas of not
less than 10,000 square feet as may be suitable for the proposed
development plan of each use provided the planned development
has a simultaneous site plan and subdivision approval and provided
the development has a common design theme.
11. Off-street parking as regulated in Subsection 18-5.3 is permitted in
side and rear yards provided the following minimum setbacks are
maintained from property line and right-of-way lines of any
approved road:
(a) Side Yard Setback. Ten feet from edge of parking to property
line, except where interconnections to adjacent lots are
approved by the Board.
(b) Rear Yard Setback. Thirty feet from edge of parking to
property line, except where interconnections to adjacent lots
are approved by the Board.
12. Loading areas shall be screened by architectural features, walls or
landscape berms.
§ 18-4.12 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.12
A:188
§ 18-4.13. RR Rural Residential Zone. [Ord. No. 9-8-98 § II; Ord. No.
02-20 § 9; Ord. No. 04-05 §§ 3 — 5, 16; Ord. No. 07-08 § 6]
13. Distance between unattached buildings shall not be closer than 30
feet to any other building situated on the same lot.
14. A planned commercial development shall be served by a central
water system.
15. Prior to the approval of any planned development, the Planning
Board shall find the facts and conclusion as required by N.J.S.A.
40:53D-45.
16. Streetscape. All properties with frontage on Main Street, Sparta
Avenue, Woodport Road and Mohawk Avenue shall provide
streetscape improvements consistent with the Town Center Master
Plan including but not limited to the following:
(a) Street trees every 40 feet or as deemed appropriate by the
Board after review of the landscape plan.
(b) Decorative street lighting, spacing as required.
(c) Sidewalks.
(d) Belgian block curbs.
(e) Concrete paver/utility strip.
(f) Benches.
(g) Trash receptacles.
h. Standards for Existing Platted Lots: Limited Commercial Use.
Undeveloped existing platted lots under four acres as of April 15, 2010
for limited commercial use shall conform to the bulk standards of the
Town Center Commercial Zone (TCC 18-4.24e).
a. Purpose. This zone is designed for detached single-family residential
use. The density permitted is based upon the natural features of the
land to withstand development. The density is based upon the capacity
of the land to provide for sufficient space for residential use, to provide
for consistency with existing neighborhoods, to provide for an
appropriate residential use and residential zone, and to provide for
development in keeping with the environmental suitability and
characteristics of the property within the zone.
b. Principal Permitted Uses.
1. Single family dwelling units.
2. Agriculture (on a lot of five acres or more).
§ 18-4.12 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.13
A:189
3. Golf courses with a minimum of 18 full length fairways meeting the
requirements of the United States Professional Golf Association.
c. Conditional Uses.
1. Kennels.
2. Schools and institutions.
3. Churches.
d. Accessory Uses.
1. Swimming pools and tennis courts.
2. Tool sheds.
3. Off-street parking.
4. Home occupations.
5. Private garages.
6. Sale of farm produce grown or produced on same property
provided said property has an area of not less than five acres.
7. Decks.
e. Required Conditions. The following requirements shall be complied
with in the Rural Residential Zone.
1. Height. The height of the principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories and 38 feet in height as defined in the chapter.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 75 feet.
3. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall have a
minimum of 50 feet.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 75 feet.
5. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area for determination of total
development density within any minor or major subdivision shall be
five acres for each lot.
6. Land Coverage. The maximum land coverage area to be covered by
all impervious surfaces shall not exceed 10% of the total site area.
7. Minimum Frontage. Minimum frontage at the right-of-way line
shall be 250 feet.
8. Minimum Width. Minimum width of the building line shall be 250
feet. Minimum frontage at the turnaround at the end of a cul-de-sac
shall be 100 feet. The minimum width of the building line of a culde-sac lot shall be 150 feet.
§ 18-4.13 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.13
A:190
9. Existing Lots Platted or Approved Prior to August 11, 1998 with
Less Than Five Acres. Existing lots platted or approved prior to
August 11, 1998 which are less than the five acre minimum lot size
may be used for a new single family residential structure or an
expansion of an existing residential structure in accordance with
the standards of the former PR zone which are as follows:
(a) Height. The height of the principal structure shall not exceed
2 1/2 stories and 38 feet in height as defined in the chapter.
(b) Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 75 feet.
(c) Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall
have a minimum of 30 feet.
(d) Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 75 feet.
(e) Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall be the actual
preexisting lot area but not less than 40,000 square feet.
(f) Land Coverage. The maximum imperious coverage shall be
18% for lots up to two acres in size and 4% additional coverage
for all lot area greater than two acres. Each cluster lot shall
have a minimum of 8,000 square feet contiguous,
unconstrained land in accordance with the standards set forth
herein and in Subsection 18-5.6.
(g) Minimum Frontage. Minimum frontage at the right-of-way line
shall be 135 feet.
(h) Minimum Width. Minimum width of the building line shall be
175 feet to 250 feet. Minimum frontage at the turn around at
the end of the cul-de-sac shall be 100 feet. The minimum width
of the building line of a cul-de-sac lot shall be 150 feet.
f. Environmental Constraints Cluster Option. Land within the Rural
Residential District may be subdivided in a cluster subdivision in
accordance with the following requirements. The total number of lots
within the subdivision shall be determined by dividing the total acreage
by five acres per lot. This total number of lots may be then subdivided
within the total tract in accordance with the following net residential
site reduction standards provided that the balance of the tract is
retained in perpetual open space by either a homeowners' association
in accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection 18-5.4, or
dedicated to the Township of Sparta for open space, conservation,
recreation and/or public school purposes consistent with the Master
Plan. The net size of the residential sites may be reduced as follows and
in accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection 18-5.6.
1. Least Restricted. One unit per one acre.
2. Moderately Restricted. One unit per three acres.
§ 18-4.13 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.13
A:191
3. Severely Restricted. One unit per five acres.
4. Newly Created Lot or Subdivision Lot. Any newly created lot or
subdivided lot in a major or minor subdivision shall be at least five
acres. The five acre lot may be clustered, however, in accordance
with this subsection.
5. Minimum Residential Site Size. Minimum residential site size
within any cluster development under this subsection shall be one
acre of least restricted land. Constraint calculations shall not be
required where the proposed residential site to be created is five
acres or more.
6. Open Space or Public Dedication. No residential site shall be
greater than five acres. All land not included in the net residential
sites shall be dedicated to the public or preserved in open space
pursuant to Subsection 18-5.4. If net residential sites are created
which are less than five acres, the open space or public lands
dedication for said clustered net residential site shall be equal to or
greater than five acres minus the size of the net residential site.
7. Contiguity of Open Space/Public Dedication. Not less than 40% of
the gross acreage of the tract shall be reserved for permanent
common open space. All open space areas and/or public dedication
areas (open space areas) shall be contiguous with the subdivision.
All open space areas shall have access from a public street and
frontage of at least 100 feet on a public street. The open space shall
abut at least 50% of the side or rear of the net residential sites. At
least 5% of the open space land shall be least restricted and
moderately restricted land.
8. The open space shall be planned and designed to provide for
interconnection to nearby or adjacent public land and planned or
possible future open space as per the Master Plan.
9. Required Conditions. The following requirements shall be complied
with in the environmental constraints cluster option:
(a) Height. The height of the principal structure shall not exceed
2 1/2 stories and 38 feet in height as defined in the chapter.
(b) Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 75 feet.
(c) Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall
have a minimum of 30 feet.
(d) Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 75 feet.
(e) Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area for determination of
total development density within any minor or major
subdivision shall be five acres for each lot.
§ 18-4.13 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.13
A:192
(f) Land Coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall be
18% for lots up to two acres in size and 4% additional coverage
for all lot area greater than two acres. For example, a sample
calculation for a three acre lot would be as follows:
(1) First two acres: 87,120 square feet x 0.18 = 15,682 square
feet permitted impervious coverage.
(2) Additional one acre: 43,560 square feet x 0.04 = 1,742.40
square feet additional permitted impervious coverage.
(3) Total Permitted Impervious Coverage: 17,424.40 square
feet. Each cluster lot shall have a minimum of 8,000
square feet contiguous, unconstrained land in accordance
with the standards set forth herein and in Subsection
18-5.6.
(g) Minimum Frontage. Minimum frontage at the right-of-way line
shall be 135 feet.
(h) Minimum Width. Minimum width of the building line shall be
175 feet. Minimum frontage at the turnaround at the end of a
cul-de-sac shall be 100 feet. The minimum width of the building
line of a cul-de-sac lot shall be 150 feet.
g. Incentive Cluster Option. As an additional incentive to Affordable
Housing Trust Fund contributions and public open space dedication
within the zone, an applicant for a major subdivision may apply for
approval from the Planning Board of an incentive cluster subdivision.
The maximum number of lots within the incentive cluster subdivision
may be increased from the total acreage of the property divided by five
acres to add an additional 0.3 residential site for each five acre portion
of the tract, so that there are 1.3 residential sites for every five acres of
gross land area, provided that the applicant meets the following
requirements:
1. Open Space Dedication. The open space of the cluster subdivision
shall include at least 15% of the lands which are not least restricted
and which are dedicated to the Township of Sparta for open space,
recreation, public use, or conservation purposes as determined
appropriate by the Township Council of the Township of Sparta.
2. Housing Trust Fund and Developer's Agreement. As a condition of
preliminary subdivision approval and prior to commencing site
work and/or prior to final subdivision approval, the applicant shall
enter into a developer's agreement with the Township of Sparta.
The developer's agreement shall provide that the applicant shall
contribute 6% of the gross sales price of each of the additional
residential sites or residences created by the incentive cluster to
the Sparta Township Housing Trust Fund. This 6% contribution
shall be made for each residential site created in addition to the
one residential site per five acres. The Housing Trust Fund
§ 18-4.13 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.13
A:193
contributions shall be paid prior to transfer of any deed of
conveyance and prior to the issuance of any building permit on
said additional lots. The Housing Trust Fund shall be contributed
to and utilized in accordance with the requirements of the Housing
Trust Fund. As an additional incentive to Affordable Housing Trust
Fund contributions and public open space dedication within a zone,
an applicant for a major subdivision may apply for approval from
the Planning Board of an incentive cluster subdivision even if it
does not yield any additional lots. However, if the applicant elects
to utilize the incentive cluster option but does not obtain one or
more additional incentive lot(s), then said applicant shall pay to the
Township Housing Trust Fund 6% of the gross sales price for one
lot and house in the first one to five lots and a 6% payment for one
of each of the five lots and houses beyond the first five lots. The
total contribution to the Housing Trust Fund shall be based on the
value of the land and the new structures.
3. Required Standards for Incentive Cluster. The minimum residential
site size shall be one acre or 43,560 square feet without central
potable water, 35,000 square feet with central potable water.
(a) Minimum Lot. Thirty-five thousand square feet.
(b) Minimum Front Yard. Fifty feet.
(c) Minimum Side Yard. Twenty feet for one side yard. The total of
two side yards shall not be less than 50 feet.
(d) Minimum Rear Yard. Sixty feet.
(e) Minimum Lot Frontage. One hundred feet.
(f) Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line. One hundred
thirty-five feet.
(g) Land Coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall be
18% for lots up to two acres in size and 4% additional coverage
for all lot area greater than two acres. Each cluster lot shall
have a minimum of 8,000 square feet contiguous,
unconstrained land in accordance with the standards set forth
herein and in Subsection 18-5.6.
(h) Maximum Stories/Height. The height of a principal structure
shall to exceed 2 1/2 stories and 38 feet in height as defined in
the chapter.
(i) Accessory Structures and Deck Requirements.
(1) Accessory Stories/Height = 1.5 or 16 feet.
(2) Accessory Side and Rear = 10 feet.
(3) Deck — Side 15 feet; Rear 50 feet.
§ 18-4.13 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.14
A:194
§ 18-4.14. RC-1 Rural Conservation Residential Zone. [Ord. No.
9-8-98 § III; Ord. No. 02-20 § 10; Ord. No. 04-04 §§ 6 — 8, 17; Ord.
No. 07-08 § 7]
a. Purpose. This zone is designed ultimately for detached single-family
residential use placed on large lots to protect the groundwater aquifer
which is located under the zone. The purpose of the zone is to provide
for an appropriate residential use at an appropriate density in a
residential zone. The purpose of this zone is also to protect the
environmental quality of the water in the groundwater under the
property and in the area of the property. The potential for groundwater
contamination by septic systems, groundwater recharge facilities,
storm water discharge, homeowner sources, and other activities are to
be carefully considered in the establishment of the density for this
district.
b. Principal Permitted Uses.
1. Single family dwelling units.
2. Agriculture on lot of five acres or more.
c. Conditional Uses. Regulations for conditional uses.
1. Kennels.
2. Schools and institutions.
3. Institutional uses and nonprofit clubs.
4. Churches.
d. Accessory Uses. Customarily incident to the above uses.
1. Home occupation.
2. Sale of farm produce grown and produced on the same property
provided said property has an area of not less than five acres.
3. Swimming pools and tennis courts.
4. Tool sheds.
e. Required Conditions.
1. Height. The height of the principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories and 38 feet in height as defined in the chapter.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 150 feet.
3. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall be a
minimum of 50 feet.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 100 feet.
§ 18-4.14 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.14
A:195
5. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area for each lot shall be five
acres. However, the minimum lot area of the RC-1 Rural
Conservation/Residential Zone shall be applied to a subdivision
application deemed complete by the administrative officer prior to
November 2, 1988, and coming for review before the Planning
Board during March, 1989, at the time of the adoption of an
ordinance amending the RC-2 zone standards and zone district
map. The RR minimum lot standards shall be applied for purposes
of a hearing and decision on such applications provided the
applications were actively pursued by the applicant and reached a
decision prior to October 1, 1989. Any such applications which
were approved pursuant to this subsection shall receive the
benefits of the effective preliminary approval as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49, but any new applications shall be subject to the RC-2
Rural Conservation Residential standards.
6. Land Coverage. The maximum land areas to be covered by all
impervious surfaces shall not exceed 5% of the total site area.
7. Existing Lots Platted or Approved Prior to August 11, 1998 with
Less Than five Acres. Existing lots platted or approved prior to
August 11, 1998 which are less than the five acre minimum lot size
may be used for a new single family residential structure or an
expansion of an existing residential structure in accordance with
the standards of the former RC-1 zone which are as follows:
(a) Height. The height of the principal structure shall not exceed
2 1/2 stories and 38 feet in height as defined in the chapter.
(b) Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 150 feet.
(c) Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall be
a minimum of 50 feet.
(d) Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 100 feet.
(e) Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area for each lot shall be
the actual size of the pre-existing lot but not less than two
acres.
(f) Land Coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall be
18% for lots up to two acres in size and 4% additional coverage
for all lot area greater than two acres. Each cluster lot shall
have a minimum of 8,000 square feet contiguous,
unconstrained land in accordance with the standards set forth
herein and in Subsection 18-5.6.
f. Environmental Constraints Cluster Option. Land within this Rural
Conservation Residential District may be subdivided in a cluster
subdivision in accordance with the following requirements: the total
number of lots within the subdivision shall be determined by dividing
the total acreage by five acres per lot. This total number of lots may be
§ 18-4.14 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.14
A:196
then subdivided within the total tract in accordance with the following
net residential site reduction standards provided that the balance of
the tract is retained in perpetual open space by either a homeowners
association in accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection
18-5.4, or dedicated to the Township of Sparta for open space,
conservation, recreation and/or public school purposes consistent with
the Master Plan. The net size of the residential sites may be reduced
as follows and in accordance with the standards set forth in Subsection
18-5.6.
1. Least Restricted. One unit per two acres.
2. Moderately Restricted. One unit per three acres.
3. Severely Restricted. One unit per five acres.
4. Newly Created Lot or Subdivision Lot. Any newly created lot or
subdivided lot in a major or minor subdivision shall be at least five
acres. The five acre lot may be clustered, however, in accordance
with this subsection.
5. Minimum Residential Site Size. Minimum residential site size
within any cluster development under this subsection shall be two
acres of least restricted land. Constraint calculations shall not be
required where the proposed residential site to be created is five
acres or more.
6. Open Space or Public Dedication. No residential site shall be
greater than five acres. All land not included in the net residential
sites shall be dedicated to the public or preserved in open space
pursuant to Subsection 18-5.4. If net residential sites are created
which are less than five acres, the open space or public lands
dedication for said clustered net residential site shall be equal to or
greater than five acres minus the size of the net residential site.
7. Contiguity of Open Space/Public Dedication. Not less than 40% of
the gross acreage of the tract shall be reserved for permanent
common open space. All open space areas and/or public dedication
areas (open space areas) shall be contiguous with the subdivision.
All open space areas shall have access from a public street and
frontage of at least 100 feet on a public street. The open space shall
abut at least 50% of the side or rear of the net residential sites. At
least 5% of the open space land shall be least restricted and
moderately restricted land.
8. The open space shall be planned and designed to provide for
interconnection to nearby or adjacent public land and planned or
possible future open space as per the Master Plan.
9. Required Conditions. The following requirements shall be complied
with in the environmental constraints cluster option:
§ 18-4.14 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.14
A:197
(a) Height. The height of the principal structure shall not exceed
2 1/2 stories and 38 feet in height as defined in the chapter.
(b) Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 75 feet.
(c) Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall
have a minimum of 30 feet.
(d) Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 75 feet.
(e) Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area for determination of
total development density within any minor or major
subdivision shall be five acres for each lot.
(f) Land Coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall be
18% for lots up to two acres in size and 4% additional coverage
for all lot area greater than two acres. For example, a sample
calculation for a three acre lot would be as follows:
(1) First two acres: 87,120 square feet x 0.18 = 15,682 square
feet permitted impervious coverage.
(2) Additional one acre: 43,560 square feet x 0.04 = 1,742.40
square feet additional permitted impervious coverage.
(3) Total Permitted Impervious Coverage: 17,424.40 square
feet.
(g) Minimum Frontage. Minimum frontage at the right-of-way line
shall be 135 feet.
(h) Minimum Width. Minimum width of the building line shall be
175 feet. Minimum frontage at the turn around at the end of a
cul-de-sac shall be 100 feet. The minimum width of the building
line of a cul-de-sac shall be 150 feet.
g. Incentive Cluster Option. As an additional incentive to Affordable
Housing Trust Fund contributions and public open space dedication
within the zone, an applicant for a major subdivision may apply for
approval from the Planning Board of an incentive cluster subdivision.
The maximum number of lots within the incentive cluster subdivision
may be increased from the total acreage of the property divided by five
acres to add an additional 0.3 residential site for each five acre portion
of the tract, so that there are 1.3 residential sites for every five acres of
gross land area, provided that the applicant meets the following
requirements:
1. Open Space Dedication. The open space of the cluster subdivision
shall include at least 15% of the lands which are not least restricted
and which are dedicated to the Township of Sparta for open space,
recreation, public use, or conservation purposes as determined
appropriate by the Township Council of the Township of Sparta.
§ 18-4.14 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.14
A:198
2. Housing Trust Fund and Developer's Agreement. As a condition of
preliminary subdivision approval and prior to commencing site
work and/or prior to final subdivision approval, the applicant shall
enter into a developer's agreement with the Township of Sparta.
The developer's agreement shall provide that the applicant shall
contribute 6% of the gross sales price of each of the additional
residential sites or residences created by the incentive cluster to
the Sparta Township Housing Trust Fund. This 6% contribution
shall be made for each residential site created in addition to the
one residential site per five acres. The Housing Trust Fund
contributions shall be paid prior to transfer of any deed of
conveyance and prior to the issuance of any building permit on said
additional lots. The Housing Trust Fund shall be contributed to and
utilized in accordance with the requirements of the Housing Trust
Fund. As an additional incentive to Affordable Housing Trust Fund
contributions and public open space dedication within a zone, an
applicant for a major subdivision may apply for approval from the
Planning Board of an incentive cluster subdivision event if it does
not yield any additional lots. However, if the applicant elects to
utilize the incentive cluster option but does not obtain one or more
incentive lots, then said applicant shall pay to the Township 6% of
the gross sales price for one house and lot in the first one to five
lots and a 6% payment for one of each of the five lots and houses
beyond the first five lots. The total contribution to the Housing
Trust Fund shall be based on the value of the land and the new
structures.
3. Required Standards for Incentive Cluster. The minimum residential
site size shall be one acre or 43,560 square feet without central
potable water, 35,000 square feet with central potable water.
(a) Minimum Lot. Thirty-five thousand square feet.
(b) Minimum Front Yard. Fifty feet.
(c) Minimum Side Yard. Twenty feet for one side yard. The total of
two side yards shall not be less than 50 feet.
(d) Minimum Rear Yard. Sixty feet.
(e) Minimum Lot Frontage. One hundred feet.
(f) Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line. One hundredthirty feet.
(g) Land Coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall be
18% for lots up to two acres in size and 4% additional coverage
for all lot area greater than two acres. Each cluster lot shall
have a minimum of 8,000 square feet contiguous,
unconstrained land in accordance with the standards set forth
herein and in Subsection 18-5.6.
§ 18-4.14 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.14
A:199
§ 18-4.15. RC-2 Rural Conservation Residential Zone. [Ord. No.
9-8-98 § IV; Ord. No. 02-20 § 11; Ord. No. 04-05 §§ 9-11, 18; Ord. No.
07-08 § 8]
(h) Maximum Stories/Height. The height of a principal structure
shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories and 38 feet in height as defined in
the chapter.
(i) Accessory Structures and Deck Requirements.
(1) Accessory Stories/Height = 1.5 or 16 feet.
(2) Accessory Side and Rear = 10 feet.
(3) Deck — Side 15 feet; Rear 50 feet
a. Purpose. This zone is designated for detached single-family residential
use on large lots to protect the aquifer which is located under the zone.
The following uses are also permitted where the criteria below and
other applicable sections of this Code are satisfied.
b. Principal Permitted Uses.
1. Single family dwelling units.
2. Agriculture (on lot of five acres or more).
c. Conditional Uses.
1. Kennels.
2. Schools and institutions.
3. Institutional uses and nonprofit.
4. Churches.
d. Accessory Uses. Uses customarily incident to the above uses.
1. Home occupation.
2. Sale of farm produce grown and produced on the same property
provided the property has an area of at least five acres.
3. Swimming pools and tennis courts.
4. Tool sheds.
e. Required Conditions.
1. Height. The height of the principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories and 38 feet in height as defined in the chapter.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 75 feet.
§ 18-4.14 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.15
A:200
3. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall be a
minimum of 50 feet.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 75 feet.
5. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area for each lot shall be five
acres.
6. Land Coverage. The maximum land areas to be covered by all
impervious surfaces shall not exceed 5% of the total site area.
7. Minimum Frontage at the Lot Right-of-Way. The Right-of-Way line
shall be 175 feet.
8. Minimum Lot Width at the Building Line. The minimum lot width at
the building line shall be 200 feet.
9. Minimum Frontage at the Turn Around. The minimum frontage at
the turn around and the end of a permanent cul-de-sac shall be 70
feet, and the minimum width of the building line for a cul-de-sac lot
shall be 150 feet.
10. Existing Lots Platted or Approved Prior to August 11, 1998 with
Less Than Five Acres. Existing lots platted or approved prior to
August 11, 1998 which are less than the five acre minimum lot size
may be used for a new single family residential structure or an
expansion of an existing residential structure in accordance with
the standards of the former RC-2 zone which are as follows:
(a) Height. The height of the principal structure shall not exceed
2 1/2 stories and 38 feet in height as defined in the chapter.
(b) Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 150 feet.
(c) Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall be
a minimum of 50 feet.
(d) Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 100 feet.
(e) Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area for each lot shall be
the actual size of the pre-existing lot but not less than two
acres.
(f) Land Coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall be
18% for lots up to two acres in size and 4% additional coverage
for all lot area greater than two acres. Each cluster lot shall
have a minimum of 8,000 square feet contiguous,
unconstrained land in accordance with the standards set forth
herein and in Subsection 18-5.6.
f. Environmental Constraints Cluster Option. Land within this Rural
Conservation Residential District may be subdivided in a cluster
subdivision in accordance with the following requirements: The total
§ 18-4.15 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.15
A:201
number of lots within the subdivision shall be determined by dividing
the total acreage by five acres per lot.
This total number of lots may be then subdivided within the total
tract in accordance with the following net residential site reduction
standards provided that the balance of the tract is retained in perpetual
open space by either a homeowners association in accordance with the
standards set forth in Subsection 18-5.4, or dedicated to the Township
of Sparta for open space, conservation, recreation and/or public school
purposes consistent with the Master Plan. The net size of the residential
sites may be reduced as follows and in accordance with the standards
set forth in Subsection 18-5.6.
1. Least Restricted. One unit per two acres.
2. Moderately Restricted. One unit per three aces.
3. Severely Restricted. One unit per five acres.
4. Newly Created Lot or Subdivision Lot. Any newly created lot or
subdivided lot in a major or minor subdivision shall be at least five
acres. The five acre lot may be clustered, however, in accordance
with this subsection.
5. Minimum Residential Site Size. Minimum residential site size
within any cluster development under this subsection shall be two
acres of least restricted land. Constraint calculations shall not be
required where the proposed residential site to be created is five
acres or more.
6. Open Space or Public Dedication. No residential site shall be
greater than five acres. All land not included in the net residential
sites shall be dedicated to the public or preserved in open space
pursuant to Subsection 18-5.4. If net residential sites are created
which are less than five acres, the open space or public lands
dedication for said clustered net residential site shall be equal to or
greater than five acres minus the size of the net residential site.
7. Contiguity of Open Space/Public Dedication. Not less than 40% of
the gross acreage of the tract shall be reserved for permanent
common open space. All open space areas and/or public dedication
areas (open space areas) shall be contiguous with the subdivision.
All open space areas shall have access from a public street and
frontage of at least 100 feet on a public street. The open space shall
abut at least 50% of the side or rear of the net residential sites. At
least 5% of the open space land shall be least restricted and
moderately restricted land.
8. The open space shall be planned and designed to provide for
interconnection to nearby or adjacent public land and planned or
possible future open space as per the Master Plan.
§ 18-4.15 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.15
A:202
9. Required Conditions. The following requirements shall be complied
with in the environmental constraints cluster option:
(a) Height. The height of the principal structure shall not exceed
2 1/2 stories and 38 feet in height as defined in the chapter.
(b) Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 75 feet.
(c) Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall
have a minimum of 30 feet.
(d) Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 75 feet.
(e) Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area for determination of
total development density within any minor or major
subdivision shall be five acres for each lot.
(f) Land Coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall be
18% for lots up to two acres in size and 4% additional coverage
for all lot area greater than two acres. For example, a sample
calculation for a three acre lot would be as follows:
(1) First two acres: 87,120 square feet x 0.18 = 15,682 square
feet permitted impervious coverage.
(2) Additional one acre: 43,560 square feet x 0.04 = 1742.40
square feet additional permitted impervious coverage.
(3) Total Permitted Impervious Coverage: 17,424.40 square
feet.
(g) Minimum Frontage. Minimum frontage at the right-of-way line
shall be 135 feet.
(h) Minimum Width. Minimum width of the building line shall be
175 feet. Minimum frontage at the turnaround at the end of a
cul-de-sac shall be 100 feet. The minimum width of the building
line of a cul-de-sac lot shall be 150 feet.
g. Incentive Cluster Option. As an additional incentive to Affordable
Housing Trust Fund contributions and public open space dedication
within the zone, an applicant for a major subdivision may apply for
approval from the Planning Board of an incentive cluster subdivision.
The maximum number of lots within the incentive cluster subdivision
may be increased from the total acreage of the property divided by five
acres to add an additional 0.3 residential site for each five acre portion
of the tract, so that there are 1.3 residential sites for every five acres of
gross land area, provided that the applicant meets the following
requirements:
1. Open Space Dedication. The open space of the cluster subdivision
shall include at least 15% of the lands which are not least restricted
and which are dedicated to the Township of Sparta for open space,
§ 18-4.15 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.15
A:203
recreation, public use, or conservation purposes as determined
appropriate by the Township Council of the Township of Sparta.
2. Housing Trust Fund and Developer's Agreement. As a condition of
preliminary subdivision approval and prior to commencing site
work and/or prior to final subdivision approval, the applicant shall
enter into a developer's agreement with the Township of Sparta.
The developer's agreement shall provide that the applicant shall
contribute 6% of the gross sales price of each of the additional
residential sites or residences created by the incentive cluster to
the Sparta Township Housing Trust Fund. This 6% contribution
shall be made for each residential site created in addition to the
one residential site per five acres. The Housing Trust Fund
contributions shall be paid prior to transfer of any deed of
conveyance and prior to the issuance of any building permit on said
additional lots. The Housing Trust Fund shall be contributed to and
utilized in accordance with the requirements of the Housing Trust
Fund established. As an additional incentive to Affordable Housing
Trust Fund contributions and public open space dedication within a
zone, an applicant for a major subdivision may apply for approval
from the Planning Board of an incentive cluster subdivision even if
it does not yield any additional lots. However, if the applicant elects
to utilize the incentive cluster option but does not obtain one or
more incentive lots, then said applicant shall pay to the Township
6% of the gross sales price for one house and lot in the first one to
five lots and a 6% payment for one of each of the five lots and
houses beyond the first five lots. The total contribution to the
Housing Trust Fund shall be based on the value of the land and the
new structures.
3. Required Standards for Incentive Cluster. The minimum residential
site size shall be one acre or 43,560 square feet without central
potable water, 35,000 square feet with central potable water.
(a) Minimum Lot. Thirty-five thousand square feet.
(b) Minimum Front Yard. Fifty feet.
(c) Minimum Side Yard. Twenty feet for one side yard. The total of
two side yards shall not be less than 50 feet.
(d) Minimum Rear Yard. Sixty feet.
(e) Minimum Lot Frontage. One hundred feet.
(f) Minimum Lot Width at Building Setback Line. One hundred
thirty-five feet.
(g) Land Coverage. The maximum impervious coverage shall be
18% for lots up to two acres in size and 4% additional coverage
for all lot area greater than two acres. Each cluster lot shall
have a minimum of 8,000 square feet contiguous,
§ 18-4.15 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.15
A:204
§ 18-4.16. MF Multi-Family Zone.
unconstrained land in accordance with the standards set forth
herein in Subsection 18-5.6.
(h) Maximum Stories/Height. The height of a principal structure
shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories and 38 feet in height as defined in
the chapter.
(i) Accessory Structures and Deck Requirements.
(1) Accessory Stories/Height. One and five tenths or 16 feet.
(2) Accessory Side and Rear. Ten feet.
(3) Deck — Side 15 feet; Rear 50 feet.
a. Purpose. To provide an appropriate mix of housing with emphasis on
least-cost construction in order to serve community and regional
housing needs for all age groups within close proximity to the center of
town.
b. Principal Permitted Uses.
1. Multifamily dwelling units.
2. Senior citizen units.
3. Single family and two family units.
c. Conditional Uses. (See regulations for conditional uses.)
1. Schools and institutions.
2. Institutional uses and nonprofit clubs.
3. Churches.
d. Accessory Uses. Customarily incident to the above uses.
1. Home occupation.
2. Swimming pools and tennis courts.
3. Recreational and maintenance facilities.
4. Off-street parking and private garages.
e. Required Conditions.
1. An appropriate mix of housing types incorporating both senior
citizen units and entry level units shall be provided in every
multifamily development proposal. At least 5% of the units
provided shall be senior citizen or entry level units in a multifamily
development.
§ 18-4.15 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.16
A:205
§ 18-4.17. MF-1 Multi-Family-1 Zone. [Ord. No. 01-14 § 4]
2. Where senior citizen units are provided, said units shall be confined
to family units with at least one member over 55 and total number
not to exceed the State health occupancy regulations. If ownership
is passed through death to someone other than a senior citizen,
that person may not occupy said unit unless they are a surviving
occupant.
3. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet, whichever is the lesser.
4. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of at least 75 feet.
5. Side Yard. No unit or building shall be constructed within 50 feet of
the property line in any development.
6. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 75 feet.
7. Minimum Size. Ten residential units or lots and five acres.
8. Maximum lot and/or site coverage for all impervious materials
equals 30%.
9. Minimum Floor Area. Every dwelling erected shall have a minimum
floor area, excluding cellar and garage areas, of 550 square feet
plus 100 square feet for each bedroom and 50 square feet
additional living area for each bedroom, as listed below:
Dwelling Minimum Floor Area
Efficiency 550
1 bedroom 700
2 bedroom 850
3 bedroom 1,000
4 bedroom 1,150
5 bedroom 1,300
10. Density. Within the multifamily district, multifamily attached
dwelling units will be permitted at a gross density not to exceed 3.5
units per acre, and a net density not to exceed six units per acre.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the Multi-Family-1 Zone District is to provide
opportunities for alternate housing for all income levels in the Sparta
Town Center consistent with the Master Plan and the certification
granted by the Council on Affordable Housing.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. Multifamily attached units (for sale).
2. "Stacked flats" (for sale only).
§ 18-4.16 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.17
A:206
3. Townhouses (for sale only).
4. Assisted living residential health care facilities.
c. Accessory Uses. All uses customarily incidental to the above permitted
uses.
d. Gross Density. Six dwelling units per acre of which 20% shall be set
aside for occupancy by low and moderate income household.
e. Minimum Tract Area. Twenty acres.
f. Minimum Tract Frontage. One hundred ten feet.
g. Property Boundary Setback. Fifty feet from all property boundaries,
except that parking spaces, driveways, lighting and drainage structures
may be located within 10 feet of a commercial zone and 15 feet from a
residential zone. Exempted from these standards are emergency access
ways and the entrance road up to the first residential unit.
h. Distance Between Buildings.
End to end 30 feet
Front to front 50 feet
Back to back 50 feet
Back to front 50 feet
i. Building Height. Thirty-five feet (The definition of "height: set forth in
the BOCA Code shall govern).
j. Impervious Coverage. 50%.
k. RSIS. The New Jersey Residential Site Improvements Standards,
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21-1, as amended from time to time, shall govern
in accordance with law.
l. Architectural. The development and architectural character of the
Town Center residential developments shall be consistent with the
historic character in the Town Center as shown in the Master Plan.
m. Conditional Uses. None.
n. Common Open Space Ownership and Maintenance. The developer shall
provide for and establish an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of all common space pursuant to the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs' rules and requirements.
o. Bedroom Distribution. The bedroom distribution for low and moderate
units shall comply with the Administrative Regulations of the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing. The remaining market units shall
have no more than 50% of three bedroom units, with the remaining
percentage one or two bedroom units.
§ 18-4.17 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.18
A:207
§ 18-4.18. MF-2 Multi-Family-2 Zone. [Ord. No. 01-14 § 4]
a. Purpose. The purpose of the Multi-Family-2 Zone District is to provide
opportunities for alternate housing for all income levels in the Sparta
Town Center consistent with the Master Plan and the certification
granted by the Council on Affordable Housing.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. Multifamily attached units (for sale).
2. "Stacked flats" (for sale only).
3. Townhouses (for sale only).
4. Assisted living residential health care facilities.
c. Accessory Uses. All uses customarily incidental to the above permitted
uses.
d. Gross Density. Five dwelling units per acre of which 20% shall be set
aside for occupancy by low and moderate income household.
e. Minimum Tract Area. Three acres.
f. Minimum Tract Frontage. One hundred ten feet.
g. Property Boundary Setback. Fifty feet from all property boundaries,
except that parking spaces, driveways, lighting and drainage structures
may be located within 10 feet of a commercial zone and 15 feet from a
residential zone. Exempted from these standards are emergency access
ways and the entrance road up to the first residential unit.
h. Distance Between Buildings.
End to end 30 feet
Front to front 50 feet
Back to back 50 feet
Back to front 50 feet
i. Building Height. Thirty-five feet (The definition of "height" set forth in
the BOCA Code shall govern).
j. Impervious Coverage. 50%.
k. RSIS. The New Jersey Residential Site Improvements Standards,
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21-1, as amended from time to time, shall govern
in accordance with law.
l. Architectural. The development and architectural character of the
Town Center residential developments shall be consistent with the
historic character in the Town Center as shown in the Master Plan.
m. Conditional Uses. None.
§ 18-4.18 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.18
A:208
§ 18-4.19. Multi-Family-3 Zone (MF-3), (Senior Project, Residential
Project and Age Restricted Project Overlay Zone). [Ord. No. 01-14
§ 4]
n. Common Open Space Ownership and Maintenance. The developer shall
provide for and establish an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of all common space pursuant to the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs' rules and requirements.
o. Bedroom Distribution. The bedroom distribution for low and moderate
units shall comply with the Administrative Regulations of the New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing. The remaining market units shall
have no more than 50% of three bedroom units, with the remaining
percentage one or two bedroom units.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to establish alternate
housing opportunities consistent with the Sparta Town Center, COAH
Mediation Agreement and to implement the Housing Element/Fair
Share Plan approved and certified by the Council on Affordable
Housing.
b. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be to permit independently,
but not a combination of:
1. A planned senior residential housing development, not exceeding
140 units, that provides adequate provisions to meet the unique
requirements of senior citizens and the aging population. A
planned environment will nurture the comfort of "aging-in-place"
amongst several levels and types of senior housing, making
available personal care elements and convenience of services
within an independent and dignified setting. This planned
residential development senior housing (Senior Project) shall be a
contiguous area of land controlled by a landowner, to be developed
as a comprehensively planned environment for a number of
dwelling units, principal and ancillary uses. The Senior Project
shall comply with the definitions, requirements and regulations, as
amended from time to time, by the New Jersey Department of
Health and Senior Services (NJDOHSS) or the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs (NJDCA). Uses of an institutional
or commercial nature ancillary to the residential housing facilities
in the Senior Project shall be intended primarily, but not exclusively
for use of the residents of the planned development. The
commercial spaces shall be harmonious with the Senior Project and
the neighborhood and shall be provided to care and assist daily
living activities and to provide other uses and activities customarily
and incidental to the residential development for seniors "aging-inplace."
2. A planned residential housing development of multifamily dwelling
units (Residential Project), not exceeding 54 units, in a planned
environment that shall be a contiguous parcel of land, with
§ 18-4.18 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.19
A:209
attached or detached structures to be configured to permit
development, together with other accessory uses customarily and
incidental to a multifamily development.
3. A planned residential housing development of multifamily dwelling
units, not exceeding 75 units, restricted by age where at least one
of the members of the residential unit is 55 years of age or older
(Age Restricted Project) in a planned environment that shall be a
contiguous parcel of land, with attached or detached structures to
be configured to permit development, together with other
accessory uses customary and incidental to a multifamily
development.
c. Permitted Structures. Any one of the following structures set forth in
either Subsections b1 or b2 or b3.
1. Senior Residential Housing Development.
(a) An Independent Living Facility (ILF) consisting of a housing
complex, multifamily, single family or a combination of uses
thereof, catering to senior citizens with minimal services; a
Congregate Seniors' Housing Facility (CSH) consisting of a
multifamily complex catering to senior citizens, with a common
dining facility and sometimes with limited support services
such as housekeeping and transportation; and an Assisted
Living Facility (ALF) consisting of multifamily complex
including a central dining room designed with features and
staff to assist the frail elderly and daily activities. Support
services shall be available.
(b) The age of occupants shall be restricted to: persons where at
least one member of the residential unit is at least 55 years of
age, with or without a spouse, and other members of such
person's residential unit; and surviving members of that
residential unit in the event of death of such resident who is at
least 55 years of age, subject to applicable local, State and
Federal law.
(c) These uses in the Senior Project may be combined in various
ways and may include skilled nursing facilities for those who
require medical, nursing or rehabilitative services on a
continuous basis.
(d) Accessory Uses.
(1) Garages for the storage of grounds equipment, or ancillary
transport service vehicles available for use in delivering
services to the PRD residents.
(2) Greenhouses, gardens, outdoor game area, gazebos,
clubhouses for the uses of the residents of single, or
combined uses in PRD.
§ 18-4.19 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.19
A:210
(3) Medical and/or specially designed spaces inherent to the
medical and social service professionals to administer
services on a transient basis, as needed, or daily scheduled
basis, i.e., physical therapies, occupational therapies,
clinical and therapeutic services, for access by residents of
complex. Overnight accommodations shall not be
permitted within these uses.
(4) Fences, retaining walls, landscape structures, trellises,
gazebos, storm water management structure or related
structures to maintain resident and complex services.
(5) Public utility substations.
(6) Interior defined spaces/areas for worship, religious
activities, provisions for personal care services to
residents, food preparation, dining, laundry and linen,
beauty/barber shops, the sale of convenience products and
sundries.
(7) Individual commercial, retail and medical office spaces for
use specific to the PRD and its residents.
(8) All other uses customarily associated with, and incidental
to the principal uses of ILF, CSH and ALF as determined by
the Board.
2. Residential Project. Multifamily residential housing, whether in fee
simple ownership or rental-based accommodations, attached or
detached.
(a) Accessory Uses. All customary and accessory uses incidental to
a multifamily residential complex as determined by the Board,
including but not limited to recreational facilities, fences,
garages, satellite dishes, antennas, carports and sheds.
3. Age Restricted Project. Multifamily residential housing, whether in
fee simple ownership or rental-based accommodations, attached,
or detached.
(a) Accessory Uses. All customary and accessory uses incidental to
a residential complex as determined by the Board, but not
limited to recreational facilities, fences, garages, satellite
dishes, antennas, carports and sheds.
d. Phasing of Development. Any of the project uses and structures
permitted under Subsection c may be developed and constructed in
phases. As part of its development application, the applicant shall
identify and describe the phases of development of the proposed
project, including the number of units and structures proposed to be
constructed in each phase and an estimated timetable for development
of each phase. The Board's review and approval of the phasing element
§ 18-4.19 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.19
A:211
of the application shall be conducted in accordance with the standards
for site plan review set forth in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., and as supplemented by the provisions of the
Township Code of Sparta.
e. Area and Bulk Requirements. The area and bulk requirements of the
permitted uses shall be as follows, except as otherwise modified herein,
for any of the permitted uses:
1. Lot Size. Not less than 10 acres.
2. Lot Width. A minimum lot width of 300 feet, measured anywhere on
the property, shall be required.
3. Street Frontage. A minimum street frontage of 50 feet shall be
required.
4. Setbacks. Fifty feet from the property line.
5. Maximum Gross Lot Coverage and Area Ratios.
(a) Total maximum building coverage of all combined uses,
principal or accessory, may not exceed 35% of total gross
property area.
(b) Total impervious surfaces coverages for all combined uses,
principal or accessory, may not exceed 50% of total gross
property area.
6. Total floor ratio (FAR) for all combined uses, principal or accessory,
may not exceed 0.35.
7. Maximum Gross Density:
(a) Senior Project. Up to 140 dwelling units.
(b) Residential Project. Up to 54 dwelling units.
(c) Age Restricted Project. Up to 75 dwelling units.
8. Building Height. Maximum height shall not exceed 35 feet, or 2 1/2
stories, whichever is less, exclusive of HVAC, satellite dishes,
antennas, or other customary elements on the roof. Height shall
mean the vertical distance from the average ground elevation of
the finished grade to the top of a structure, or the highest point of
the roof surface of a building.
9. Spacing Between Two or More Structures. The minimum distance
between any two structures containing a window or door opening
to occupied rooms shall be 40 feet, or 1/2 of the combined height of
the facing walls, whichever is greater, but in no case shall it be
more than 80 feet. Where the facing walls contain no windows or
doors other than kitchen or bathroom windows, the minimum
§ 18-4.19 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.19
A:212
distance shall be 30 feet regardless of the height of the facing
walls.
10. Payments in Lieu of On Site Construction. Payments shall be made
in lieu of on site construction of affordable housing units in
accordance with the terms of the Township's substantive
certification, including any mediated agreements.
11. Additional Requirements. Applicable to Residential Project only.
(a) Parking. Residential Site Improvement Standards shall apply.
(b) Dwelling Unit Size. The size of dwelling units, in all residential
structures erected under this permitted use, converted or
altered, with respect to floor area or number of dwelling limits,
shall be exclusive of steps, porches, walls, bays and utility
room.
(c) Bedroom Mix. No more than 5% of the units in the Project shall
have three bedrooms, no fewer than 10% of the units shall
have one bedroom or less, and the balance shall be two
bedroom units. In the event of a fraction, the number shall be
rounded up. Examples: (1) 5% of 54 units equal 2.7; thus, 2.7
shall be rounded up to 3; (2) 10% of 54 equals 5.4; thus, 5.4
shall be rounded up to 6.
12. Additional Requirements. Applicable to Senior Project only.
(a) The age of occupants shall be restricted to: persons where at
least one member of the residential unit is at least 55 years of
age, with or without a spouse, and other members of such
person's residential unit; and surviving members of that
residential unit in the event of death of such resident who is at
least 55 years of age, subject to applicable local, State and
Federal law.
(b) Facility Services Criteria Guidelines for Components of the
Senior Project:
(1) Assisted Living Residence. A facility which is licensed by
the Department of Health and Senior Services to provide
apartment-style housing and congregate dining and to
assure that assisted living services are available when
needed by its residences. Residential living units must
include, at a minimum, an unfurnished room, a private
bathroom, a kitchenette inclusive of: (counter top/sink/
microwave/small refrigerator), and a door able to be
locked at the unit entrance. The age of its residents shall
be restricted to 55 years of age and older, except in the
case of a younger spouse who cohabits with a resident, and
is younger than the restrictive age. Further exceptions
may be allowed in "need driven" cases, where, for
§ 18-4.19 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.19
A:213
example, a younger adult requires the specific services
provided in an assisted living residence and meets other
facility admissions criteria.
(2) Assisted Living Services. A coordinated array of supportive
personal care services and health care services available
24 hours per day to residents who have been assessed to
need these services, in order to promote resident selfdirection and participation in decisions that emphasize
independence, individuality, privacy, dignity and home-like
surroundings.
(3) Personal Care Services. Services supportive to residents'
care and comfort including assistance with activities of
daily living.
(4) Health Care Services. Any service provided to a resident of
an assisted living residence that is ordered by a physician
and required to be provided or delegated by a licensed,
registered or certified health care professional. Certified
health care professional shall not include a certified
homemaker/home health aide or certified nurse aide.
(5) Social Services. Services provided to residents that
address their interactions in the social environment and
which affect the ability of people to accomplish their tasks,
alleviate distress, and realize their aspirations and values.
(6) Elements of Facility Design Standards. The following
minimum design standards shall be permitted as part of
the Senior Project:
(i) Outdoor recreational facilities planned for residents;
(ii) Indoor recreational facilities for activities;
(iii) Designated rest/sitting areas;
(iv) Congregate dining, and meal provisions as applicable
to regulatory requirements;
(v) Health care facilities and services including, but not
limited to, security facilities, administrative offices,
storage facilities; any such administrative office shall
be located entirely within the principal uses(s) and
shall be used to provide administrative services for
singular or combined uses;
(vi) Gift shop/convenience shop with hygiene aids,
sundries and reading materials;
(vii) Walking facilities which shall include landscaped
seating areas at its beginning, mid and end points;
§ 18-4.19 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.19
A:214
§ 18-4.20. C-1 Community Commercial Zone. [Ord. No. 01-14 § 3;
Ord. No. 09-12 § 1]
laundry facilities or linen services for residents and
living units;
(viii) Physical therapy facilities;
(ix) Planned social events and activities;
(x) Area for worship provided;
(xi) Indoor exercise area;
(xii) Evergreen buffers provided around perimeter of site,
as determined by the Planning Board;
(xiii) Parking requirements to follow standards published
by the American Seniors Housing Association (ASHA);
(xiv) Facilities and grounds to be universally accessible to
all residents;
(xv) Illuminated walking paths, parking areas, drives and
internal roadways.
(c) The minimum size of a residential living unit, in all structures
erected, converted or altered, with respect to floor area or
number of dwelling limits, exclusive of steps, porches, walls,
bays, or utility rooms shall be as follows:
(1) Three hundred square feet for each unit designated as a
single occupancy unit within any principal or accessory
use;
(2) Five hundred square feet for each unit designated as a
double occupancy unit within any principal or accessory
use;
(3) Adjoining units shall be limited to be configured into a
maximum of a two bedroom dwelling unit;
(4) In case of a two bedroom configuration in a dwelling unit,
occupancy shall be limited to a maximum of four persons.
a. Principal Permitted Use. This zone is limited to business uses of a retail
sales and service type. Only the following uses are permitted:
1. Stores or shops for retail business or wholesale display entirely
within the confines of a building.
2. Banks and offices for business, executive and professional
purposes.
§ 18-4.19 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.20
A:215
3. Opera houses and theatrical and motion picture theaters, but not
including open air theaters.
4. Hotels and motels.
5. Restaurants, but not including drive-in restaurants.
6. Public buildings and uses.
7. Apartments over retail commercial and office establishments
existing or approved at the time of passage of this chapter.
8. Bowling alleys and sports centers.
9. Institutional uses and nonprofit clubs, lodges and fraternal
organizations.
10. Accessory uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses.
11. Churches.
b. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
1. Residential construction or conversion except apartments
constructed on the second floor as set forth in Subsection
18-4.20a7 and d.
2. Any business conducted outside the confines of a building.
3. Any industry, process of manufacture, fabrication, assembly,
disassembly, conversion or alteration. For the purpose of this
subsection, any business use shall be deemed to be an industry
where it employs more than five persons in the processing or
manufacturing of a product or uses more than a total of 25
horsepower machinery in the direct processing or manufacturing
operations, but is not intended that a retail store or service
establishment such as a hotel, department store or bank be limited
in the number of its employees or in the horsepower used for
heating, air conditioning and other similar nonprocessing or
manufacturing operations.
4. Carousels, merry-go-rounds, miniature golf, outdoor theaters, pony
tracts or other similar commercial outdoor amusements.
5. Junk yards, warehouses, storage buildings and coal or fuel yards.
c. Required Conditions. The following requirements must be complied
with in the C-1 Zone:
1. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet, whichever is the lesser.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard setback of not less than 25
feet, except that where existing buildings within 200 feet form an
§ 18-4.20 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.20
A:216
§ 18-4.21. C-1H Community Commercial-Historic Zone. [Ord. No.
01-14 § 3]
average established setback, new buildings shall conform to such
established line.
3. Side Yard. There shall be a minimum side yard of 10 feet.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 60 feet
unobstructed by buildings or other permanent structures. Offstreet parking is permitted within the rear yard, provided no
parking area is closer than five feet to any building nor 15 feet to
any residential zone boundary line.
5. Impervious Coverage. The total impervious coverage of any site
shall not exceed 40% of the total site area.
6. Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with Subsection 18-5.3m.
7. Site Plan Approval. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, the
Planning Board shall review a site plan according to Subsections
18-4.2c and 18-4.2d of the proposed use to ascertain that all the
requirements of this section are complied with.
8. Lot Area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet
measured within 125 feet of the front street right-of-way line.
9. Minimum Frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 60
feet.
d. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted by
the Planning Board acting in accordance with the provision of
Subsection 18-4.7c of this chapter: public garages, automotive service
stations, drive-in restaurants (with or without inside seating capacity),
miniature golf courses, and any building containing a retail store or
service establishment upon the first floor. With the exception of public
garages and service stations, apartments may be constructed on the
second floor in connection with a proposal for any of the aforesaid
conditional uses.
1. Outdoor dining conditioned on compliance with 18-4.7c, 19.
a. Purpose. This zone is designed to provide for community commercial
use with preservation of the historic value of the commercial zone. The
goal of the historic preservation of the district is intended to accomplish
the following:
1. Accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of the
Lake Mohawk Plaza area, which has been designated as a historic
landmark, and other structures and resources within the central
business district which reflect the elements of the architectural
history of the Township.
§ 18-4.20 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.21
A:217
2. To encourage the continued use of the existing buildings and to
appropriate reuses.
3. To maintain the character of the neighborhood and architecturally
significant buildings.
4. To manage change by preventing alteration or new construction
not in keeping with the zone.
5. To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
b. Principal Permitted Use. The zone is limited to business uses of a retail
sale and service type. Only the following uses are permitted:
1. Stores or shops for retail business or wholesale display entirely
within the confines of a building.
2. Banks and offices for business, executive and professional
purposes.
3. Opera houses and theatrical and motion picture theaters, but not
including open air theaters.
4. Hotels and motels.
5. Restaurants, but not including drive-in restaurants.
6. Public buildings and uses.
7. Apartments over retail commercial and office establishments
existing or approved at the time of passage of this chapter.
8. Institutional uses and nonprofit clubs, lodges and fraternal
organizations.
9. Accessory uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses.
10. Churches.
c. Required Conditions. The requirements of the C-1H Zone shall be the
same as the C-1 Zone and the provisions of Subsection 18-4.2s, Historic
Preservation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the
Comprehensive Land Management Code, preliminary and final site plan
approval shall be required in the C-1H Zone prior to any change,
alteration or conversion to the exterior of any existing structure or use
within the zone including, but not limited to, any change, alteration or
improvement of the exterior facade of any structure or use within the
zone. In addition, notwithstanding any other provisions of the
Comprehensive Land Management Code, preliminary and final site plan
approval shall be required prior to the issuance of any building permit,
construction code permit, zoning permit or certificate of occupancy
within the C-1H Zone.
§ 18-4.21 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.21
A:218
§ 18-4.22. C-2 Office and Service Zone. [Ord. No. 01-14 § 3]
d. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted by
the Planning Board acting in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection 18-4.7c of this chapter: public garages, automotive service
stations, any building not containing public garages or service stations
may be constructed so that on the second floor there may be apartment
units.
a. Principal Permitted Use. This zone is designated for office buildings,
doctors, dentists, veterinarians, architects, engineers, attorneys, or
other like professionals, medical clinics, banking, insurance,
institutional and real estate offices, and governmental and such other
semi-commercial uses of similar character serving the direct public.
Only the following uses are permitted:
1. Offices for business, executive and professional purposes.
2. Banking institutions.
3. Public buildings and uses.
4. Recreational uses, sports centers.
5. Schools and institutional uses.
6. Accessory uses customarily incident to the above uses.
7. Churches.
b. Prohibited Uses. Any use other than those listed is prohibited.
c. Required Conditions. The following requirements must be complied
within the C-2 Zone.
1. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet, whichever is the lesser.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard setback of not less than 25
feet, except where existing buildings within 200 feet from an
average established line. Any corner lot shall meet the front yard
setback on the side street.
3. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards which in combination shall
not be less than 30 feet. Off-street parking as regulated in
Subsection 18-5.3 is permitted in the side yard provided no parking
area is closer than five feet to any building nor closer than 15 feet
to any residential zone boundary line.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 60 feet
unobstructed by buildings or other permanent structures. Offstreet parking as regulated in Subsection 18-5.3 is permitted in the
rear yard, provided no parking area is closer than five feet to any
building nor 15 feet to any residential zone boundary line.
§ 18-4.21 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.22
A:219
§ 18-4.23. C-2H Office and Service/Historic Zone. [Ord. No. 01-14
§ 3]
5. Impervious Coverage. The total impervious coverage of any site
shall not exceed 40% of the total site area.
6. Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with Subsection 18-5.3m.
7. Site Plan Approval. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, the
Planning Board shall review a site plan of the proposed use to
ascertain that all the requirements of this section are complied
with. In addition, the Planning Board may require compliance with
§ 18-5 and such other requirements as the Board deems necessary
for the general welfare of the public.
8. Lot Area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet
measured within 100 feet of the street right-of-way line.
d. Accessory Uses. Off-street parking.
a. Purpose. This zone is designed to provide for an office and service zone
use with preservation of the historic value of the Mohawk Avenue/Route
181 area of the central business district. The goal of historic
preservation of the district is intended to accomplish the following:
1. Accomplish the protection, enhancement and preservation of the
Mohawk Avenue/Route 181 corridor in the central business district
and to preserve the village environment constituted and
exemplified by the Junior High School, library, Ungermann Field
facilities, professional office buildings and existing residences in
the district.
2. To encourage the continued use of the existing buildings and to
appropriate reuse.
3. To maintain the character of the neighborhood and architecturally
significant buildings.
4. To manage change by preventing alteration or new construction
not in keeping with the zone.
5. To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
b. Principal Permitted Use. The principal permitted uses in the C-2H Zone
shall be the same as in the C-2 Zone.
c. Prohibited Uses. The prohibited uses in the C-2H Zone shall be the
same as in the C-2 Zone.
d. Required Conditions. The required conditions in the C-2H Zone shall be
the same as in the C-2 Zone and the provisions of Subsection 18-4.2s
entitled Historic Preservation. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
§ 18-4.22 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.23
A:220
§ 18-4.24. Town Center Commercial Zone (TCC). [Ord. No. 1003 § 7;
Ord. No. 01-14 § 3; Ord. No. 02-20 §§ 20, 21; Ord. No. 2016-21 § 3]
the Comprehensive Land Management Code, preliminary and final site
plan approval shall be required in the C-2H Zone prior to any change,
alteration or conversion to the exterior of any existing structure or use
within the zone including, but not limited to, any change, alteration
or improvement of the exterior facade of any structure or use within
the zone. In addition, notwithstanding any other provisions of the
Comprehensive Land Management Code, preliminary and final site plan
approval shall be required prior to the issuance of any building permit,
construction code permit, zoning permit or certificate of occupancy
within the C-2H Zone.
a. Purpose. This zone provides for community commercial uses to
complement and enhance the existing retail and service use and
historic character in the Town Center area. The Master Plan establishes
guidelines for proper site plan development which is referenced as a
part of this subsection. The goals of community design and historic
preservation of the Town Center is intended to accomplish the
following:
1. To accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of
the Town Center area, which has been designated as a historic
landmark, and other structures and resources within the Town
Center area which reflect the elements of the architectural history
of the Township. To encourage construction and reconstruction
with a residential appearance in keeping with the goals of the Town
Center and the Appendix to the 1993 Master Plan Amendment to
the Interchange Master Plan.
2. To encourage the continued use of the existing buildings and to
appropriate reuses.
3. To maintain the character of the neighborhood and architecturally
significant buildings.
4. To manage change by preventing alteration or new construction
not in keeping with the zone.
5. To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
6. To maintain economic viability of the existing land uses.
7. To improve access, circulation and parking.
8. To maintain a stable and balanced community fiscal structure.
9. To maintain and improve the traffic circulation by implementing the
Master Plan concepts and by limiting access to the Route 517
Bypass properties to the proposed connector road, Main Street and
Sparta Avenue.
§ 18-4.23 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.24
A:221
b. Principal Permitted Uses. This zone is limited to business uses of a
retail sales and service type. Only the following uses are permitted:
1. Stores or shops for retail business or wholesale display entirely
within the confines of a building.
2. Banks and offices for business, executive and professional
purposes.
3. Opera houses and theatrical and motion picture theaters, but not
including open air theaters.
4. Bed and breakfast establishments, access to all guest rooms shall
be via hallways from a central area. See definition (Subsection
18-2.1).
5. Restaurants, but not including drive-in restaurants.
6. Public buildings and uses.
7. Second floor apartments over retail commercial and office
establishments but not over service stations or public garage or dry
cleaning establishments.
8. Bowling alleys and sports centers.
9. Institutional uses and nonprofit clubs, lodges and fraternal
organizations.
10. Houses of worship, churches and cemeteries.
11. A parking lot on property owned by a homeowners association with
at least 300 members. Nonmembers of the association may be
charged a user fee. Parking or a parking lot is otherwise prohibited
as a principal use in the TCC Zone. This amendment does not
extend to parking on public roadways and is limited to a parking
lot. [Added 11-12-2019 by Ord. No. 19-19]
c. Permitted Accessory Uses. Parking, signs, essential services and other
accessory uses and customary incidental to the permitted uses.
d. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
1. Residential construction or conversion except apartments
constructed on the second floor as set forth in Subsection
18-4.20a7 and d.
2. Any business conducted outside the confines of a building unless
specifically permitted.
3. Any industry, process of manufacture, fabrication, assembly,
disassembly, conversion or alteration. For the purpose of this
section, any business use shall be deemed to be an industry where
it employs more than five persons in the processing or
§ 18-4.24 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.24
A:222
manufacturing of a product or uses more than a total of 25
horsepower machinery in the direct processing or manufacturing
operations, but is not intended that a retail store or service
establishment such as a hotel, department store or bank be limited
in the number of its employees or in the horsepower used for
heating, air conditioning and other similar nonprocessing or
manufacturing operations.
4. Carousels, merry-go-rounds, miniature golf, outdoor theaters, pony
tracks or other similar commercial outdoor amusements.
5. Junk yards, warehouses, storage buildings and coal or fuel yards.
6. Gasoline Service Stations. However, gasoline service stations in
existence on January 1, 1999 are hereby grandfathered and
authorized to be expanded and/or rebuilt even if totally destroyed.
However, any expansion or rebuilding shall be pursuant to the
conditional use requirements set forth in Subsection 18-4.7c,
entitled Conditional Automotive Service Stations and Public
Garages.
7. Any other uses not specifically permitted.
e. Required Conditions. The following requirements must be complied
with in the TCC Zone:
1. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet, whichever is the lesser.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard setback of not less than 25
feet, except that where existing buildings within 200 feet from an
average established setback, new buildings shall conform to such
established line.
3. Side Yard. There shall be a minimum side yard of 10 feet. Off-street
parking is permitted in the side yard provided no parking area is
closer than five feet to any building and not closer than 15 feet to
any residential zone boundary line.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 60 feet
unobstructed by buildings or other permanent structures. Offstreet parking is permitted within the rear yard, provided no
parking area is closer than five feet to any building nor 15 feet to
any residential zone boundary line.
5. Impervious Coverage. The total impervious coverage of any site
shall not exceed 40% of the total site area.
6. Site Plan Approval. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, the
Planning Board shall review a site plan according to Subsections
18-4.2c and 18-4.2d of the proposed use to ascertain that all the
requirements of this section are complied with.
§ 18-4.24 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.24
A:223
7. Lot Area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet
measured within 125 feet of the front street right-of-way line.
8. Minimum Frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 60
feet.
9. Site Design-Spatial Requirements.
(a) The organization of buildings, streets, drives, parking areas,
walks, service areas and other site components shall have a
functional relationship and be compatible with existing site
features and adjacent areas.
(b) Alignment of Buildings. The alignment of the major access of a
building shall be related to the prevailing orientation of
adjacent buildings and street.
(c) Compact groupings of buildings are required to achieve the
density and spatial relationship desired to establish a
consistent development character relating to the historic
architecture.
(d) Physical site elements such as accessory buildings, fences,
walls, tree grates and other plantings shall relate from one
parcel to another to provide overall visual continuity within the
Town Center.
10. Architectural Requirements.
(a) Style. New construction or renovation shall be of similar
architectural style to the established theme, and compatible
with the Town Center Master Plan and the Appendix of the
1993 Amendment to the Interchange Master Plan.
(b) Materials, Texture and Color. Materials for new construction
shall be similar to the types of and textures of materials
established in the Town Center. Renovations, restoration and
maintenance work should match existing materials and
textures.
(c) Architectural Elements and Features. Architectural features,
including but not limited to, cornices, windows, doors and trim,
prevailing in the immediate area are important. It is not
intended that the details of historical buildings be duplicated
precisely, but they shall be regarded as a reference for new
buildings or alterations. Details and architectural elements
shall reinforce established architectural theme and shall be
included in drawings submitted for review.
(d) Continuity of Architecture and Site Details. The design
continuity and coordination of architecture and site details,
especially walls, fences, ornamental metal work, steps,
§ 18-4.24 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.24
A:224
walkways, planting beds and landscaping is especially critical
to the character of the Town Center.
(e) Mechanical Equipment and Roof Projections. Any exterior
mechanical and electrical equipment, shall not be exposed to
the public view. Any deviations from the standard shall require
architectural treatments consistent with the historic character
and approved by the Board.
(f) Building Massing and Scale. (Nonresidential)
(1) Large single rectangle block buildings greater than 25,000
square feet, with undifferentiated facades, especially with
curtain walls or large areas of glass, are inappropriate.
Where large structures are required, massing shall be
broken up through the use of gables, indentations,
variation in rooflines, arcades and other design
techniques.
(2) A human scale shall be achieved at ground level and along
street frontages and entryways through the use of
windows, arcades, porches, doors, columns, canopies and
architectural details such as cornices, window and door
trim, transoms, etc.
(3) Building facades shall be articulated with a base, a lower
and upper facade and capped with a cornice; and/or a roof
element. All visible facades of any proposed building must
be treated with architectural materials which shall consist
of brick, finished masonry, stone, wood or combination
thereof, based on commonly accepted architectural
details, or other materials approved by the Planning
Board.
(4) Roofs. All buildings shall have pitched roofs, except where
technical considerations require a flat roof, a mansard roof
treatment shall be used to reflect the historic character of
Main Street (hip, mansard or gable) and material shall be
architecturally compatible with the rest of the building and
should reflect the general pattern along the street.
(5) Individual commercial retail and office building shall be
designed to reflect the pedestrian scale of a traditional
Town Center.
(6) Each facade must be treated architecturally, not just the
main entrance facade. The entire front, sides and rear of
the building shall be coordinated in compatible colors and
materials. Street facades, in the public view, shall receive
the greater architectural emphasis.
§ 18-4.24 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.24
A:225
(7) All buildings shall also be harmoniously related to the
existing and proposed road network, as well as to open
spaces and other civic spaces. Linkages to adjacent
development including streets and pedestrian ways, are
required.
11. Parking/Circulation.
(a) Shade trees and parking aisles plantings shall be provided. All
islands shall contain shade trees. Open space areas shall
contain shade trees. All trees in parking areas impacting
vehicular circulation shall have all branches removed below
eight feet to assure good sight distance.
(b) Interior parking lot islands should be designed so as to channel
traffic in accordance with the approved circulation design and
to provide site triangles at aisle intersection, reduce heat and
glare and soften the view of large areas of parking.
(c) Shared access and cross easements to adjacent parking areas
shall be provided where feasible. Infill, redevelopment and
conversions of residential to nonresidential properties shall
provide accessways and parking lots in a manner so as to
permit shared access areas and parking areas between
adjacent property.
12. Signs and Graphics. Refer to Subsection 18-5.3m, (Signs), which is
also applicable.
(a) Internally lit box signs are prohibited in the R-4 and all Town
Center Zones.
(b) The design of a sign shall be subservient to, and consistent
with, the building or use it serves. Signs shall be compatible
with the architecture and details of the building, and oriented
to pedestrians.
(c) The size of free standing signs in the Town Center zones may
be increased in proportion to the area of the building as set
forth below:
(1) Building area less than 15,000 = 12 square feet.
(2) Building area 15,000 — 25,000 = 20 square feet.
(3) Building area 25,000 — 30,000 = 28 square feet.
(4) Building area 30,000 and above = 32 square feet.
(d) A business establishment may display one or more signs not
exceeding three relating to its business. The total area for all
signs affixed to the building face fronting on the street shall not
exceed 5% of the area of said face. No individual sign shall
§ 18-4.24 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.24
A:226
exceed 24 square feet. The maximum height of any sign shall
not exceed 10% of the wall height or two feet, whichever is
less. The maximum width of any sign shall not exceed 50%
of the width of the wall to which it is attached or 12 feet,
whichever is less.
(e) Where a building or buildings are developed together and
require several different signs, they should be similar in size,
materials, colors and lettering. The applicant shall submit to
the Planning Board for approval a comprehensive sign plan
showing the size, configuration, location, color, and letter style
proposed for each sign.
(f) For shops and stores, recommended signage is a graphically
consistent system of darker colored traditional style letters,
routed or applied to a neutral background over the store
window area, hanging signs, or a combination thereof. Letter
size shall be subordinate to the background. Sign lighting shall
be indirect or external to the sign. Internal box lit signs are
prohibited. Lettering should not conflict with the historical
time period of building architecture.
(g) No more than three colors for background, lettering and
emphases and no more than two type faces shall be permitted
for any sign. Signs should be constructed of natural materials.
(h) Signs must be located at the places of business to which they
refer.
(i) A sign shall not obscure, conflict with, or cover any
architectural detail (i.e. cornice), and must be aligned with
major building elements, such as windows, trim and structure
lines.
13. Streetscape. All properties with frontage on Main Street, Sparta
Avenue, Woodport Road and Mohawk Avenue shall provide
streetscape improvements consistent with the Town Center Master
Plan including but not limited to the following:
(a) Street trees every 40 feet or as deemed appropriate by the
Board after review of the landscape plan.
(b) Decorative street lighting, spacing as required.
(c) Sidewalks.
(d) Concrete paver/utility strip.
(e) Benches.
(f) Trash receptacles.
§ 18-4.24 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.24
A:227
§ 18-4.25. Town Center Commercial Office Zone (TCCO). [Ord. No.
1003 § 7; Ord. No. 01-14 § 3; Ord. No. 02-20 § 12]
(g) The connector road shall be required to place the streetscape
on the development side of the road. Appropriate connections
to the open space shall be provided as directly by the Planning
Board.
14. Landscape buffers shall be required along Route 517 for a distance
of 20 feet and parking areas along other roadways for a distance of
15 feet measured from the right-of-way line.
f. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted by
the Planning Board acting in accordance with the listed conditions:
1. Drive-in restaurants pursuant to Subsection 18-4.7c2.
2. Outdoor dining accessory to and associated with a restaurant
pursuant to Subsection 18-4.7c19.
a. Purpose. This zone provides for community commercial uses to
complement and enhance the existing office uses and historic character
and natural resources in the Town Center area. The Master Plan
establishes guidelines for proper site plan development which is
referenced as a part of this subsection. The goals of community design
and historic preservation of the Town Center is intended to accomplish
the following:
1. To accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of
the Town Center area, which has been designated as a historic
landmark, and other structures and resources within the Town
Center which reflect the elements of the architectural history of the
Township. To encourage construction and reconstruction with a
residential appearance in keeping with the goals of the Town
Center and the Appendix to the 1993 Master Plan Amendment to
the Interchange Master Plan.
2. To encourage the continued use of the existing buildings and to
appropriate reuses.
3. To maintain the character of the neighborhood and architecturally
significant buildings.
4. To manage change by preventing alteration or new construction
not in keeping with the zone.
5. To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
6. To maintain economic viability of the existing land uses.
7. To improve access, circulation and parking.
8. To maintain a stable and balanced community fiscal structure.
§ 18-4.24 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.25
A:228
9. To maintain and improve traffic circulation by implementing the
Master Plan concepts and by limiting access to the Route 517
Bypass properties to the proposed connector road, Main Street and
Sparta Avenue.
b. Principal Permitted Uses. This zone is limited to office and service uses.
Only the following uses are permitted:
1. Offices for business, executive and professional purposes entirely
within the confines of a building.
2. Banks and offices for business, executive and professional
purposes.
3. Public buildings and uses.
4. Recreational uses, sports centers.
5. Schools and institutional uses.
6. Churches.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses. Parking, signs, essential services and other
accessory uses customary and incidental to the permitted uses.
d. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
1. Residential construction or conversion except apartments
constructed on the second floor as set forth in Subsection
18-4.20a7 and d.
2. Any business conducted outside the confines of a building unless
specifically permitted.
3. Any industry, process of manufacture, fabrication, assembly,
disassembly, conversion or alteration. For the purpose of this
section, any business use shall be deemed to be an industry where
it employs more than five persons in the processing or
manufacturing of a product or uses more than a total of 25
horsepower manufacturing operations, but is not intended that a
retail store or service establishment such as a hotel, department
store or bank be limited in the number of its employees or in the
horsepower used for heating, air conditioning and other similar
nonprocessing or manufacturing operations.
4. Carousels, merry-go-rounds, miniature golf, outdoor theaters, pony
tracks or other similar commercial outdoor amusements.
5. Junk yards, warehouses, storage buildings and coal or fuel yards.
6. Drive-in restaurants.
7. Gasoline service stations.
8. Any use not specifically permitted.
§ 18-4.25 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.25
A:229
§ 18-4.26. Town Center Limited Commercial Zone (TCLC). [Ord. No.
1003 § 7; Ord. No. 01-14 § 13; Ord. No. 02-20 §§ 13, 22, 24]
e. Required Conditions. The following requirements must be complied
with in the TCCO Zone:
1. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet, whichever is the lesser.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard setback of not less than 25
feet, except that where existing buildings within 200 feet from an
average established setback, new buildings shall conform to such
established line.
3. Side Yard. There shall be a minimum combined side yards of 30
feet. Off-street parking as regulated in Subsection 18-5.3 is
permitted in the side yard provided no parking area is closer than
five feet to any building nor closer than 15 feet to any residential
zone boundary line.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 60 feet
unobstructed by buildings or other permanent structures. Offstreet parking as regulated in Subsection 18-5.3 is permitted
within the rear yard, provided no parking area is closer than five
feet to any building nor 15 feet to any residential zone boundary
line.
5. Impervious Coverage. The total impervious coverage of any site
shall not exceed 40% of the total site area.
6. Site Plan Approval. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, the
Planning Board shall review a site plan according to Subsections
18-4.2c and 18-4.2d of the proposed use to ascertain that all the
requirements of this section are complied with. In addition, the
Planning Board may require compliance with § 18-5 and such other
requirements as the Board deems necessary for the general
welfare of the public.
7. Lot Area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 20,000 square feet
measured within 100 feet of the front street right-of-way line.
8. Accessory Uses. Off-street parking.
9. Town Center Zones Required Standards. Any development in the
Town Center Commercial Office Zone (TCCO) shall comply with the
Town Center Zones Required Standards set forth in Subsection
18-4.24e9 — 14.
a. Purpose. This zone provides for community commercial uses to
complement and enhance the existing retail and service use and
historic character in the Town Center area. The Master Plan establishes
§ 18-4.25 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.26
A:230
guidelines for proper site plan development which is referenced as a
part of this subsection. The goals of community design and historic
preservation of the Town Center is intended to accomplish the
following:
1. To accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of
the Town Center area, and other structures and resources within
the Town Center which reflect the elements of the architectural
history of the Township. To encourage construction and
reconstruction with a residential appearance in keeping with the
goals of the Town Center and the Appendix to the 1993 Master Plan
Amendment to the Interchange Master Plan.
2. To encourage the continued use of the existing buildings and to
appropriate reuses.
3. To maintain the character of the neighborhood and architecturally
significant buildings.
4. To manage change by preventing alteration or new construction
not in keeping with the zone.
5. To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
6. To maintain economic viability of the existing land uses.
7. To improve access, circulation and parking.
8. To maintain a stable and balanced community fiscal structure.
9. To maintain and improve traffic circulation by implementing the
Master Plan concepts and by limiting access to the Route 517
Bypass properties to the proposed connector road, Main Street and
Sparta Avenue.
10. To concentrate development in the appropriate buildable areas.
b. Principal Permitted Uses. This zone is limited to the following business
uses of a retail sales and service type subject to an explicit requirement
that the site plan, architecture and signs shall be consistent with the
Town Center Plan. Only the following uses are permitted:
1. Planned Town Center Limited Commercial Development with more
than one of the following uses:
(a) Stores or shops for retail business or wholesale display entirely
within the confines of a building.
(b) Banks and offices for business, executive and professional
purposes.
(c) Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants with architecture
and signs compatible with the historic character of Main
Street.
§ 18-4.26 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.26
A:231
(d) Public buildings and uses.
(e) Office establishments.
(f) Institutional uses and nonprofit clubs, lodges and fraternal
organizations.
(g) Second floor apartments over retail commercial and office
uses, but not over dry cleaning establishments.
2. Limited Commercial Use. Platted tax lots of no more than 1.5 acres,
existing as of April 1998, may be used for the permitted uses in the
TCC Zone subject to the required conditions of the TCC Zone. Such
lots may continue to be used as a single family residential use.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses. Parking, signs, essential services and other
accessory uses customary and incidental to the permitted uses.
d. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
1. Any business conducted outside the confines of a building unless
specifically permitted.
2. Any industry, process of manufacture, fabrication, assembly,
disassembly, conversion or alteration. For the purpose of this
subsection, any business use shall be deemed to be an industry
where it employs more than five persons in the processing or
manufacturing of a product or uses more than a total of 25
horsepower machinery in the direct processing or manufacturing
operations, but is not intended that a retail store or service
establishment such as a hotel, department store or bank be limited
in the number of its employees or in the horsepower used for
heating, air conditioning and other similar nonprocessing or
manufacturing operations.
3. Carousels, merry-go-rounds, miniature golf, outdoor theaters, pony
tracks or other similar commercial outdoor amusements.
4. Junk yards, warehouses, storage buildings and coal or fuel yards.
5. Gasoline service stations.
6. Any uses not specifically permitted.
e. Required Standards for Planned TCLC Developments. Any site plan or
subdivision application in this zone shall include a preliminary site plan
for a planned development for the entire area of the lot or lots owned or
controlled by the applicant and located in the TCLC Zone. Certain bulk
standards are not included to permit flexibility in the planned
development. The following requirements must be complied with in the
TCLC Zone:
1. Impervious Coverage. The total impervious coverage of any TCLC
development shall not exceed 12.5%. The impervious coverage
§ 18-4.26 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.26
A:232
§ 18-4.27. Town Center Lower Main Street Commercial Zone
(TCLM). [Ord. No. 1003 § 7; Ord. No. 01-14 § 3; Ord. No. 02-20
§§ 14, 23; Ord. No. 05-03 § 3]
shall be located on the portion of the property north of the new
collector road to be constructed between Main Street and the
Route 517 bypass. The land south of the connector road shall
be restricted open space organization requirements Subsection
18-5.4, Open Space and Recreation Element of the Master Plan and
the M.L.U.L. except as provided in Subsection e2 below.
2. Impervious Coverage Incentive for Public Dedication of Open
Space. The total impervious charge of a TCLC may be increased to
a maximum of 23% provided that the applicant dedicates all the
land south of the new connector road but not less than 17 acres of
open space and recreational uses to the Township and provided
that the development area shall be limited to the portion of the
property north of the collector road and approximately two acres
located along Route 517 and the collector road south of the
collection and north of the existing tree row. The tree row shall be
preserved by any such development.
3. Acreage requirements. Ten acres.
4. No direct access driveways shall be permitted along the Route 517
bypass. On the south side of the bypass, Lot 48, Block 19.03, the
development plan must include a collector street located between
Main Street and the bypass per the Master Plan.
5. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories or 38 feet, whichever is the lesser. An exception would
include a house of worship steeples or clock towers which shall not
exceed 50 feet.
6. Maximum building size of a single building is 60,000 square feet.
7. Town Center Zones Required Standards. Any development within
the Town Center Limited Commercial Zone (TCLC) shall comply
with the Town Center Zones Required Standards set forth in
Subsection 18-4.24e9 — 14.
a. Purpose. This zone provides for community commercial uses to
complement and enhance the existing retail and service use and
historic character in the Town Center area. The Master Plan establishes
guidelines for proper site plan development which is referenced as a
part of this subsection. The goals of community design and historic
preservation of the Town Center is intended to accomplish the
following:
1. To accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of
the Town Center area, which has been designated as a historic
landmark, and other structures and resources within the Town
§ 18-4.26 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.27
A:233
Center area which reflect the elements of the architectural history
of the Township. To encourage construction and reconstruction
with a residential appearance in keeping with the goals of the Town
Center and the Appendix to the 1993 Master Plan Amendment to
the Interchange Master Plan.
2. To encourage the continued use of the existing buildings and to
appropriate reuses.
3. To maintain the character of the neighborhood and architecturally
significant buildings.
4. To manage change by preventing alteration or new construction
not in keeping with the zone.
5. To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
6. To maintain economic viability of the existing land uses.
7. To improve access, circulation and parking.
8. To maintain a stable and balanced community fiscal structure.
9. To maintain and improve the traffic circulation by implementing the
Master Plan concepts and by limiting access to the Route 517
Bypass properties to the proposed connector road, Main Street and
Sparta Avenue.
b. Principal Permitted Uses. This zone is limited to business uses of
limited retail sales and service type. Only the following uses are
permitted:
1. Banks and offices for business, executive and professional
purposes.
2. Pharmacy, clothing store, gift shop, antique shops and photography
studio and other similar lower intensity retail uses.
3. Bed and breakfast establishments, access to all guest rooms shall
be via hallways from a central area. See definition (Subsection
18-2.1).
4. Restaurants, but not including drive-in restaurants.
5. Public buildings and uses.
6. Apartments over retail commercial and office establishments.
7. Institutional uses and nonprofit clubs, lodges and fraternal
organizations.
8. Churches.
9. Apartments. In any building containing a retail store or service
establishment upon the first floor. With the exception of public
§ 18-4.27 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.27
A:234
garages and service stations, apartments may be constructed on
the second floor.
10. Patio homes, duplexes and triplexes at a density of four dwelling
units per acre with a 15% mandatory set aside of affordable
housing meeting the requirements of the Housing Section.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses. Parking, signs, essential services and other
accessory uses customary and incidental to the permitted uses.
d. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
1. Any business conducted outside the confines of a building unless
specifically permitted.
2. Any industry, process of manufacture, fabrication, assembly,
disassembly, conversion or alteration. For the purpose of this
section, any business use shall be deemed to be an industry where
it employs more than five persons in the processing or
manufacturing of a product or uses more than a total of 25
horsepower machinery in the direct processing or manufacturing
operations, but is not intended that a retail store or service
establishment such as a hotel, department store or bank be limited
in the number of its employees or in the horsepower used for
heating, air conditioning and other similar nonprocessing or
manufacturing operations.
3. Carousels, merry-go-rounds, miniature golf, outdoor theaters, pony
tracks or other similar commercial outdoor amusements.
4. Junk yards, warehouses, storage buildings and coal or fuel yards.
5. Gasoline service stations. However, gasoline service stations in
existence on January 1, 1999 are hereby grandfathered and are
authorized to be expanded and/or rebuilt even if totally destroyed.
However, any expansion or rebuilding shall be pursuant to the
conditional use requirement set forth in Subsection 18-4.7c1
entitled Conditional Automotive Service Stations and Public
Garages.
6. Intense retail uses convenience stores, fast food restaurants, dry
cleaners and other similar quick stop retail.
e. Required Conditions. The following requirements must be complied
with in the TCLM Zone:
1. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard setback of not less than 25
feet, except that where existing buildings within 200 feet from an
average established setback, new buildings shall conform to such
established line.
§ 18-4.27 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.27
A:235
§ 18-4.28. Town Center Professional Business (TCPB) Zone. [Ord.
No. 1003 § 7; Ord. No. 01-14 § 3; Ord. No. 02-20 §§ 15, 26; Ord. No.
05-03 § 2; Ord. No. 10-09]
3. Side Yard. There shall be a minimum side yard of 10 feet.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 60 feet
unobstructed by buildings or other permanent structures. Offstreet parking is permitted within the rear yard, provided no
parking area is closer than five feet to any building nor 15 feet to
any residential zone boundary line.
5. Impervious Coverage. The total impervious coverage of any site
shall not exceed 40% of the total site area.
6. Site Plan Approval. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, the
Planning Board shall review a site plan according to Subsections
18-4.2c and 18-4.2d of the proposed use to ascertain that all the
requirements of this subsection are complied with.
7. Lot Area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet
measured within 125 feet of the front street right-of-way line.
8. Minimum Frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 60
feet.
9. Town Center Zones Required Standards. Any development within
the Town Center Lower Main Zone (TCLM) shall comply with the
Town Center Zones Required Standards set forth in Subsection
18-21.24e9 — 14.
f. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted by
the Planning Board acting in accordance with the provisions:
1. Outdoor dining accessories to and associated with a restaurant
pursuant to Subsection 18-4.7c19.
a. Purpose. This zone provides for a planned development of community
commercial uses and housing to compliment and enhance the existing
professional business or service use, historic character and natural
resources in the Town Center area. A planned development is required
and it shall include 25 affordable units. The Master Plan establishes
guidelines for proper site plan development which is referenced as a
part of this subsection. The goals of community design and historic
preservation of the Town Center is intended to accomplish the
following:
1. To accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of
the Town Center area, which has been designated as a historic
landmark, and other structures and resources within the Town
Center which reflect the elements of the architectural history of the
§ 18-4.27 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.28
A:236
Township. To encourage construction and reconstruction with a
residential appearance in keeping with the goals of the Town
Center and the Appendix to the 1993 Master Plan Amendment to
the Interchange Master Plan.
2. To encourage the continued use of the existing buildings and to
appropriate reuses.
3. To maintain the character of the neighborhood and architecturally
significant buildings.
4. To manage change by preventing alteration or new construction
not in keeping with the zone.
5. To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
6. To maintain economic viability of the existing land uses.
7. To improve access, circulation and parking.
8. To maintain a stable and balanced community fiscal structure.
9. To maintain and improve traffic circulation by implementing the
Master Plan concepts and by limiting access to the Route 517
Bypass properties to the proposed connector road, Main Street and
Sparta Avenue.
10. To concentrate development in the appropriate buildable areas.
b. Principal Permitted Uses. This zone is limited to business uses of a
retail sales and service type. The following uses are permitted:
1. Planned Town Center Professional Business Development is
required: The planned development shall include the 25 units of
affordable housing units required in Subsection 1(i) below and it
may include any other uses in Subsections 1(a) to (j) below.
(a) Inn/hotel with associated catering facilities, conference rooms,
and restaurant as accessory uses.
(b) Banks and offices for business, executive and professional
purposes.
(c) Restaurants, but not including drive-ins.
(d) Public buildings and uses.
(e) Emergency care facility.
(f) Health and indoor athletic facilities.
(g) Institutional uses and nonprofit clubs, lodges and fraternal
organizations.
(h) Churches.
§ 18-4.28 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.28
A:237
(i) Second and third story multifamily units over retail,
commercial, hotel, and office uses, but not over dry cleaning
establishments. Townhouses, patio homes and condominium
units are also permitted in conjunction with a Town Center
Professional Business Planned Development. The planned
development shall include up to 100 units of which at least 25
units shall be affordable family units. Of the 25 affordable
units, at least 11 shall be three-bedroom affordable units (of
which at least one unit shall be affordable to very-low-income
households and at least five additional units to low-income
households) and the remaining units shall be two-bedroom
affordable units (of which at least two units shall be affordable
to very-low-income households and at least five additional units
to low-income households); no one-bedroom affordable units
shall be included. As an incentive for this affordable housing
requirement, there is no net density applicable to these 100
units, and the impervious coverage has been increase.
(j) Specialty retail (defined as shops that cater to a specific
market, which are linked by architectural, historical or a
geographic theme and by commonality of goods. The specialty
retail center consist of smaller shops of 2,000 to 10,000 square
feet of floor area).
2. Town Center Professional Business Uses. Platted tax lots of no
more than 2.5 acres, existing as of April 1998 are subject to the
required standards of the TCC Zone. Such lots may continue to be
used as a single-family residential use.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses. Parking, signs, essential services, open
spaces and recreational uses and other accessory uses customary and
incidental to the permitted uses.
d. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
1. Any business conducted outside the confines of a building unless
specifically permitted.
2. Any industry, process of manufacture, fabrication, assembly,
disassembly, conversion or alteration. For the purpose of this
subsection, any business use shall be deemed to be an industry
where it employs more than five persons in the processing or
manufacturing of a product or uses more than a total of 25
horsepower machinery in the direct processing or manufacturing
operations, but is not intended that a retail store or service
establishment such as a hotel, department store or bank be limited
in the number of its employees or in the horsepower used for
heating, air conditioning and other similar nonprocessing or
manufacturing operations.
3. Carousels, merry-go-rounds, miniature golf, outdoor theaters, pony
tracks or other similar commercial outdoor amusements.
§ 18-4.28 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.28
A:238
4. Junk yards, warehouses, storage buildings and coal or fuel yards.
5. Drive-in restaurants.
6. Gasoline service stations.
7. Any uses not specifically permitted.
e. Required Standards for Planned Developments in the TCPB Zone. Any
site plan or subdivision in the zone shall include a preliminary site plan
for a planned development for the entire area of the lot or lots owned or
controlled by the applicant and located in the TCPB Zone. Certain bulk
standards are not included to permit flexibility in the planned
development. The following requirements must be complied with in the
TCPB Zone:
1. Impervious Coverage. The total impervious coverage of any TCPB
shall not exceed 6%. The impervious coverage shall be located on
the portion of the property along the 517 Bypass in the buildable
land as indicated in the Town Center Master Plan. At least 60 acres
of the remaining land west of the 517 Bypass shall be restricted
open space and recreation in accordance with the open space
organization requirements Subsection 18-5.4, Open Space and
Recreation Element of the Master Plan and the Municipal Land Use
Law, except as provided in Subsection e2 below.
2. Impervious Coverage Incentive for Public Dedication of Open
Space. The total impervious coverage for commercial, assisted
living and permitted uses of a TCPB may be increased to a
maximum of 9% provided that the applicant dedicates at least 60
acres of the remaining land west of the 517 Bypass to the Township
and provided that the major development area is limited to the
portion of the property along the Route 517 Bypass to the Township
and provided that the major development area is limited to the
portion of the property along the Route 517 Bypass in the buildable
land as indicated on the Town Center Master Plan.
3. Acreage Requirements. Ten acres.
4. No direct access driveways shall be permitted along the Route 517
Bypass. On the north side of the bypass, Lot 48, Block 19.02, the
development plan must include an internal circulation plan
consistent with the Master Plan.
5. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed three
stories or 38 feet. An exception would be a house of worship steeple
or clock towers which shall not exceed 50 feet.
6. Town Center Zones Required Standards. Any development within
the Town Center Professional Business Zone (TCPB) shall comply
with the Town Center Zones required standards set forth in
Subsection 18-4.24e9 — 14.
§ 18-4.28 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.28
A:239
§ 18-4.29. ED Economic Development District. [Ord. No. 1003 § 7;
Ord. No. 01-14 § 3; Ord. No. 02-20 § 25; Ord. No. 05-03 § 2]
7. Findings for Planned Developments. As part of the approval of a
planned development, the applicant shall demonstrate and the
Board shall find the following facts and conclusions:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65;
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate;
(c) The provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment are adequate;
(d) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is
proposed to be established;
(e) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are
adequate.
f. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted by
the Planning Board acting in accordance with the provisions:
1. Outdoor dining accessory to and associated with a restaurant
pursuant to Subsection 18-4.7c19.
2. Senior age restricted housing in congregate care facilities, assisted
living facilities and/or residential care facilities pursuant to
Subsection 18-4.7c20 but only as part of an overall planned TCPB
development.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the Economic Development District shall be to
allow for the location of office, research and industrial uses in a
campus-like setting with good access to Route 15 and properly buffered
from residential uses.
b. Principal Permitted Uses. The erection, construction, alteration or use
of buildings or premises for the following uses to be conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building or in a court enclosed on all sides
by a suitable screening structure, except for on-site parking and loading
§ 18-4.28 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.29
A:240
incidental thereto, and public utility facilities not normally enclosed
within a building.
1. Scientific research and development laboratories.
2. Office buildings for business, professional, executive and
administrative purposes.
3. Storage buildings, warehouses and wholesale distribution centers.
4. Agricultural uses on a lot of five acres or more.
5. Processes of manufacture, fabrication, assembly treatment or
packaging conversion of products.
6. Indoor recreational uses including gymnastics, basketball, soccer,
health clubs and other similar uses.
c. Conditional Uses. (See regulations for conditional uses.)
1. Public utilities.
2. Kennels.
3. Miniature and regular golf courses.
4. Golf driving range.
5. Trucking terminals.
6. Soil removal operations.
7. Schools and institutions.
8. Accessory retail sales.
d. Accessory Uses.
1. Those uses customarily incident to the above uses (i.e., storage
buildings, parking lots, etc.).
2. Farm stands and sale of agricultural products on a lot not less than
five acres.
e. Specifically Discouraged Uses. Any uses which directly or indirectly
utilize materials listed in N.J.A.C. 7:27-6.12-14 shall be expressly
prohibited. The Planning Board may give approval of a process or
material discouraged in this zone by a majority vote of the full
membership of the Board after a review by the Environmental
Commission and public notification of a discussion on the matter with
specific reference to the process or material. Such notification shall
conform to the requirements of variance notification.
f. Required Conditions for Industrial Development. The following lot area
and building height regulations shall apply:
§ 18-4.29 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.29
A:241
1. (a) Minimum Lot Area. A minimum lot area of 80,000 square feet
is required.
(b) Maximum Building Height. No structure shall exceed 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet in height.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 100 feet. Offstreet parking areas as required shall be permitted in the front
yard, provided said area is at no point closer than 50 feet to any
adjoining street right-of-way line and 50 feet from residential zone
boundary line or any closer than 10 feet from the side of a building.
Parking areas shall be limited to a maximum of 25% at the front
yard area.
3. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall be no
less than 30 feet. Parking as required may be permitted in the side
yards, provided no parking area is closer than 10 feet to any
building or 25 feet to any residential zone boundary line or street
right-of-way.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 50 feet. No building
shall be closer than 100 feet from any residential zone. The rear
yard may be used for off-street parking provided no parking area
shall be nearer than 10 feet to any building or 25 feet to any
residential zone boundary line or street right-of-way.
5. Landscaping. Landscaping shall conform to the requirement of
Subsection 18-5.3o of the design standards.
6. Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width shall be 200 feet when
measured at the building setback line.
7. Lot Area Ratio. Principal and accessory buildings shall not occupy
more than 25% of the lot area. Storage and parking areas shall not
occupy more than 25% of the lot area.
8. Impervious Coverage. The total impervious coverage of any one lot
shall not exceed 40% of the total lot area.
9. New industrial subdivisions fronting on White Lake road as of July
1, 2002 shall maintain 125-foot front yard setback for structures
and parking from White Lake Road, which shall be properly
landscaped with earth berms, trees, shrubs as approved by the
Board. Vehicular access shall be from an internal roadway network.
g. Vehicular Movement and Parking. Control of vehicular movement and
parking shall be provided according to the following standards:
1. On-site accessways, driveways, parking and loading facilities shall
be paved with all-weather dust-free surfaces or as approved by the
Planning Board.
§ 18-4.29 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.29
A:242
§ 18-4.30. ED-1, Economic Development/Low and Moderate Cost
Housing Zone. [Ord. No. 1003 § 7; Ord. No. 01-14 § 3]
2. Proper site lines shall be maintained at all intersections of public
streets. Measured along the centerline, there shall be a clear sight
triangle of 100 feet from the point of intersection measured along
each intersecting centerline in which no vegetation or other major
visual obstruction shall be permitted in the line of sight between
streets above the height of three feet above the grade of the
intersecting streets. Accessways may not be located within 100 feet
of an intersection and shall enter a public street at no less than 90°
plus or minus 10° acute angle to the public street centerline.
3. For private accessways, a clear sight triangle measurement of 50
feet along the intersecting center lines shall be maintained as
required above. Each accessway shall not be more than 35 feet in
width measured at right angles to the centerline of the access way,
except as increased by necessary curb return radii. Accessways
may not be located within 100 feet of an intersection, and shall
enter a public street at no less than 90°, plus or minus 10° acute
angle to the public street centerline.
4. Except where in conflict with the three subsections above in which
case these subsections shall control, the standards of Subsection
18-5.3h shall apply.
5. Where a proposed use required significant material handling a
suitable loading dock shall be constructed and such loading areas
should be constructed and such loading areas shall be screened
from view from a public right-of-way.
h. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (C.O.), each new
tenant or change in tenancy in the Economic Development Zone shall
be required to receive tenant approval from the Planning Board to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this section.
a. Purpose. This zone is designed to provide for economic development
uses as well as multifamily residential uses in a planned development to
meet the needs of new and indigenous low and moderate income
housing within the Township.
b. Principal Permitted Uses. The erection, construction, alteration or use
of buildings or premises for the following uses to be conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building or in a court enclosed on all sides
by a suitable screening structure, except for on-site parking and loading
incidental thereto, and public utility facilities not normally enclosed
within a building.
1. Scientific research and development laboratories.
2. Office buildings for business, professional, executive and
administrative purposes.
§ 18-4.29 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.30
A:243
3. Agricultural uses on a lot of five acres or more.
4. Multifamily residential uses intended to conform to Council on
Affordable Housing Standards and in accordance with the terms
and conditions of Subsection 18-4.2q, Affordable Housing
Provisions of this chapter and developer's agreement with the
Township Council.
5. Day care centers and facilities serving, at least partially, the needs
of the other uses within the ED-1 Zone.
6. Medical centers and/or outpatient care facilities or laboratories.
c. Conditional Uses. (See regulations for conditional uses.)
1. Public utilities.
2. Schools and institutions.
3. Banks and/or financial institutions meeting the conditions of
Subsection 18-4.7.
4. Eating facilities such as restaurants, delicatessens, and sandwich
and coffee shops which serve, at least in part, the other principal
permitted uses in the ED-1 Zone subject to the conditions set forth
in Subsection 18-4.7.
5. Health clubs and/or fitness centers subject to the conditions set
forth in Subsection 18-4.7.
6. Hotels, motels and conference centers.
d. Accessory Uses. The accessory uses within the ED-1 Zone shall be the
same as in the ED Zone.
e. Specifically Discouraged Uses. The specifically discouraged uses within
the ED-1 Zone shall be the same as in the ED Zone.
f. Required Conditions for Industrial or Planned Development. The
required conditions for industrial or planned development within the
ED-1 Zone shall be as follows:
1. (a) Minimum Lot Area. A minimum lot area of 80,000 square feet
is required.
(b) Maximum Building Height. No structure shall exceed 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet in height.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 100 feet
from a public road or 35 feet from a private access road or lane. Offstreet parking areas as required shall be permitted in the front
yard, provided said area is at no point closer than 50 feet to any
adjoining street right-of-way line or any closer than 10 feet from
§ 18-4.30 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.30
A:244
the side of a building. Parking areas shall be limited to a maximum
of 25% at the front yard area.
3. Side Yard. No side yard requirements shall apply to economic
development uses within the zone. Multifamily uses developed for
low/moderate income housing shall conform to minimum side yard
standards of the MF Zone. Parking as required may be permitted in
the side yards, provided no parking area is closer than 10 feet to
any building or 25 feet to any residential zone boundary line or
street right-of-way.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 50 feet. The rear
yard may be used for off-street parking provided no parking area
shall be nearer than 10 feet to any building or 25 feet to any
residential zone boundary line or street right-of-way.
5. Landscaping. Landscaping shall conform to the requirement of
Subsection 18-5.3o of the design standards.
6. Minimum Lot Width. No minimum lot width is required.
7. Floor Area Ratio. Floor area of principal and accessory buildings
shall not occupy more than 30% of the lot area.
g. Vehicular Movement and Parking. The control of vehicular movement
and parking shall conform to the standards of the ED Zone.
h. Bulk Area and Site Design Regulations for Low/Moderate Income
Housing.
1. The low/moderate income housing shall conform to the general
provisions of this chapter, Subsection 18-4.2q. Affordable Housing
Provisions and the following bulk area and site design regulations.
(a) A total of 48 multifamily units shall be constructed within the
ED-1 Zone of which 35% shall be low/moderate income
housing units. Market value units are considered to be offset
by reduced standards for economic development within the
ED-1 Zone.
(b) Minimum tract area. Twenty acres.
(c) Minimum tract frontage. One hundred feet.
(d) Minimum front and rear yard for primary structures. Thirty
feet.
(e) Minimum distance between primary structures. Thirty feet.
(f) Maximum structure length. One hundred forty feet.
(g) Maximum number of units per structure. Six units.
§ 18-4.30 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.30
A:245
(h) Setback facade requirements. For every two units, the setback
difference shall be no less than four feet. The appearance of
the fronts shall vary by varying the dwelling widths and
changing the roof line.
(i) Maximum building coverage. 20%.
(j) Maximum building height. Twenty-five feet.
(k) Landscaping and Recreation. At least 50% of the parcel area
shall consist of landscaped open space. At least 10% of the
parcel area which can be included as part of the foregoing 50%
shall be developed for active or passive recreation use of the
residents of the development to include such facilities as play
areas, sitting areas, tennis courts, and swimming pools.
(l) Buffer Strips. There shall be a buffer strip on all parcel lines,
excepting public street lines, adjoining another zone at least 30
feet in width. Such buffer shall be increased to 50 feet in width
in those instances where the parcel line abuts an existing
single-family use or a residential zone of a lesser density. The
buffer, if wooded, shall remain in the natural state, or if not
substantially wooded, shall be landscaped with a visual screen,
at least four feet in height at the time of planting. The planting
shall be in double alternate rows in a strip at least 12 feet wide.
(m) Access Drives or Roadways. Access drives shall be at least 24
feet wide, curbed with concrete or Belgian block and at least
20 feet from any principal use structure. All other roadways
shall be built to Township specifications.
(n) Lighting. Noncorrosive ornamental lighting shall be provided
and shielded to direct illumination downward for walks, steps,
and parking areas and roadways to insure safe and convenient
nighttime use.
(o) Access for Emergency Vehicles. At least two avenues of access
shall be provided for each parcel; the parcel shall be so
designed that all emergency vehicles have access to each
multifamily unit.
(p) Utilities. Water and sewer service shall be provided in
compliance with the rules and regulations of the water and
sewer department and existing codes. All utilities and their
service lines, including but not limited to, water, sewer, gas,
electric, telephone and TV cable, shall be installed
underground in accordance with the specifications of the
appropriate utilities. Whenever a utility is not installed in a
public right-of-way, an appropriate utility easement shall be
provided.
§ 18-4.30 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.30
A:246
§ 18-4.31. Planned Commercial Development Zone (PCD). [Ord. No.
9/9/98 § 1]
In accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law, the Planned Commercial
Development Zone is intended to permit the construction of permitted uses
provided that any preliminary and final site plan within the zone and any use
of the property shall comply with the standards set forth in this subsection.
(q) Individual Controls. Each unit shall be provided with individual
heat controls.
(r) Other Requirements. Other reasonable standards and
conditions not inconsistent with the intent of this section may
be imposed by the Planning Board at the time of review of the
plans which shall be approved prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
(s) Common Open Space Ownership and Maintenance. The
applicant shall provide for and establish an organization for the
ownership and maintenance of all common open space.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the Route 15 Planned Commercial
Development (PCD) area is to permit development of large tracts of
land along Route 15 in a planned setting. A planned development will
prevent an adverse impact on the community and enhance the existing
light industrial uses, and permit the free flow of traffic on Route 15 to
meet the State Access Management Code.
The intent of the Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance is to reinforce the
concept of a strong central Town Center in Sparta which is consistent
with the New Jersey State Development and Redevelopment Plan. The
Planned Commercial Development area is intended to complement, not
detract from, the commercial viability of the Town Center area.
b. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted principal uses in the
PCD Zone.
1. Office building for business, professional, executive and
administrative offices.
2. Banks and banking offices.
3. Commercial buildings for single users limited to sales and
showroom facilities for hardware, furniture, floor coverings and
carpeting, bath and tile stores, lighting fixture and business supply
stores; accessory indoor inventory storage shall be permitted.
4. Restaurants where all food sold on premises is served and
consumed at tables within the restaurant.
5. Indoor theaters, indoor cinemas and indoor recreation centers.
§ 18-4.30 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.31
A:247
6. Hotels, motor inns and conference centers which may include
health clubs and spas; catering facilities and restaurants open to
the public but ancillary to the principal permitted use; access to all
guest rooms shall be via hallways from a main lobby.
7. Agricultural uses on five acres or more.
c. Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the PCD Zone:
1. Scientific, research and development laboratories.
2. Public utilities.
3. Schools and institutions.
d. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the
PCD Zone:
1. Storage buildings.
2. Warehouses.
3. Kennels.
4. Golf courses and miniature golf use.
5. Trucking terminals.
6. Soil removal.
7. Agricultural uses.
e. Accessory Uses. Those uses customarily incident to the above.
f. Specifically Discouraged Uses. Any use which directly or indirectly
utilizes materials listed in N.J.A.C. 7:27-6.12-14.
g. Required Standards. All planned commercial developments shall meet
the following minimum standards:
1. The planned commercial development shall have a minimum of at
least 20 acres with at least 200 feet of frontage on New Jersey State
Highway Route 15 and/or access to an access road connecting the
property to White Lake Road or Commerce Park Drive without the
necessity of a driveway to Route 15. There shall be only one new
roadway from any planned commercial development to Route 15
for either ingress or egress, and there shall be no driveways for
ingress and egress to or from Route 15. All driveways shall be from
the one new roadway, not from Route 15.
2. The planned commercial development shall have a unified
architectural and design scheme which shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Planning Board at the time of
preliminary site plan approval. The approved unified architectural
§ 18-4.31 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.31
A:248
and design scheme shall be complied with by the applicant and
any future developers within the planned development. There shall
be no changes to the architectural and design scheme without a
formal amendment to the planned commercial development by the
applicant and approval of the amendment by the Planning Board
of the Township of Sparta. The unified architectural and design
scheme shall include a unified architectural appearance on all
facades of the buildings and shall provide for a common signage
theme for all use on the property.
3. Signs. Signage in the planned commercial development shall be
limited to one facade sign per use and a maximum of 20 square feet
per use on the facade. There shall be no more than one
freestanding sign identifying the planned commercial development
and visible from Route 15. Said freestanding sign may be located
on a pylon or foundation and shall be no greater than 32 square
feet on each side and shall be no higher than 10 feet in height. The
freestanding sign shall not be a directory sign. One directory sign
internal to the development may be submitted and approved. The
directory sign may be up to 32 square feet on each side; however,
the total square footage of the freestanding sign and the directory
shall be 48 square feet.
4. Minimum lot size for any one building shall be one acre, except that
minimum lot size for motels shall be five acres.
5. In the planned commercial development, more than one principal
use may be permitted on the same lot.
6. The uses within a planned development shall provide for parking in
accordance with the parking schedule set forth in Subsection
18-5.3h. Parking for planned commercial developments shall
generally be located within at least 200 feet of each of the
structures and uses for which the parking is provided. Parking may
be located underground and under buildings and, as an incentive
for such underground and under building parking, a planned
commercial development is hereby authorized to increase its
maximum coverage from a maximum 40% to a maximum 50% in
exchange for the square footage of any parking spaces located
under a building or underground. No more than 33 1/3% of the
parking spaces shall be located in the front yard.
7. Maximum Impervious Coverage. 40%.
8. Landscape Plan. Any planned commercial development shall
provide a landscape plan at the time of preliminary site plan
approval setting forth landscape buffers between adjacent
industrial properties and the planned commercial development and
within and between parking lots. The landscape islands within the
parking lots shall be located at least every 40 parking spaces. The
landscape plan shall provide for the initial planting of shade trees
§ 18-4.31 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.31
A:249
with a minimum caliper of four inches at the base and at least one
tree every 30 feet of a landscape area within the parking area or on
the perimeter of the parking area and on all property boundaries.
9. Common Access Between Parking Lots. Any planned commercial
development shall provide for the common ingress to and egress
from parking lots and for common access between parking lots
even if owned by separate property owners within the planned
commercial development. A deed of common driveway easement
shall be submitted with any planned commercial development and
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Planning Board
Attorney and Township Engineer. The common driveways shall be
intended to limit the need for driveways to the access road and to
prevent any need for driveways to Route 15.
10. Prior to the commencement of any site work and prior to the
effectiveness of any preliminary site plan approval, the applicant
shall enter into a developer's agreement with the Council of the
Township of Sparta as authorized by the Municipal Land Use Law
establishing certain minimum conditions relating to water, septic
or sewer, fire protection, ingress to and egress from White Lake
Road or Commerce Park Drive, standards to ensure no ingress to
and egress from Route 15, timing and rate of development and
construction of private and public improvements, performance
guarantees for any common accessways and/or public
improvements, maintenance guarantees for any common
accessways or public improvements, and such other time period or
statutory protection period applicable to the development, and
such other standards and provisions as shall be deemed
appropriate by the Governing Body of the Township of Sparta.
11. Covered Pedestrian Walkways Between Buildings. All commercial
buildings within a planned commercial development shall provide
for safe vehicular and pedestrian ingress to and egress from
parking lots and drives and building areas. In addition, a pedestrian
plan shall be submitted with the application at the time of
preliminary site plan application providing for pedestrian access
from parking spaces devoted to particular uses to the buildings to
which the parking spaces are devoted. The architectural scheme
for the planned commercial development shall provide for internal
pedestrian circulation within buildings and between uses within
buildings and for connection between buildings. Perhaps such
connections may include covered walkways and/or internal
pedestrian walkways.
12. Evaluation Standards and Criteria. In order to foster the
attractiveness of a site designated as a PCD, planned commercial
development and the surrounding neighborhoods and thereby
preserve property values, and in order to provide an efficient road
and utility network, ensure the movement of traffic, implement
comprehensive planning and better serve the public health, safety
§ 18-4.31 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.31
A:250
and general welfare, the following standards and criteria shall
be utilized by the Planning Board in reviewing all site plans and
subdivision plats relating to a PCD, planned commercial
development. These standards shall not be regarded as inflexible
requirements. They are not intended to discourage creativity,
invention and innovation.
(a) The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as
practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal. All PCD,
planned commercial developments shall provide a minimum
front yard of 150 feet from Route 15 which shall be a
landscaped area dedicated to perpetual open space.
(b) Proposed buildings shall be related harmoniously to the terrain
and to other buildings in the vicinity that have a visual
relationship to the proposed buildings.
(c) The distance between buildings shall be sufficient to provide
adequate light and air.
(d) With respect to vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including
walkways, interior drives and parking, special attention shall
be given to location and number of access points to the public
streets, width of interior drives and access points, general
interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic and arrangement of parking areas that are safe and
convenient and, insofar as practicable, do not detract from the
design of proposed buildings and structures and the
neighboring properties.
(e) Special attention shall be given to property site surface
drainage so that removal of surface waters will not adversely
affect neighboring properties or the public storm drainage
system.
(f) All permanent utility lines, pipes and conduits shall be located
below ground, and all other installations and appurtenances
shall be adequately screened.
(g) The size, location, design, color, texture, lighting and materials
of all temporary and permanent signs and outdoor advertising
structures or features shall not detract from the design of
proposed buildings and structures and the surrounding
properties.
(h) Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installations,
service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and
structures and similar accessory areas and structures shall be
subject to such setbacks, screen plantings or other screening
methods as shall reasonably be required to prevent their being
incongruous with the existing or contemplated environment
and the surrounding properties.
§ 18-4.31 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.31
A:251
(i) Adequate provision shall be made for a sewage disposal system
which shall be of sufficient size, capacity and design to collect
and dispose of all sewage from all present and proposed
buildings in the PCD, planned commercial development and
which shall be otherwise constructed and maintained in
conformity with all applicable State, County and municipal
regulations and requirements.
(j) Adequate provision shall be made for a storm drainage and
surface water detention system which shall be of sufficient
size, capacity and design to collect, carry off and dispose of all
predictable surface water runoff within the PCD, planned
commercial development and which shall be otherwise
constructed and maintained in conformity with all applicable
State, County and municipal regulations and requirements.
(k) Adequate provision shall be made for a water system which
shall be of sufficient size, capacity and design to supply potable
water and fire protection to each of the buildings within the
PCD, planned commercial development and which shall be
otherwise constructed and maintained in conformity with all
applicable State, County and municipal regulations and
requirements.
(l) Adequate provision shall be made for the collection and
disposal and, where possible, recycling of garbage, trash and
solid waste generated by the PCD, planned commercial
development, and such system shall be maintained in
conformity with all applicable State, County and municipal
regulations and requirements.
(m) Adequate provision shall be made for a system of interior roads
sufficient to accommodate predictable vehicular traffic within
the PCD, planned commercial development and to ensure safe
and efficient vehicular access, including access of fire-fighting
equipment to and from each of the buildings within the PCD,
planned commercial development.
(n) In the event that PCD, planned commercial development is to
be constructed in sections over a period of years, then the
provisions for the sewage and garbage disposal, storm
drainage and water supply and for interior roads, specified in
Subsections (i), (j), (k), (l) and (m) above, need to be adequate
only in respect to the sections of development which have
previously received final approval and the section of
development for which final approval is being sought. The
developer shall supply to the Planning Board information
disclosing such adequacy and obtain the Planning Board's
approval thereof.
§ 18-4.31 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.31
A:252
§ 18-4.31A. Planned Commercial Economic Development Zone
(PCED). [Ord. No. 2018-12 § 3]
(o) There shall be a minimum front yard setback of 50 feet for
buildings and 25 feet for any parking area. Except as otherwise
provided in this section, there shall be no minimum width or
frontage, no requirement as to front, side or rear yards, and no
requirement concerning the location of accessory buildings or
structures for any land use in the PCD, planned commercial
development. However, no plan for a PCD, planned commercial
development shall be approved unless the lot widths, depths
and frontages, building setbacks, percentages of lot coverage,
front, side and rear yards and locations of accessory buildings
or structures provided for in the site plan and subdivision plan
are consonant with the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(p) The height of any principal building within a PCD, planned
commercial development shall not exceed 35 feet, except that
hotels, motor inns and conference centers may have three
stories and a height of a maximum of 40 feet.
(q) No building or structure, other than a fence or garden wall less
than seven feet in height, or a sign, shall be located within a
distance of 50 feet of any exterior boundary line of the site
designated for a PCD, planned commercial development, and
no such building or structure other than those excepted above
shall be located within a distance of 50 feet of any State or
County road.
(r) Maximum building size. No building shall be larger than
40,000 square feet.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the Route 15 Planned Commercial Economic
Development PCED Zone is to permit development of the areas of land
along Route 15, West of Route 15, North of the New York Susquehanna
Western Railroad right-of-way and Houses Corner Road and South of
Wilson Drive. A Planned Commercial Development will prevent any
adverse impacts on the community, and enhance the existing light
industrial uses, and permit the free flow of traffic on Route 15 to meet
the State Highway Access Management Code.
b. Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the Planned
Commercial Economic Development (PCED) Zone in a Planned
Development.
1. Planned Commercial Economic Developments, including any uses
permitted in this zone.
2. Office building for business professional executive administrative
offices.
§ 18-4.31 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.31A
A:253
3. Banks and banking offices.
4. Retail uses in single use or multi-tenant buildings provided the
buildings have a residential appearance of multiple facades and
multiple peaked roofs.
5. Restaurants including restaurants where food is sold on premises
and served and consumed at tables within the restaurant, and
restaurants with drive-through windows.
6. Indoor theaters, indoor cinemas, and indoor recreation areas.
7. Banquet facilities.
8. Hotels, motor inns and conference centers which may include
health clubs, skating rinks and spas, catering facilities, and
restaurants open to the public ancillary to the principal permitted
use. Access to all guests shall be via internal hallways from the
main lobby.
9. Churches, houses of worship.
10. Agricultural uses on 5 acres or more.
11. Science, research and development laboratories.
12. Processes of manufacture, fabrication, assembly treatment or
packaging conversion of products.
13. Micro-breweries, Micro-distilleries, Wineries.
14. Indoor recreational uses including gymnastics, basketball, soccer,
health clubs, and other similar uses.
15. Outdoor recreation uses including miniature golf and batting
cages.
16. Preexisting storage buildings and preexisting warehouses.
17. Multi-tenant professional offices.
18. Warehouses and storage buildings located 300 feet from Route 15.
c. Conditional Uses. The following uses are approved as conditional uses
in the PCED Zone District.
1. Outdoor dining.
2. Public utilities.
3. Schools and institutions.
d. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the
PCED Zone District.
1. Hair and Nail Salons.
§ 18-4.31A SPARTA CODE § 18-4.31A
A:254
2. Kennels.
3. Golf courses.
4. Trucking terminals.
5. Soil and rock removal.
6. Gasoline Service and/or Distribution Stations.
7. Any uses that are regulated by the underground storage tank (UST)
program of the State of New Jersey or Federal Government.
8. Any uses that use or generate hazardous materials or materials
regulated by the Technical Regulations of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection under the Site
Remediation Program.
9. Any use not specified as a permitted use or conditional use shall be
prohibited.
e. Accessory Uses. Those uses customarily incident to the above permitted
and conditional uses.
f. Required Standards. All Planned Commercial Economic Development
(PCED) District Zone uses shall meet the following minimum standards.
1. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 35 feet,
except that hotels, motor inns and conference centers may have
three stories and a maximum height of 40 feet.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard setback of not less than 50
feet. Parking areas shall have a minimum front yard setback of 25
feet. Properties with frontage on Route 15 shall have a front yard
setback of not less than 100 feet. No more than 33 1/3% of the
parking spaces shall be located in the front yard.
3. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall be no
less than 30 feet. Parking as required may be permitted in the side
yards with a side yard setback not less than 10 feet. The parking
side yard setback may be reduced to zero feet for adjacent
properties with shared parking.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of a least 50 feet. The rear
yard may be used for parking with a rear yard setback of not less
than 10 feet. The parking rear yard setback may be reduced to zero
feet for adjacent properties with shared parking. Underground
parking shall be prohibited.
5. Impervious Coverage. Maximum impervious coverage of 40%.
Impervious coverage may be increased if a portion of the lot is used
as a public right-of-way or public access easement providing access
to adjoining lots for purposes of access to either Wilson Drive or the
new traffic light located on Route 15. The increase in impervious
§ 18-4.31A FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.31A
A:255
coverage shall equal to 1.5 times the area of public right-of-way
or public access easement located on the original property. The
calculated percentage of impervious coverage shall be based on the
original property acreage but shall not exceed 50%.
6. Lot Area. Minimum lot size for any one building shall be one acre,
except that the lot size for hotels and conference centers shall be
five acres.
7. Minimum Frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 200
feet.
8. Parking. The uses within the Planned Commercial Economic
Development (PCED) Zone shall provide for parking in accordance
with the parking standards set forth in Subsection 18-5.3h.
Underground parking is not permitted.
9. Planned Commercial Economic Development uses shall utilize
Wilson Drive or the future intersection for northbound access to
Route 15. Access from northbound Route 15 shall be from Wilson
Drive or the future intersection. There shall be no new left turn in
and/or left turn out driveways after September 25, 2018, to Route
15 from new or expanded uses within the Planned Commercial
Economic Development.
10. Any pre-existing signs on existing properties may continue to be
used. Signs located along any internal access drive shall be limited
to one free-standing monument sign per business located on a
foundation and shall be no greater than 15 square feet on each side
and shall be no higher than five feet in height. Properties with
existing direct access to Route 15 may have an additional sign to be
located along Route 15 up to 32 square feet.
11. Architectural Design Standards.
(a) The PCED shall have a unified architectural and design scheme
for all buildings and facades that face streets or parking areas.
Each facade must be treated architecturally, not just the main
entrance facade. The entire front, sides and rear of the
building shall be coordinated in compatible colors and
materials. Street facades, in the public view, shall receive the
greater architectural emphasis.
(b) Natural, earth tone colors with accent colors permitted as a
unifying design element or as business color scheme.
(c) Building facades shall be articulated with a base, a lower and
upper facade and capped with a cornice; and/or a roof element.
All visible facades of any proposed building must be treated
with architectural materials which shall consist of brick,
finished masonry, stone, wood or combination thereof, based
§ 18-4.31A SPARTA CODE § 18-4.31A
A:256
on commonly accepted architectural details, or other materials
approved by the Planning Board.
(d) All buildings shall have pitched roofs, except where technical
considerations require a flat roof, a mansard roof treatment
shall be used to reflect the design standards of the PCED (hip,
mansard or gable) Different orientations, and types of pitched
roofs shall be utilized to break up large roof lines. Architectural
shingles are permitted; metal roofs may be permitted provided
they are consistent with color design standards.
(e) Entrances shall be defined by architectural elements.
(f) Any exterior mechanical and electrical equipment, shall not be
exposed to the public view. Any deviations from the standard
shall require architectural treatments consistent with the
character and approved by the Board.
(g) Continuity of Architecture and Site Details. The design
continuity and coordination of architecture and site details,
especially walls, fences, ornamental metal work, steps,
walkways, planting beds and landscaping is especially critical
to the character of the Planned Commercial Economic
Development zone.
12. Sign Standards.
(a) Individual businesses that have a principal entrance on the
first story may choose from the following sign types and must
follow the conditions for each individual sign type.
(1) Awning.
[a] Smallest rectangle that fully encompasses the entire
extent of letters, logo and background. The following
variations of awnings, with or without signbands are
permitted: fixed or retractable, shed or dome awnings.
[b] Signage or signbands shall be limited to the valance of
the awning or the vertical portion of a dome awning.
[c] No portion of the awning shall be lower than eight feet
clearance.
[d] Awnings shall be a minimum of four feet deep, and
shall not extend beyond the width of the building or
tenant space, nor encroach above the roof line or the
story above. Awnings may wrap around the corner of
buildings.
[e] The height of the valance or sign band shall not
exceed 12 inches.
§ 18-4.31A FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.31A
A:257
[f] Awning signs shall contain only the business name,
logo, and/or street address. Letters, numbers and
graphics shall cover no more than 70% of the valance/
sign band area.
[g] Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated or
backlit. Colors shall be consistent with the uniform
architectural and design scheme of the overall
planned development.
(2) Band.
[a] Band signs shall include only letters, background, and
an optional logo. Information shall consist only of the
name and/or logo of the business. Band signs shall not
list products, sales, or other promotional messages, or
contact information.
[b] The following band sign construction types are
permitted:
[1] Cut-Out Letters. Letters shall be individually
attached to the wall or on a separate background
panel, and shall be externally illuminated.
[2] Flat Panel. Letters shall be printed or etched on
same surface as the background, which is then
affixed to the wall and externally illuminated.
[3] Channel Letters by Warrant. Each letter shall
have its own internal lighting element,
individually attached to the wall or onto a
separate background panel. The letter shall be
translucent, or solid to create a backlit halo effect.
[c] Height and width shall be measured using the
smallest rectangle that fully encompasses the entire
extent of letters, logo and background. Height shall
not exceed three feet.
[d] Band signs shall not be wider than 90% of the width of
the building facade or tenant space.
[e] Band signs shall not project vertically above thereof
line.
Band signs may be illuminated from dusk to dawn or
during business. External lights shall be shielded from
direct view to reduce glare.
[f] No internal lighting shall be permitted.
§ 18-4.31A SPARTA CODE § 18-4.31A
A:258
[g] Band signs should be placed where the architectural
features suggest the best placement for signage. They
should be vertically aligned with the center of an
architectural feature such as a storefront window,
entry portal, or width of a bay or overall retail space.
They shall not interrupt or obscure these features or
cause visual disharmony.
13. Sidewalks. Sidewalks and crosswalks where applicable, shall be
installed along all rights-of-way and between rights-of-way and
buildings. Sidewalks along Route 15 are under the jurisdiction of
NJDOT.
14. Shade trees. A row of shade trees shall be provided along any rightof-way.
15. Planned Commercial Developments. Planned commercial
developments shall have either a minimum of 20 acres and are
subject to the following standards with at least 200 feet of frontage
on Route 15 or access to an access road connecting the property to
the new road at the traffic light on Route 15 or access to Wilson
Drive. The access to Wilson Drive may be a public or private street
or a driveway. There shall be only one Roadway from the Planned
Commercial Economic Development District to Route 15 for
primary ingress and egress at the planned new traffic light.
Existing operating driveways existing as of August 2017 may
continue to operate. All driveways shall connect to the one new
road to Route 15.
(a) The planned commercial development shall have a unified
architectural and design scheme which shall be subject to the
review and approval of the reviewing board at the time of
preliminary and final site plan approval. The approved unified
architectural and design scheme shall be complied with by the
applicant, and any future developers within the Planned
Commercial Economic Development (PCED) District. There
shall be no changes to the architectural and design scheme
without a formal Amendment of the approved planned
commercial development or site plans within the PCED District
by the applicant and approval of the Amendment by the
reviewing board of the Township of Sparta. The unified
architectural and design scheme shall include a unified
architectural appearance of all facades of the buildings, and
shall provide for common signage theme for all uses in the
property and in the zone.
(b) One directory sign along Route 15 for the planned commercial
development may be submitted and approved. The directory
sign may be up to 32 square feet and 16 feet in height on each
side for any property or group of properties in the planned
commercial development.
§ 18-4.31A FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.31A
A:259
(c) Parking for the planned commercial developments in the
Planned Commercial Economic Development (PCED) Zone
shall be located within 200 feet of each of the structures for
which the parking is provided. Parking may be located under
buildings and as an incentive for such under building parking a
planned commercial development is hereby authorized to
increase the maximum impervious coverage from the
maximum of 40% to the maximum of 50% in exchange for
square footage of any parking space located under the
building. No more than 33 1/3% of the parking spaces shall be
located in the front yard.
(d) Landscape Plan. Any Planned Commercial Economic
Development (PCED) development shall provide a landscape
plan for at the time of preliminary site plan approvals setting
forth a landscape buffer between the adjacent industrial
properties and the planned commercial development and
within and between parking lots. The landscape aisles within
the parking island shall be located at least every 40 parking
spaces. The landscape plan shall provide for the initial planting
of shade trees at a minimum caliper of four inches in a base of
at least one tree every 30 feet of the landscape area within the
parking area, or on the perimeter of the parking area and all
property boundaries. The landscape plan shall also address
streetscape improvements including but not limited to
benches, lighting poles and fixtures (all downward facing), and
sidewalk pavers/materials. Lighting shall provide a minimum
of 0.5 foot candle in parking lots.
(e) Common Access Between Parking Lots. Any Planned
Commercial Economic Development (PCED) development shall
provide for common access and egress from parking lots and
for common areas between parking lots even if owned by
separate owners within the planned commercial development.
A deed of common driveway easement shall be submitted with
any planned commercial development and shall be subject to
the review and approval of the Planning Board Attorney and
the Planning Board Engineer. The common driveway shall be
intended to prevent the need for new left turn out and left turn
in driveways to Route 15. The accessways may be a common
driveway, private or public road.
(f) Prior to the commencement of the site work, the applicant
shall enter into a Developer's Agreement with the Council of
the Township of Sparta as authorized by the Municipal Land
Use Law establishing certain minimum conditions relating to
water, septic or sewer, fire protection, ingress and egress from
Wilson Drive standards to ensure no new left turn in and left
turn out driveway to and from Route 15, timing and rate of
development, construction of private and public
§ 18-4.31A SPARTA CODE § 18-4.31A
A:260
improvements, dedication of open space, performance
guarantees and any common accessways and public
improvements, maintenance guarantees for any common
accessways or public improvements, and in such other time
period or statutory protection period applicable to the
development, and such standards and provision as shall be
deemed appropriate by the governing body of the Township of
Sparta.
(g) Pedestrian Walkways Between Buildings. All commercial
buildings within a planned commercial development shall
provide for safe vehicular and pedestrian ingress to and egress
from parking lots and drives and building areas. In addition, a
pedestrian plan shall be submitted within the application at the
time of preliminary site plan application providing for
pedestrian access from parking spaces devoted to particular
uses to the buildings to which the parking spaces are devoted.
The architectural scheme for the planned commercial
development shall provide for internal pedestrian circulation
within buildings and between uses within buildings and for
connection between buildings. Sidewalks shall be provided
along any public right-of-way, excluding Route 15.
(h) Evaluation Standards and Criteria. In order to foster the
attractiveness of a site designated as a PCED, planned
commercial development and the surrounding neighborhoods
and thereby preserve property values, and in order to provide
an efficient road and utility network, ensure the movement of
traffic, implement comprehensive planning and better serve
the public health, safety and general welfare, the following
standards and criteria shall be utilized by the Planning Board
in reviewing all site plans and subdivision plats relating to a
PCED, planned commercial development. These standards
shall not be regarded as inflexible requirements. They are not
intended to discourage creativity, invention and innovation.
(1) The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state,
insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil
removal. All planned commercial developments shall
provide a minimum front yard of 100 feet from Route 15
which shall be a landscaped with a row of shade trees
spaced no more than 75 feet apart and dedicated to
perpetual open space.
(2) Proposed buildings shall be related harmoniously to the
terrain and to other buildings in the vicinity that have a
visual relationship to the proposed buildings.
(3) The distance between buildings shall be sufficient to
provide adequate light and air.
§ 18-4.31A FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.31A
A:261
(4) With respect to vehicular and pedestrian and handicapped
circulation, including walkways, interior drives and
parking, special attention shall be given to location and
number of access points to the public streets, width of
interior drives and access points, general interior
circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic
and arrangement of parking areas that are safe and
convenient and, insofar as practicable, do not detract from
the design of proposed buildings and structures and the
neighboring properties.
(5) Special attention shall be given to property site surface
drainage so that removal of surface waters will not
adversely affect neighboring properties or the public
storm drainage system.
(6) All permanent utility lines, pipes and conduits shall be
located below ground, and all other installations and
appurtenances shall be adequately screened.
(7) The size, location, design, color, texture, lighting and
materials of all temporary and permanent signs and
outdoor advertising structures or features shall not
detract from the design of proposed buildings and
structures and the surrounding properties.
(8) Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installations,
service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and
structures and similar accessory areas and structures shall
be subject to such setbacks, screen plantings or other
screening methods as shall reasonably be required to
prevent their being incongruous with the existing or
contemplated environment and the surrounding
properties.
(9) Adequate provision shall be made for a sewage disposal
system which shall be of sufficient size, capacity and
design to collect and dispose of all sewage from all present
and proposed buildings in the PCED, planned commercial
development and which shall be otherwise constructed
and maintained in conformity with all applicable State,
County and municipal regulations and requirements.
(10) Adequate provision shall be made for a storm drainage and
surface water detention system which shall be of sufficient
size, capacity and design to collect, carry off and dispose of
all predictable surface water runoff within the PCED,
planned commercial development and which shall be
otherwise constructed and maintained in conformity with
all applicable State, County and municipal regulations and
requirements.
§ 18-4.31A SPARTA CODE § 18-4.31A
A:262
(11) Adequate provision shall be made for a water system
which shall be of sufficient size, capacity and design to
supply potable water and fire protection to each of the
buildings within the PCED, planned commercial
development and which shall be otherwise constructed
and maintained in conformity with all applicable State,
County and municipal regulations and requirements.
(12) Adequate provision shall be made for the collection and
disposal and, where possible, recycling of garbage, trash
and solid waste generated by the PCED, planned
commercial development, and such system shall be
maintained in conformity with all applicable State, County
and municipal regulations and requirements.
(13) Adequate provision shall be made for a system of interior
roads sufficient to accommodate predictable vehicular
traffic within the PCED, planned commercial development
and to ensure safe and efficient vehicular access, including
access of fire-fighting equipment to and from each of the
buildings within the PCED, planned commercial
development.
(14)In the event that PCED, planned commercial development
is to be constructed in sections over a period of years, then
the provisions for the sewage and garbage disposal, storm
drainage and water supply and for interior roads, specified
in Subsections (i), (j), (k), (l) and (m) above, need to be
adequate only in respect to the sections of development
which have previously received final approval and the
section of development for which final approval is being
sought. The developer shall supply to the Planning Board
information disclosing such adequacy and obtain the
Planning Board's approval thereof.
(15) There shall be a minimum front yard setback of 50 feet for
buildings and 25 feet for any parking area. Except as
otherwise provided in this section, there shall be no
minimum width or frontage, no requirement as to front,
side or rear yards, and no requirement concerning the
location of accessory buildings or structures for any land
use in the PCED, planned commercial development.
However, no plan for a PCED, planned commercial
development shall be approved unless the lot widths,
depths, and frontages, building setbacks, percentages of
lot coverage, front, side and rear yards and locations of
accessory buildings or structures provided for in the site
plan and subdivision plan are consistent with the public
health, safety and general welfare.
§ 18-4.31A FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.31A
A:263
§ 18-4.32. Open Space Government Use Zone. [Ord. No. 02-25 § 3;
Ord. No. 08-06 § 1; Ord. No. 08-09 § 1]
(16) No building or structure, other than a fence or garden wall
less than seven feet in height, or a sign, shall be located
within a distance of 50 feet of any exterior boundary line of
the site designated for a PCED, planned commercial
development, and no such building or structure other than
those excepted above shall be located within a distance of
50 feet of any State or County road.
(17) Maximum building size. No building shall be larger than
40,000 square feet.
(18) Areas along the adjacent railroad right-of-way shall be
buffered and include adequate security to limit public
access to the railroad right-of-way.
a. Purpose. The purpose of the Open Space/Government Use Zone is to
establish a zone to regulate the use of public open space and lands. This
will insure local protection of the financial resources, environmental
resources, water resources and rural character of Sparta Township.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. Public recreation and open space.
2. Timber management as approved under a Forest Management Plan
approved by the State Forrester.
3. Public parks.
4. Public or private schools.
5. Educational centers.
6. Farms.
7. Single-family detached dwellings of one unit per 25 acres.
8. Public utilities excluding TV and radio towers.
c. Required Conditions.
1. Minimum Lot Area: 25 acres.
2. Minimum Front Yard: 300 feet.
3. Minimum Side Yard: 200 feet.
4. Minimum Rear Yard: 300 feet.
5. Maximum Impervious Coverage: 5%.
6. Maximum Building Height: 38 feet.
§ 18-4.31A SPARTA CODE § 18-4.32
A:264
§ 18-4.33. Town Center Commercial and Age-Restricted Housing
(TCCAH) District. [Ord. No. 05-03 § 4; Ord. No. 10-15; Ord. No.
2016-20 § 2]
7. Parking Requirements as set forth in § 18-53h.
d. Accessory Uses.
1. Those customarily incidental to the above permitted uses including
sheds, play structures, play equipment, pools, parking lots and
other similar accessory uses as approved by the Board.
2. Outdoor vending machines are permitted when associated with
public parks.
a. Purpose. Town Center Commercial and Age-Restricted District: This
District provides opportunities "to encourage senior citizen community
housing construction" in a mixed use development pattern within the
Designated Sparta Town Center consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2.L and
smart growth principles established in the State Plan, Sussex County
Strategic Growth Plan and the Sparta Township Master Plan. The
district will provide affordable housing opportunities within a walkable
planned village center to assist in meeting the Township's 2016
Amendment and Supplement to 2008 Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan obligation. Public sewer and water serve the district to minimize
any environmental issues.
1. To accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of
the Town Center area, which has been designated as a historic
landmark, and other structures and resources within the Town
Center area, which reflect the elements of the architectural history
of the Township. To encourage construction and reconstruction
with a residential appearance in keeping with the goals of the Town
Center and the Appendix to the 1993 Master Plan Amendment to
the Interchange Master Plan.
2. To encourage the continued use of the existing buildings and
appropriate reuses.
3. To maintain the character of the neighborhood and architecturally
significant buildings.
4. To manage change by preventing alteration or new construction
not in keeping with the zone.
5. To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources.
6. To maintain economic viability of the existing land uses.
7. To improve access, circulation and parking.
8. To maintain a stable and balanced community fiscal structure.
§ 18-4.32 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.33
A:265
9. To maintain and improve the traffic circulation by implementing the
Master Plan concepts and by limiting access to the 517 Bypass
properties to the proposed connector road, Main Street and Sparta
Avenue.
b. Principal Permitted Uses. This is a mixed-use zone of commercial retail,
office, age-restricted housing and affordable housing apartments in
100% affordable buildings existing on June 1, 2010 and in new mixed
use buildings.
1. Stores or shops for retail business or wholesale display entirely
within the confines of a building.
2. Banks and offices for business, executive and professional
purposes.
3. Restaurants, but not including drive-in restaurants.
4. Public buildings and uses.
5. Second floor apartments over retail commercial and office but not
over dry cleaning establishments.
6. Institutional uses and nonprofit clubs, lodges and fraternal
organizations.
7. Age-restricted housing: the age of the occupants shall be restricted
to persons where at least one member of the residential unit is at
least 55 years of age, with or without a spouse, and other members
of such person's residential unit over the age of 19 years of age;
and surviving members of that unit in the event of death of such
resident who is at least 55 years of age, subject to applicable local,
State and Federal law.
8. A maximum of 10 100% affordable housing rental apartments in a
mixed-use structure, which shall have commercial uses on the first
floor and may have commercial uses or affordable housing on other
floors.
c. Permitted Accessory Uses. Parking, signs, essential services and other
accessory uses customary incidental to the permitted uses as
determined by the approving Board.
d. Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited:
1. Any business conducted outside the confines of a building unless
specifically permitted.
2. Any industry, process of manufacture, fabrication, assembly,
disassembly, conversion or alteration of products or materials.
3. Carousels, merry-go-rounds, miniature golf, outdoor theatres, pony
tracks or other similar commercial outdoor entertainment.
§ 18-4.33 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.33
A:266
4. Junk yards, warehouses, storage buildings and fuel yards.
5. Gasoline service stations and other automobile related uses.
6. Any other use not specifically permitted as determined by the
Board.
e. Required Conditions. The following ordinance requirements must be
complied with in the TCCAH Zone District.
1. Height. The height of the principal structures shall not exceed
three stories or 38 feet except a structure devoted to age-restricted
housing that is set back 200 feet from the right-of-way may not
exceed 40 feet.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a minimum front yard of 15 feet.
3. Side Yard. There shall be a minimum side yard of 10 feet for
commercial buildings and 15 feet for the age-restricted housing
buildings.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a minimum rear yard of 25 feet.
5. Impervious Coverage. The total impervious coverage of a tract of
land (may be comprised of more than one lot) for a mix of
commercial and age-restricted housing shall not exceed 70%.
Stand-alone commercial development shall not exceed 40%.
6. Site Plan Approval. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or a
certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required, the
Planning Board shall review a site plan according to Subsections
18-4.2c and 18-4.2d of the proposed use to ascertain that all the
requirements of this section are complied with.
7. Tract Area. The minimum tract area for the mixed-use development
of commercial and age-restricted housing is 80,000 square feet.
8. Lot Area. There shall be minimum lot area of 10,000 square feet for
any commercial use including the option of apartments on the
second floor as a stand-alone project or subdivided from the tract.
9. Minimum Frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 80
feet.
10. Minimum Commercial Development. The commercial portion of the
mixed-use development shall be located along the street frontage.
A minimum of 15% of the total first floor area of the development
shall be devoted to commercial uses.
11. Age-Restricted Housing. The maximum number of age-restricted
housing units shall not exceed 55.
12. Bedroom Distribution. The maximum number of three bedroom
units shall not exceed 20% of the total units.
§ 18-4.33 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.33
A:267
§ 18-4.34. Planned Village Core District Zone. [Ord. No. 11-05 § 4;
Ord. No. 11-19]
13. Inclusionary Housing. The affordable housing set aside required for
all housing units is 20% of the units constructed.
14. Utilities. Proof of sewer allocation and water capacity are required
prior to Board approval for a mixed-use development.
15. Town Center Zone Standards. Any development within the Town
Center Commercial and Age-Restricted District (TCCAH) shall
comply with the Town Center Zones required standards set forth in
Subsection 18-4.24e9-13.
16. Parking. Parking requirements are governed by the Residential Site
Improvement Standards. Structured parking is recommended to
meet the intent and purposes of the district.
a. Purpose. Planned Village Core District Zone. The purpose of the PVC
District is to permit development of large tracts of land along Route 15,
in a planned setting. A planned development will prevent an adverse
impact on the community and enhance the existing light industrial uses,
and limit access to Route 15 in order to minimize any disruption to the
flow of traffic on Route 15 to meet the State Access Management Code.
The intent of the Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance is to reinforce the
concept of a strong central Town Center in Sparta Township, with a
complimentary Village Center, which are both consistent with the New
Jersey State Development and Redevelopment Plan. The PVC District is
intended to complement, not detract from, the commercial viability of
the Town Center area.
The PVC follows the guidelines presented in the SmartCode as a means
to regulate development in a Smart Growth fashion and is authorized
under the Municipal Land Use Law provisions for Planned Unit
Development. The primary means for regulating development in the
PVC District is the assignment of Transects.
Throughout this subsection, standards will be applied to specific
Transects. The Transects were assigned via the Master Plan and are
presented in Table 1 and Map 1.
b. Applicability. The Planned Village Core Zone only applies to a lot or lots
located in the PVC Zone under the following conditions. If minimum
conditions cannot be met, then the underlying zone requirements for
the ED/PCD Zones apply.
1. Composite minimum acreage of seven acres.
2. Access to centralized wastewater treatment and disposal.
c. Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted uses for
each Transect that make up the PVC District:
§ 18-4.33 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.34
A:268
1. Conservation Transect (T1).
(a) Park. A natural preserve available for unstructured recreation.
Its landscape shall consist of paths, and trails, meadows,
waterbodies, woodland and open shelters, all naturalistically
disposed.
(b) Playground. An open space designed and equipped for the
recreation of children that should be fenced, (four feet tall and
approved by the Board) and may include an open shelter.
Playgrounds may be included with parks and greens.
(c) Existing public utilities are permitted and are authorized to be
expanded and/or rebuilt even if totally destroyed. However,
any expansion or rebuilding shall be pursuant to the
conditional use standards set forth in Subsection 18-4.7c3.
(d) Disposal beds.
2. Mixed Residential Transect (T4).
(a) Playground. Playgrounds shall be interspersed within
residential areas and may be placed within a block.
(b) Green. An open space available for unstructured recreation. A
Green may be spatially defined by landscaping rather than
building frontages. Its landscape shall consist of lawn and
trees, naturalistically disposed.
(c) Residential single-family dwelling units.
(d) Residential duplexes, multifamily attached units, townhouses.
3. Mixed-Use Transect (T5).
(a) Plaza. An open space available for civic and commercial
activities. A plaza shall be defined by building frontages. Its
landscape shall consist primarily of pavement, with trees
optional. Plazas should be located at main intersections and
provisions for outdoor dining may be incorporated.
(b) Residential multifamily, townhouses.
(c) Mixed use buildings with residential apartments/
condominiums located above the first floor commercial.
(d) Office buildings for business, professional, executive and
administrative offices.
(e) Retail stores for the indoor sale of goods or merchandise with
seasonal sidewalk sales as approved by the subcommittee of
the Planning Board at a maximum of four times per year,
including: general stores, bakeries, cafes, dry cleaners,
financial services, florists, ice cream, personal services,
§ 18-4.34 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.34
A:269
pharmacies, sporting goods, apparel, bookstores, and home
furnishings.
(f) Restaurants where all food sold on premises is served at tables
within the restaurant.
(g) Banks and banking offices.
(h) Preschools, childcare facilities, health clubs, spas, dance
schools and karate schools.
(i) Sewer utilities.
4. Business Transect (T6).
(a) Plaza. An open space available for civic and commercial
activities. A plaza shall be defined by building frontages. Its
landscape shall consist primarily of pavement, with trees
optional. Plazas should be located at main intersections.
(b) Retail stores for the indoor sale of goods or merchandise with
seasonal sidewalk sales as approved by the subcommittee of
the Planning Board at a maximum of four times per year,
including: general stores, bakeries, cafes, financial services,
florists, ice cream, pharmacies, sporting goods, apparel,
bookstores, home furnishings.
(c) Restaurants where all food sold on premises is served at tables
within the restaurant.
(d) Specialty retail (defined as shops that cater to a specific
market, which are linked by architectural, historical or a
geographic theme and by commonality of goods. The specialty
retail center consist of smaller shops of 2,000 to 10,000 square
feet of floor area).
(e) Theaters.
(f) Convenience stores.
(g) Hotels and conference centers which may include health clubs
and spas, catering facilities and restaurants open to the public
but ancillary to the principal permitted use; access to all guest
rooms shall be via hallways from a main lobby.
(h) Medical clinics.
5. Limited Commercial Transect (SD).
(a) Plaza. An open space available for civic and commercial
activities. A plaza shall be defined by building frontages. Its
landscape shall consist primarily of pavement, with trees
optional. Plazas should be located at main intersections.
§ 18-4.34 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.34
A:270
(b) Restaurants where all food sold on premises is served at tables
within the restaurant.
(c) Hotels and conference centers which may include health clubs
and spas, catering facilities and restaurants open to the public
but ancillary to the principal permitted use; access to all guest
rooms shall be via hallways from a main lobby.
(d) Supermarkets.
(e) Banks and banking offices.
(f) Theaters.
(g) Fast food restaurants with drive through facilities.
(h) Medical clinics.
(i) Public utilities.
d. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses for the PVC Zone are assigned by
Transect. The following uses are permitted as a conditional use, but
must follow the specific criteria of the conditional use section:
1. Mixed-Use Transect (T5).
(a) Outdoor dining. In addition to meeting the standards set forth
in Subsection 18-4.7c19, outdoor sidewalk dining shall be of a
minimum of an eight foot sidewalk frontage zone.
(b) Schools and institutions.
2. Business Transect (T6).
(a) Outdoor Dining. In addition to meeting the standards set forth
in Subsection 18-4.7c19, outdoor sidewalk dining shall be of a
minimum of an eight foot sidewalk frontage zone.
e. Accessory Uses. Those uses customarily incidental to the above
including; parking structures associated with commercial spaces at the
street level, and drive through banking facilities.
f. Prohibited Uses. Any use not specifically permitted is prohibited. In
addition, the following uses are specifically prohibited in all transects of
the PVC Zone:
1. Gasoline service stations, automotive repair facilities, garages and
car washes.
2. Storage buildings including mini-storage warehousing.
3. Kennels.
4. Golf courses, driving ranges, batting cages and outdoor miniature
golf.
§ 18-4.34 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.34
A:271
5. Trucking terminals.
6. Soil removal.
7. Any business operation conducted outside the confines of a
building.
8. Any uses which directly or indirectly utilize materials listed in
N.J.A.C. 7:26-8.16, "Hazardous Constituent" pursuant to N.J.A.C.
7:26-8.16, "Hazardous Substance" pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:1E; and/or
"Hazardous Waste" pursuant to Solid Waste Regulations, N.J.A.C.
7:26-1.4 and Waste Regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:26-8.
g. Required Conditions. All planned development shall meet the following
minimum standards:
1. The planned development shall have a unified architectural and
design scheme which shall be subject to review and approval of the
Planning Board at the time of preliminary site plan approval. The
approved unified architectural and design scheme shall be
complied with by the applicant and any future developers within
the Planned Village Core. There shall be no changes to the
architectural and design scheme without a formal amendment to
the planned unit development by the applicant and approval of the
amendment by the Planning Board of the Township of Sparta. The
unified architectural and design schemes shall include a unified
architectural appearance on all the facades of the buildings and
shall provide for a common signage theme for use on the property.
2. There shall be no more than one freestanding sign identifying the
Planned Village Core at the principal entrance from Route 15 or
White Lake Road. Said freestanding sign may be located on a
foundation and shall be no greater than 32 square feet on each side
and shall not be a directory sign.
3. Transect Plan. Any planned development shall provide a Transect
Plan at the time of preliminary site plan approval demonstrating
consistency with principles of the Transect Plan presented in the
Planned Village Core Master Plan Amendment, and should also
demonstrate consistency with the Circulation Plan.
4. Landscape Plan. Any planned development shall provide a
landscape plan at the time of preliminary site plan approval setting
forth landscape buffers between adjacent industrial properties and
the planned development and within and between parking lots. The
landscape islands within the parking lots shall be located at least
every 40 parking spaces. The plan shall provide for the initial
planting of shade trees with a minimum caliper 2 1/2 inches
diameter at breast height (D.B.H.) one tree every 30 feet of a
landscape area within the parking area or on the perimeter of the
parking area and on all property boundaries.
§ 18-4.34 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.34
A:272
5. Grading Plan. Any planned development shall provide an overall
grading plan to demonstrate sufficient protection of the Germany
Flats Aquifer and shall include a hydro-geologic analysis
demonstrating conformance with NJDEP standards.
6. Phasing Plan. In the event that the PVC, Planned Village Core is to
be constructed in sections over a period of years, then the
provisions for the sewage and garbage disposal, storm drainage
and water supply and for interior roads, need to be adequate only
in respect to the sections of development which have previously
received final approval and the section of development for which
final approval is being sought. The impacts to the partial
installation of any proposed networks must be addressed for each
section seeking approval. Each section of development must meet
the required standards set forth in this subsection and must not
rely on proposed sections to meet the required standards. The
developer shall supply to the Planning Board information disclosing
such adequacy and obtain the Planning Board's approval thereof.
7. Infrastructure Impact Statement. Any planned development shall
provide an analysis of the expected impacts to area services,
including: Fire protection, Police protection, Emergency Medical
Response, as well as the local school system.
8. Green Development Checklist. Applicant is to submit a report
summarizing "green" development techniques to be implemented
in the PVC development. This report shall be based on the USGBC's
LEED ND checklist and shall document each item the applicant
intends to implement in the following categories: "Smart Location
and Linkage," "Neighborhood Pattern and Design," and "Green
Infrastructure and Buildings."
9. Lighting Plan.
10. Parking Plan.
11. Prior to the commencement of any site work and prior to the
effectiveness of any preliminary site plan approval, the applicant
shall enter into a developer's agreement with the Council of the
Township of Sparta as authorized by the Municipal Land Use Law.
The agreement shall include establishing certain minimum
conditions relating to water, septic or sewer, fire protection,
ingress to and egress from White Lake Road and Route 15, and
include: timing and rate of development, construction of private
and public improvements, performance guarantees for any
common accessways and/or public improvements, maintenance
guarantees for any common accessways or public improvements,
and such other time period or statutory protection period
applicable to the development, and such other standards and
provisions as shall be deemed appropriate by the Governing Body
of the Township of Sparta.
§ 18-4.34 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.34
A:273
12. Required Conditions for Single-Family and Duplex Residential Use.
(a) Lot Area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 5,000 square
feet.
(b) Minimum Frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of
40 feet.
(c) Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/
2 stories and 35 feet.
(d) Front Yard. There shall be a minimum front yard setback of not
less than 15 feet
(e) Side Yard. There shall be a minimum side yard of five feet.
When the lot in question is a corner lot, the side yard adjoining
the side street shall conform to the front yard setback.
(f) Rear Yard. There shall be a minimum rear yard setback of at
least 25 feet.
(g) Impervious Coverage. The maximum land area to be covered
by impervious surfaces shall not exceed 45% of the total site
area.
(h) Garages may be attached to the dwelling unit, and must
conform to the front yard setback. Detached garages are
permitted and must conform to the accessory structure
requirements.
(i) One accessory structure is permitted per lot in the rear yard
only, and must be a minimum of five feet from the rear setback
line.
(j) Decks are permitted in the rear yard only and must be a
minimum of 15 feet from the rear yard setback and eight feet
from the side yard setback.
(k) Within 800 feet of every residential lot, a civic space
designated as a playground shall be provided.
(l) No more than 25% of the overall residential units shall be
duplex units.
(m) A 20% mandatory set aside, or percentage approved by State
statute, whichever is less, of affordable housing meeting the
requirements of Subsection 18-4.2g, is required.
13. Required Conditions for Multi-Family, Townhouse Uses.
(a) Multifamily dwelling units such as townhouses, shall conform
to the maximum density of 15% of the overall residential
development, with four units maximum per building.
§ 18-4.34 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.34
A:274
(b) Building Setbacks. A minimum of 20 feet separation is required
between buildings.
(c) Front Yard Setback. There shall be a minimum front yard
setback of not less than 15 feet.
(d) Height. Height of a principal structure shall not exceed 2 1/2
stories and 35 feet.
(e) Rear Yard Setback. There shall be a minimum rear yard
setback of not less than 25 feet.
(f) A 20% mandatory set aside, or percentage approved by State
statute, whichever is less, of affordable housing meeting the
requirements of Subsection 18-4.2g, is required.
14. Required Conditions for Planned Commercial Development.
(a) Any site plan or subdivision in the zone shall include a
preliminary site plan for a planned development for the entire
area of the lot or lots owned or controlled by the applicant and
located in the PVC Zone. Certain bulk standards are not
included to permit flexibility in the planned development.
Phasing is permitted, however all access roads and related
infrastructure must be completed before the completion of
Phase I. The following requirements must be complied with:
(b) In the Planned Village Core more than one principal use may
be permitted on the same lot.
(c) Acreage Requirements. Seven acres.
(d) A minimum of 5% of the developable area shall be dedicated as
civic space.
(e) Each site plan shall contain at least one main civic space,
centrally located and dedicated as the primary outdoor
gathering place for the site.
(f) Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed
three stories and 40 feet, with the exception of a house of
worship steeple or clock towers, which shall not exceed 50
feet.
(g) Maximum Impervious Coverage. 60%.
(h) No direct access driveways shall be permitted along Route 15
or White Lake Road. The development must include an internal
circulation plan consistent with the PVC Master Plan
Amendment.
(i) Parking Standards.
§ 18-4.34 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.34
A:275
(1) The retail and office uses within a planned commercial
development shall provide one parking space for every 300
square feet of gross leasable area Other uses in the
planned commercial development shall provide parking in
accordance with the parking schedule set forth in
Subsection 18-5.3h. Parking for planned commercial
developments shall generally be located within at least
300 feet of each of the structures and uses for which the
parking is provided.
(j) Sign Requirements.
(1) One directory sign internal to the development may be
submitted and approved for each Transect. The directory
sign may be up to 32 square feet on each side.
(2) Individual businesses that have a principal entrance on the
first story may choose from the following sign types and
must follow the conditions for each individual sign type.
(i) Awning.
[a] Smallest rectangle that fully encompasses the
entire extent of letters, logo and background. The
following variations of awnings, with or without
signbands are permitted: fixed or retractable,
shed or dome awnings.
[b] Signage or signbands shall be limited to the
valance of the awning or the vertical portion of a
dome awning.
[c] No portion of the awning shall be lower than eight
feet clearance.
[d] Awnings shall be a minimum of four feet depth,
and shall not extend beyond the width of the
building or tenant space, nor encroach above the
roof line or the story above.
[e] The height of the valance or signband shall not
exceed 12 inches.
[f] Awning signs shall contain only the business
name, logo, and/or street address. Letters,
numbers and graphics shall cover no more than
70% of the valance/signband area.
[g] Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated or
backlit.
§ 18-4.34 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.34
A:276
[h] Colors shall be consistent with the uniform
architectural and design scheme of the overall
planned development.
(ii) Band.
[a] Band signs shall include only letters, background,
and an optional logo. Information shall consist
only of the name and/or logo of the business. Band
signs shall not list products, sales, or other
promotional messages, or contact information.
[b] The following band sign construction types are
permitted:
[1] Cut-Out Letters. Letters shall be individually
attached to the wall or on a separate
background panel, and shall be externally
illuminated.
[2] Flat Panel. Letters shall be printed or etched
on same surface as the background, which is
then affixed to the wall and externally
illuminated.
[3] Channel Letters by Warrant. Each letter shall
have its own internal lighting element,
individually attached to the wall or onto a
separate background panel. The letter shall
be translucent, or solid to create a backlit
halo effect.
[c] Height and width shall be measured using the
smallest rectangle that fully encompasses the
entire extent of letters, logo and background.
Height shall not exceed three feet.
[d] Band signs shall not be wider than 90% of the
width of the building facade or tenant space.
[e] Band signs shall not project vertically above the
roof line.
[f] Band signs may be illuminated from dusk to dawn
or during business. External lights shall be
shielded from direct view to reduce glare.
[g] No internal lighting shall be permitted.
[h] Band signs should be placed where the
architectural features suggest the best placement
for signage. They should be vertically aligned with
the center of an architectural feature such as a
§ 18-4.34 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.34
A:277
storefront window, entry portal, or width of a bay
or overall retail space. They shall not interrupt
or obscure these features or cause visual
disharmony.
[i] Where multiple band signs are present on a single
building (i.e. for retail tenants in a shopping
center), signage shall be coordinated in terms of
scale, placement, colors and materials.
(iii) Blade.
[a] Blade signs may be double-sided.
[b] Blade signs may encroach into the public frontage
up to four feet and shall clear the sidewalk by at
least eight feet. They shall not encroach above the
roof line nor above the bottom of the second story
window.
[c] Text and graphics on the blade sign shall be
limited to the name and/or logo of the business
Slogans, address labels, operating hours and
contact information shall not be permitted.
[d] Mounting hardware, such as supports and
brackets, may be simple and unobtrusive or
highly decorative, but shall complement the
design of the sign, the building, or both. For
buildings with multiple signs, mounting hardware
or sign shapes, sizes and colors shall be
consistent with the overall architectural and
design scheme.
[e] No internal lighting shall be permitted.
(3) Businesses and offices located on the second story are
permitted shingle type signs meeting the following
requirements:
(i) Shingle signs may be double sided.
(ii) Shingle signs may encroach into the public frontage
up to two feet and shall clear the sidewalk by at least
eight feet.
(iii) Text and graphics on the shingle sign shall be limited
to the name, logo and suite number of the business.
Slogans, full street address labels, operating hours
and contact information are not permitted.
(iv) No internal lighting shall be permitted.
§ 18-4.34 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.34
A:278
15. Evaluation Standards and Criteria. In order to foster the
attractiveness of a site designated as a Planned Village Core
Development, planned development and the surrounding
neighborhoods and thereby preserve property values, and in order
to provide an efficient road and utility network, ensure the
movement of traffic, implement comprehensive planning and better
serve the public health, safety and general welfare, the following
standards and criteria shall be utilized by the Planning Board in
reviewing all site plans and subdivision plats relating to a PVC,
planned development. These standards shall not be regarded as
inflexible requirements. They are not intended to discourage
creativity, invention and innovation.
(a) The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as
practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal and may
include the addition of trees, shrubs and/or landscaped berms.
All PVC, Planned Commercial Developments shall provide a
minimum front yard of 100 feet from Route 15 which shall be a
landscaped area dedicated to perpetual open space.
(b) Proposed buildings shall be related harmoniously to the terrain
and to other buildings in the vicinity that have a visual
relationship to the proposed buildings.
(c) The distance between buildings shall be sufficient to provide
adequate light and air.
(d) With respect to vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including
walkways, interior thoroughfares and parking, special
attention shall be given to location and number of access
points to the public streets, width of interior drives and access
points, general interior circulation, separation of pedestrian
and vehicular traffic and arrangement of parking areas that
are safe and convenient and, insofar as practicable, do not
detract from the design of proposed buildings and structures
and the neighboring properties.
(e) Special attention shall be given to property site surface
drainage so that removal of surface waters will not adversely
affect neighboring properties or the public storm drainage
system.
(f) All permanent utility lines, pipes and conduits shall be located
below ground, and all other installations and appurtenances
shall be adequately screened.
(g) The size, location, design, color, texture, lighting and materials
of all signs shall not detract from the design of proposed
buildings and structures and the surrounding properties.
(h) Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installations
(including rooftop), service areas, truck loading areas, garbage
§ 18-4.34 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.34
A:279
§ 18-4.35. PDRM-1 District Zone. [Ord. No. 12-01 § 4]
storage and disposal areas, utility buildings and structures and
similar accessory areas and structures shall be subject to such
setbacks, screen plantings or other screening methods as shall
reasonably be required to prevent their being incongruous
with the existing or contemplated environment and the
surrounding properties.
(i) Adequate provision shall be made for a centralized sewage
disposal system which shall be of sufficient size, capacity and
design to collect and dispose of all sewage from all present and
proposed buildings in the PVC, Planned Village Core and which
shall be otherwise constructed and maintained in conformity
with all applicable Federal, State, County and municipal
regulations and requirements.
(j) Adequate provision shall be made for a storm drainage and
surface water detention system which shall be of sufficient
size, capacity and design to collect, carry off and dispose of all
predictable surface water runoff within the PVC, Planned
Village Core, and which shall be otherwise constructed and
maintained in conformity with all applicable State, County and
municipal regulations and requirements.
(k) Adequate provision shall be made for a water system which
shall be of sufficient size, capacity and design to supply potable
water and fire protection to each of the buildings within the
PVC, Planned Village Core and which shall be otherwise
constructed and maintained in conformity with all applicable
State, County and municipal regulations and requirements.
(l) Adequate provision shall be made for the collection and
disposal and recycling of garbage, trash and solid waste
generated by the PVC, Planned Village Core, and such system
shall be maintained in conformity with all applicable State,
County and municipal regulations and requirements.
(m) Adequate provision shall be made for a system of interior roads
sufficient to accommodate predictable vehicular traffic within
the PVC, Planned Village Core and to ensure safe and efficient
vehicular access, including access of fire-fighting equipment to
and from each of the buildings within the PVC, Planned Village
Core. The interior thoroughfare network shall maintain
connectivity to existing roadways, White Lake Road and Route
15.
(n) Maximum Building Size. No building shall be larger than
80,000 square feet.
§ 18-4.34 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.35
A:280
a. Purpose: PDRM-1. The purpose of this zone is to allow for economic
development in the form of a planned development, which will provide
for a coordinated planned development of all the properties in the
proposed zone, and will supplement the Economic Development Zone in
a controlled manner. Uses in the zone should leverage the proximity to
major transportation routes. The planned development shall be
consistent with the Municipal Land Use Law provisions regarding
planned developments.
b. Principal Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in the
PDRM-1 District:
1. Scientific, research and development laboratories.
2. Office buildings.
3. Indoor recreational uses including gymnastics, basketball, soccer,
and other similar uses.
4. Outdoor recreation facilities.
5. Solar farms.
6. Public transportation facilities.
7. Planned Economic Development. A planned development
consistent with the Municipal Land Use Law N.J.S.A. 50:55D-65c
provisions for planned developments including the following types
of uses is a permitted use within the Planned Development
Resource Management-1 Zone:
(a) Processes of manufacture, fabrication, assembly, treatment or
packaging conversion of products.
(b) Transshipment facilities for the transfer of goods between rail
and trucks.
(c) Storage buildings, warehouses, and wholesale distribution
centers.
c. Conditional Uses.
1. Golf driving range.
2. Public utilities.
3. Soil removal operations.
d. Accessory Uses.
1. Those uses customarily incident to the above uses (i.e. storage
buildings, parking lots, etc.)
2. Farm stands and sale of agricultural products on a lot not less than
five acres.
§ 18-4.35 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.35
A:281
e. Prohibited Uses. Any use not specifically permitted is prohibited. In
addition, the following uses are specifically prohibited in the PDRM-1
Zone:
1. Gasoline service stations, automotive repair facilities, garages and
car washes.
2. Any uses which directly or indirectly utilize materials listed in
N.J.A.C. 7:1E-Appendix A, including petroleum products that are
regulated but do not appear in Appendix A, shall be expressly
prohibited. The Planning Board may give approval of a process or
material discouraged in this Zone by a majority vote of the full
membership of the Board after a review by the Environmental
Commission and public notification of a discussion on the matter
with specific reference to the process or material. Such notification
shall conform to the requirements of variance notification. Use of
de minimis quantities of hazardous materials shall be allowed
subject to explicit conditions and confirmation by the applicant that
there shall be no outside storage or disposal of hazardous materials
and no discharge of hazardous materials into the sanitary
wastewater system or septic system or onto the land.
f. Required Standards. All principal permitted uses shall meet the
following minimum standards:
1. Minimum Lot Area. A minimum lot area of 80,000 square feet.
2. Maximum Building Height. No structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories
or 35 feet.
3. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 100 feet. Offstreet parking areas as required shall be permitted in the front
yard, provided said area is at no point closer than 50 feet to any
adjoining street right-of-way line and 50 feet from residential zone
boundary line or any closer than 10 feet from the side of a building.
Parking areas shall be limited to a maximum of 25% at the front
yard area.
4. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards, each of which shall be no
less than 30 feet. Parking as required may be permitted in the side
yards, provided no parking area is closer than 10 feet to any
building or 25 feet to any residential zone boundary line or street
right-of-way.
5. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 50 feet. No building
shall be closer than 100 feet from any residential zone. The rear
yard may be used for off-street parking provided no parking area
shall be nearer than 10 feet to any building or 25 feet to any
residential zone boundary line or street right-of-way.
6. Landscaping, Landscaping shall conform to the requirement of
Subsection 18-5.3o of the design standards.
§ 18-4.35 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.35
A:282
7. Minimum Lot Width. The minimum lot width shall be 200 feet when
measured at the building setback line.
8. Lot Area Ratio. Principal and accessory buildings shall not occupy
more than 25% of the lot area. Storage and parking areas shall not
occupy more than 25% of the lot area.
9. Impervious Coverage. The total impervious coverage of any one lot
shall not exceed 40% of the total lot area.
10. New industrial subdivisions shall maintain 125-foot front yard
setback for structures and parking from Houses Corner Road,
which shall be properly landscaped with earth berms, trees, shrubs
as approved by the Board.
11. Signs — Permitted Signs in the PDRM-1 Zone:
(a) One freestanding sign may be permitted provided that the area
of the sign shall not exceed 48 square feet. Signs erected back
to back (double faced) are permitted. The freestanding sign
shall be set back at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way
line and shall not exceed 16 feet in height.
(b) The maximum area of all signs on a lot shall not exceed 100
square feet.
(c) Signs attached to a building are permitted provided the size of
any sign shall not exceed 3% of the area on which the sign is
located. The height of any said sign shall not exceed three feet
and the length shall not exceed 12 feet.
(d) In conjunction with Subsection 18-5.3m3(t), as part of any
subdivision in the PDRM-1 Zone, an overall sign plan shall be
submitted for the entire development, as well as for individual
lots where practical. This plan shall include details on directory
sign(s), directional sign(s), address signs and individual tenant
signs. There shall be a consistent design theme throughout the
development.
(e) For Sale/For Lease/For Rent Signs. One such sign to be placed
on the property is permissible provided that it does not exceed
32 square feet and a sign permit is obtained.
g. Required Standards for Planned Economic Developments. All planned
economic developments shall meet the following minimum standards:
1. Planned economic developments shall be consistent with the
Municipal Land Use Law requirements. Planned economic
developments will be consistent with the standards and intent set
forth in this Code. As part of any planned development, the
applicant shall demonstrate and the Planning Board shall find the
following facts and conclusions:
§ 18-4.35 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.35
A:283
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to
Subsection 52c of this act;
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate;
(c) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment are adequate;
(d) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is
proposed to be established;
(e) In the case of a proposed development that contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are
adequate.
2. Minimum Overall Tract Area. A minimum overall tract area of 10
acres is required.
3. The total impervious coverage on any one lot of planned
development in the PDRM-1 Zone shall not exceed 40%.
4. 150-foot buffers from all residentially zoned properties. If the
Planning Board determines that inadequate vegetation or
topography exists within this buffer, then the following shall apply:
Turf grass, low growing evergreen plants or evergreen ground
cover shall be planted within 50 feet of the property line. Two
staggered rows of evergreen canopy trees which are not less than
10 feet high at the time of planting, a minimum of two-inch caliper,
spaced not more than 30 feet apart and planted more than 50 feet
from the property line. An earthen berm shall be constructed
within 150 feet of the property line, the height and design shall be
approved by the Planning Board.
5. Rail sidings and related loading structures and equipment
proposed within the PDRM-1 Zone District to the existing railroad
lines in Germany Flats shall be allowed to cross and protrude into
the setback area for purposes of reasonably accessing the rail
service. Such areas shall be located, however, at least 200 feet from
any existing residential property lines.
6. Any buffer areas included in the open space dedication shall be
considered common open space or publicly dedicated open space
§ 18-4.35 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.35
A:284
as part of the planned development. Where rail sidings and related
loading structures and equipment are proposed within the PDRM-1
Zone District, such rail sidings and related loading structures and
equipment shall be allowed to cross the buffer area for purposes of
accessing regional rail service as approved by the Board. Fencing,
emergency and other access drives, and utility lines and pipes shall
be permitted to cross buffer areas as approved by the Board.
7. The uppermost portion of continuous areas of steep slopes shall be
buffered by 50 feet. This buffer shall be reserved for the planting of
vegetative material for screening purposes.
8. Economic development uses and soil, sand and gravel removal uses
shall not utilize any hazardous materials and shall ensure that
there is no disposal or contamination of the land or septic systems,
surface water and/or ground water by the use or disposal of
hazardous materials on the property.
9. Minimum Lot Area. A minimum lot area of 80,000 square feet shall
be required for lots within the PDRM-1 District.
10. Maximum Building Height. No structure shall exceed a height of
2 1/2 stories and 45 feet.
11. Minimum Yards. The minimum front yard shall be 100 feet, the
minimum side yard shall be 50 feet, the minimum rear yard shall be
100 feet.
12. No stormwater discharge pipes or stormwater flows shall be
directed to White Lake, Lake Grinnell or any streams draining to
White Lake or Lake Grinnell. Planned developments shall be
designed to provide for stormwater management and stormwater
infiltration without any stormwater overflows from the property in
all twenty-four-hour storm events at an average recurrence interval
of 100 years or less.
h. Vehicular Movement and Parking. Control of vehicular movement and
parking shall be provided according to the following standards:
1. Principal vehicular access shall not be provided through the
PDRM-2 Zone.
2. All traffic generated from any planned development shall not be
permitted to turn left and proceed north on Houses Corner Road.
Signage shall be installed to prohibit left turns and these
restrictions shall be enforced as a site plan condition.
3. On-site accessways, driveways, parking and loading facilities shall
be paved with all-weather dust-free surfaces or as approved by the
Planning Board.
4. Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections of public
streets. Measured along the centerline, there shall be a clear sight
§ 18-4.35 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.35
A:285
§ 18-4.36. PDRM-2 District Zone. [Ord. No. 12-01 § 4; Ord. No.
12-04; Ord. No. 13-13]
triangle of 100 feet from the point of intersection measured along
each intersecting centerline in which no vegetation or other major
visual obstruction shall be permitted in the line of sight between
streets above the height of three feet above the grade of the
intersecting streets. Accessways may not be located within 100 feet
of an intersection and shall enter a public street at no less than 90°
plus or minus 10° acute angle to the public street centerline.
5. For private access ways, a clear sight triangle measurement of 50
feet along the intersecting center lines shall be maintained as
required above. Each accessway shall not be more than 35 feet in
width measured at right angles to the centerline of the accessway,
except as increased by necessary curb return radii. Accessways
may not be located within 100 feet of an intersection, and shall
enter a public street at no less than 90°, plus or minus 10° acute
angle to the public street centerline.
6. Except wherein conflict with the three subsections above in which
case these subsections shall control, the standards of Subsection
18-5.3h shall apply.
7. Where a proposed use or building requires significant material
handling a suitable loading dock shall be constructed and such
loading areas should be constructed and such loading areas shall
be screened from view from a public right-of-way.
i. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (C.O.), each new use
or change in use in the Planned Development Resource Management-1
(PDRM-1) Zone shall be required to receive use approval from the
Planning Board to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section
and site plan ordinance standards.
a. Purpose: PDRM-2. The purpose of this zone is to allow planned
developments within the district while simultaneously protecting the
natural resources, and limiting impacts to the surrounding residential
neighborhoods. Permitted uses in the PDRM-2 will be limited to protect
the residential character of the neighboring uses. Any economic
development must be part of a planned development and must provide
adequate buffers to the adjacent residential neighborhoods. Special
care shall be taken to protect area land uses from any negative impacts
of the potential economic development.
b. Permitted Planned Development Uses. A planned development
consistent with the Municipal Land Use Law N.J.S.A. 50:55D-65c
provisions for planned developments including the following uses is a
permitted use within the Planned Development Resource
Management-2 Zone:
§ 18-4.35 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.36
A:286
1. Office buildings.
2. Data centers.
3. Indoor recreational uses including gymnastics, basketball, soccer,
and other similar uses.
4. Outdoor recreation facilities.
5. Solar energy farms.
6. Golf courses.
7. Agricultural uses.
8. Equestrian centers
9. Public parks.
10. Soil removal operations.
11. Storage buildings, warehouses and distribution centers.
c. Conditional Uses.
1. Golf driving range.
d. Accessory Uses.
1. Those uses customarily incident to the above uses (i.e. storage
buildings, parking lots, etc.)
2. Farm stands and sale of agricultural products on a lot not less than
five acres.
e. Prohibited Uses. Any use not specifically permitted is prohibited. In
addition, the following uses are specifically prohibited in the PDRM-2
Zone:
1. Gasoline service stations, automotive repair facilities, garages and
car washes.
2. Any uses which directly or indirectly utilize materials listed in
N.J.A.C. 7:1E-Appendix A, including petroleum products that are
regulated but do not appear in Appendix A, shall be expressly
prohibited. The Planning Board may give approval of a process or
material discouraged in this zone by a majority vote of the full
membership of the Board after a review by the Environmental
Commission and public notification of a discussion on the matter
with specific reference to the process or material. Such notification
shall conform to the requirements of variance notification. Use of
de minimis quantities of hazardous materials shall be allowed
subject to explicit conditions and confirmation by the applicant that
there shall be no outside storage or disposal of hazardous materials
§ 18-4.36 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.36
A:287
and no discharge of hazardous materials into the sanitary
wastewater system or septic system or onto the land.
f. Required Standards for Planned Economic Development. All planned
economic developments shall meet the following minimum standards:
1. Planned economic developments shall be consistent with the
Municipal Land Use Law requirements. Planned economic
developments will be consistent with the standards and intent set
forth in this Code. As part of any planned development, the
applicant shall demonstrate and the Planning Board shall find the
following facts and conclusions:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to
Subsection 52c of the act;
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable, and the amount location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate;
(c) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment are adequate;
(d) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is
proposed to be established;
(e) In the case of a proposed development that contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are
adequate.
2. Minimum acreage of 60 acres within the PDRM-2 District which
may or may not consist of contiguous lots.
3. No stormwater discharge pipes or stormwater flows shall be
directed to Lake Grinnell, White Lake or any streams draining to
Lake Grinnell or White Lake. Planned Developments shall be
designed to provide for stormwater management and stormwater
infiltration without any stormwater overflows from the property in
all twenty-four-hour storm events at an average recurrence interval
of 100 years or less.
4. The impervious coverage on any planned development in the
PDRM-2 zone shall be no greater than 3% of the total tract on
which the planned development is proposed. Planned
§ 18-4.36 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.36
A:288
developments on any lots within the PDRM-2 zone shall provide
for open space of at least 55% of the planned development tract
but not less than 88 acres of forest to minimize the impact to the
contiguous area of core forest. The open space shall include all
existing trees and vegetation currently located on said percentage
of the planned development tract. The open space shall be
dedicated to either a qualified open space organization or the
Township of Sparta pursuant to the open space provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43. If the land is
dedicated to the Township of Sparta on an incentive provision, it
may be utilized by the planned development applicant to increase
the impervious coverage from 3% to 5%. If the planned
development voluntarily provides for affordable housing to the
satisfaction of the Board and the Township Council, then the
impervious coverage may be increased to 7%.
5. 150-foot buffers from all residentially zoned properties. If the
Planning Board determines that inadequate vegetation or
topography exists within this buffer, then the following shall apply:
Turf grass, low growing evergreen plants or evergreen ground
cover shall be planted within 50 feet of the property line. Two
staggered rows of evergreen canopy trees which are not less than
10 feet high at the time of planting, a minimum of two-inch caliper,
spaced not more than 30 feet apart and planted more than 50 feet
from the property line. An earthen berm shall be constructed
within 150 feet of the property line, the height and design shall be
approved by the Planning Board.
6. The uppermost portion of continuous areas of steep slopes shall be
buffered by 100 feet. This buffer shall be reserved for the planting
of vegetative material for screening purposes as determined by the
Planning Board.
7. Economic development uses and soil, sand and gravel removal uses
shall not utilize any hazardous materials and shall ensure that
there is no disposal or contamination of the land or septic systems,
surface water and/or ground water by the use or disposal of
hazardous materials on the property.
8. Minimum Lot Area. A minimum lot area of six acres shall be
required for individual lots created as part of a Planned
Development.
9. Maximum Building Height. No structure shall exceed a height of
2 1/2 stories and 45 feet.
10. Minimum Yards. The minimum front yard shall be 100 feet, the
minimum side yard shall be 50 feet, the minimum rear yard shall be
100 feet.
11. Principal and accessory buildings shall not occupy more than 8% of
the lot area, uncovered storage and parking areas shall not occupy
§ 18-4.36 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.36
A:289
more than 12% of the lot area, and the total impervious coverage
shall not exceed 15% of the lot area. In a planned development
of more than 250 acres, principal and accessory buildings shall
not occupy more than 15% of the lot area, uncovered storage, and
parking areas shall not occupy more than 15% of the total lot area,
and the total impervious coverage shall not exceed 25% of the lot
area.
12. Signs — Permitted Signs in the PDRM-2 Zone.
(a) One freestanding sign may be permitted provided that the area
of the sign shall not exceed 48 square feet. Signs erected back
to back (double faced) are permitted. The freestanding sign
shall be set back at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way
line and shall not exceed 16 feet in height.
(b) The maximum area of all signs on a lot shall not exceed 100
square feet.
(c) Signs attached to a building are permitted provided the size of
any sign shall not exceed 3% of the area on which the sign is
located. The height of any said sign shall not exceed three feet
and the length shall not exceed 12 feet.
(d) In conjunction with Subsection 18-5.3m3(t), as part of any
subdivision in the PDRM-2 Zone, an overall sign plan shall be
submitted for the entire development, as well as for individual
lots where practical. This plan shall include details on directory
sign(s), directional sign(s), address signs and individual tenant
signs. There shall be a consistent design theme throughout the
development.
(e) For Sale/For Lease/For Rent Signs. One such sign to be placed
on the property is permissible provided that it does not exceed
32 square feet and a sign permit is obtained.
g. Vehicular Movement and Parking. Control of vehicular movement and
parking shall be provided according to the following standards:
1. Soil removal, storage buildings, warehouses and distribution
center uses shall be accessed through the PDRM-1 Zone via an
internal road except for an initial phase of soil removal. An initial
phase of soil removal may be approved with a driveway accessing
Houses Corner Road and shall comply with the following
conditions:
(a) The area of operations for excavation shall not exceed a total of
five acres.
(b) Total soil removal may not exceed 50,000 tons per year for no
more than three years and one three-year extension which may
§ 18-4.36 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.36
A:290
be granted by the Planning Board after the second year but
before the end of the initial three year period.
(c) Soil removal activities shall be conducted between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and shall not
be conducted on the following holidays: (1) New Year's Day; (2)
Memorial Day; (3) Independence Day; (4) Labor Day; (5)
Thanksgiving Day; (6) Christmas Day.
(d) Tree removal shall not impact areas of core forest.
(e) Shall comply with all applicable standards set forth in
Subsection I of this subsection.
2. All traffic generated from any planned development shall not be
permitted to turn left and proceed north on Houses Corner Road.
Signage shall be installed to prohibit left turns and these
restrictions shall be enforced as a site plan condition.
3. On-site accessways, driveways, parking and loading facilities shall
be paved with all-weather dust-free surfaces or as approved by the
Planning Board.
4. Proper sight lines shall be maintained at all intersections of public
streets. Measured along the centerline, there shall be a clear sight
triangle of 100 feet from the point of intersection measured along
each intersecting centerline in which no vegetation or other major
visual obstruction shall be permitted in the line of sight between
streets above the height of three feet above the grade of the
intersecting streets. Accessways may not be located within 100 feet
of an intersection and shall enter a public street at no less than 90°
plus or minus 10° acute angle to the public street centerline.
5. For private accessways, a clear sight triangle measurement of 50
feet along the intersecting center lines shall be maintained as
required above. Each accessway shall not be more than 35 feet in
width measured at right angles to the centerline of the accessway,
except as increased by necessary curb return radii. Accessways
may not be located within 100 feet of an intersection, and shall
enter a public street at no less than 90°, plus or minus 10° acute
angle to the public street centerline.
6. Except wherein conflict with the three subsections above in which
case these subsections shall control, the standards of Subsection
18-5.3h shall apply.
7. Where a proposed use or building requires significant material
handling a suitable loading dock shall be constructed and such
loading areas should be constructed and such loading areas shall
be screened from view from a public right-of-way.
§ 18-4.36 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.36
A:291
h. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (C.O.), each new use
or change in use in the Planned Development Resource Management-2
(PDRM-2) Zone shall be required to receive use approval from the
Planning Board to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section
and site plan ordinance standards.
i. Required Standards for Soil Removal Operations as Part of a Planned
Development. In addition to the standards for planned developments
provided in the Municipal Land Use Law, the removal of soil as part of a
planned development conducted independently or conducted in
conjunction with other permitted use shall adhere to the following
standards:
1. The applicant for a soil removal use shall submit and obtain site
plan approval from the Board of the proposed soil removal and a
preliminary site plan showing the final grading and future use of
the property for the planned development and the soil removal
plans shall be designed to cut and grade the property to form the
final grading of the planned development uses.
2. An application to the Planning Board shall be accompanied by a
map or maps showing existing contour lines at two-foot intervals,
an aerial photograph of the site, proposed contour lines at two-foot
intervals after removal of the soil, and existing structures on the
subject premises and within 200 feet of the property, location of top
soil storage areas, methods of controlling silting of downstream
properties. The application shall also indicate the total number of
cubic yards to be removed and the length of time within which the
proposed operation shall be completed. Where a total project is not
capable of being completed within five years, it shall be broken
down into sections, each section shall be completed within five
years.
3. Soil removal activities shall not result in the creation of a lake,
pond, hole, pit or similar type of depression, except for as needed
for the control and management of stormwater and sediment as
approved by the Board.
4. The owner or person in charge shall so conduct the operation that
there shall be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions, and in such
manner that the area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of
debris, including boulders and graded to conform with the contour
lines and grades as required and shown on the approved plan.
5. Arable soil within eight inches of the surface shall not be removed
from the premises but promptly on completion of operations, or as
otherwise directed by the Planning Board, the arable soil so
retained shall be respread on the surface as uniformly as possible
and seeded with winter rye or other suitable planting. If the soil
within eight inches of the top is not arable soil, arable soil must be
spread thereon promptly when the operation is completed in each
§ 18-4.36 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.36
A:292
such area. Provisions must be made for adequate drainage after
the top soil is replaced. In addition to the above, a landscaping plan
will be provided to return the land to a suitable state.
6. Soil removal shall not be deposited or in any way thrown or placed
upon adjoining property or public roads. Any soil or material
resulting from any such operation accumulating on any adjoining
property or public road shall be removed therefrom immediately
upon notice by the Construction Official or other designated official
to the owner of such accumulation.
7. All operations shall be conducted in strict accordance with any
State law or other ordinances of the Township and the terms and
conditions of any approval granted for such operations.
8. The operation shall be so conducted as not to constitute a nuisance
to adjoining owners or the Township and in no event shall said
operation create any hazardous or unsafe conditions with regard to
any person or persons.
9. Upon completion of an operation or of excavation from an area
delineated on the approved plan, said area shall be properly leveled
off, cleared of debris, graded to conform to the contours and grades
as approved by the Planning Board and trees planted in accordance
with the plan approved by the Planning Board. All roads which may
have been damaged shall be returned to their original condition.
10. While working an area, the working face of the excavation shall not
exceed 60° from the horizontal, nor shall a face have a vertical
height exceeding 30 feet. Any face not currently being worked on
shall not exceed 30° from the horizontal. Where an excavated area
adjoins a public road or road which has been dedicated to the
public, no excavation shall be made below the level of the road for a
distance of 100 feet from the right-of-way of said road except in
such instances where, on the low side of the road, the removal of
material would not substantially alter the general terrain
characteristics. Where an excavated area is within 50 feet of any
building, the finished grade thereof shall not exceed 10% or be less
than 2%. In any event, no finished grade shall exceed 10% or be
less than 2%. Care should be taken so that there shall be no
diversion of surface water either during the operation or after the
project is complete.
11. No trash, garbage, junk or debris may be stored on the subject
property and no safety hazards will be permitted, either during or
after the completion of operations. There shall be no burning of
combustible debris resulting from said soil operation.
12. Each operator shall annually furnish a progress report to the
Township Engineer, the first of which shall be submitted nine
months after approval of the application, which shall Consist of a
sketch map at a scale of one inch to 100 feet showing contours at
§ 18-4.36 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.36
A:293
two foot intervals, retained arable soil, equipment, the areas where
soil was removed, the location of water supply and disposal
facilities, and drainage facilities, prepared and certified by a
licensed professional engineer.
13. Hours of operation shall be limited to the following: 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays, except between Memorial
Day weekend through Labor Day weekend, when operations shall
occur only 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and
Thursdays, with no operations during the week of July 4 (if July 4
falls on a Saturday, there will be no operations the prior five days; if
July 4 falls on a Sunday, there will be no operations the following
five days). Additionally, operations shall not be conducted on New
Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
14. In order to minimize the possibility of mud slides or drainage of silt,
the area of operations for excavation shall not exceed a total of five
acres at any one time without a replacement of top soil and
reseeding of the premises unless otherwise permitted by the
Township for good cause shown.
15. Upon the completion of work in any specific area, all respreading of
arable soil and reseeding as required by this chapter shall be
completed within 60 days thereafter; except that, if the completion
of work in an area occurs during the winter months when it would
not be practicable to respread top soil and reseed same, such work
shall be completed within such additional time as may be specified
by the Township.
16. The soil removal use shall not excavate below the grade of the site
plan of the planned development use and shall not excavate to an
elevation lower than 20 feet above the seasonal high water table. At
least 20 feet of native soil shall be maintained above the seasonal
high water table for water quality protection. The vertical buffer
may be reduced to no less than 20 feet.
17. All soil removal activities shall be 300 feet from all residentially
zoned properties. If the Planning Board determines that inadequate
vegetation or topography exists within this buffer, then the
following shall apply: turf grass, low growing evergreen plants or
evergreen ground cover shall be planted within 50 feet of the
property line. Two staggered rows of evergreen canopy trees which
are not less than 10 feet high at the time of planting, a minimum of
two-inch caliper, spaced not more than 30 feet apart and planted
more than 50 feet from the property line. An earthen berm shall be
constructed within 150 feet of the property line. An eight-foot high
security fence shall be installed within 250 feet of the property line.
18. Soil removal activities may encroach to within 100 feet of other
PDRM-2 zoned properties. This buffer may be reduced to zero
provided there is an internal road through the PDRM-1 Zone.
§ 18-4.36 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.36
A:294
19. All soil removal activities must be conducted a minimum of 300 feet
from any water body.
20. Soil removal activities shall be surrounded by security fencing
located at the interior limits of any required setbacks.
21. All enhanced (vegetative or earthen berms) buffers and fencing
must be in place prior to the commencement of soil removal
activities.
22. Soil removal end uses may reduce the soil removal enhanced buffer
to 150 feet from residentially zoned properties.
23. Any buildings, structures, and pavement areas associated with
sand and gravel removal shall conform with the bulk, area and
related dimensional requirements of the PDRM District, except that
equipment (whether fixed to the ground or mobile) which is related
to the sand and gravel removal operation shall be allowed to
exceed the maximum building height limit by up to 30 feet.
24. The soil extraction and removal site plan shall specify the
equipment that may be used and the applicant shall demonstrate
that the use, operations, and performance of the use and
equipment will comply with the ordinances of the Township of
Sparta and all statutes and regulations of the United States of
America and the State of New Jersey.
25. The soil removal activities shall not include any blasting of rock,
removal of consolidated rock or crushing or processing of rock.
26. Any of the conditions or regulations contained herein may be
modified or waived by the Planning Board under the following
conditions:
(a) Where the applicant can show undue hardship by reason of
topography, grade or other special conditions; or
(b) Where clear evidence is presented showing that the imposition
of such requirements would be detrimental to the public
interest; or
(c) Where it can be shown that the intended purpose of the
Township in establishing such requirements can be achieved
through other means; or
(d) Where the data required is obtainable or available to the
Township from other sources; or
(e) Where it can be demonstrated that the financial costs to the
applicant or owner in order to meet said requirements would
impose an undue burden or hardship in comparison to the
volume of business being conducted, provided said volume is
equal to or less than 75 cubic yards in any two-year period.
§ 18-4.36 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.36
A:295
27. Upon action to the Planning Board pursuant to the provisions of
this section, the applicant shall pay a fee to cover the cost of the
initial review of the proposed soil removal operation as stipulated
in the Revised Ordinances of the Township of Sparta entitled "Fees
and Costs." Upon approval of any application, the applicant shall
pay a permit fee as follows:
(a) Up to and including 500 cubic yards — $50.
(b) Above 500 cubic yards — $100 plus a sum computed at a rate
of $0.03 per cubic yard multiplied by the number of cubic yards
to be removed.
These fees will cover the additional costs of the Township for
inspectors as well as any additional or extraordinary costs or expenses
necessitated by operation.
28. Upon approval of the application, the applicant shall file and
maintain a bond in form and with surety approved by the Township
Attorney in such amount as in the opinion of the Township Engineer
shall be sufficient to insure the faithful performance of the work to
be undertaken pursuant to the conditions of the approval and the
terms thereof. The bond shall be in an amount of not less than
$6,000 per acre of land which is actually being worked in
accordance with the approved plan. Said bond shall cover the
respreading of top soil as required by the provisions of this section
and also final provisions for drainage of the site and grading to final
contour. This bond may be increased from time to time where, in
the opinion of the Township Engineer, conditions and price
increases warrant such increases.
29. The amount of any performance bond or guarantee may be reduced
when portions of the improvements or works have been completed,
upon recommendation of the Township Engineer.
30. When all required performance has been completed, the obligor
shall notify the Township Manager or his designee in writing by
certified or registered mail of the completion thereof and shall send
a copy thereof to the Township Engineer. The Township Manager or
his designee shall authorize the Township Engineer to inspect the
site to determine that all requirements of the approved plan have
been carried out. The Township Engineer shall thereupon file a
report in writing with the Township Manager which shall be
detailed and shall recommend approval, partial approval or
rejection. If the work covered by the bond or performance
guarantee or any portion thereof shall not be approved, or shall be
rejected by the Township Engineer, said report shall contain a
statement of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection. Where said
rejection indicates partial approval of said improvements of works,
it shall indicate the costs of the work for which approval is denied.
The Township Manager shall accept or reject the work, grant
§ 18-4.36 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.36
A:296
§ 18-4.37. Town Center Main Street Business Zone (TCMSB). [Ord.
No. 2016-21 § 4]
partial approval or withhold approval on the basis of such report
and shall notify the obligor in writing by certified or registered
mail of the contents of said report and the action of the Township
Manager with relation thereto not later than 90 days after receipt
of notice from the obligor of the completion of the work. Where
partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be released from all
liability pursuant to his performance guaranty bond except for that
portion sufficient to secure the work not yet approved.
31. After reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard before the
Planning Board, an application may be revoked or suspended for
such period as the Board may determine for any violation of the
terms hereof or the terms and conditions of any plan approved
hereunder.
32. In addition to an action on the bond or guarantee, or the revocation
of approval provided for herein, any person who violates this
chapter, or any director or officer who permits or participates in a
violation of this chapter or the conditions of the approval shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,250
or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or both in the discretion of
the judge before whom such conviction is had. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation hereof.
a. Purpose and General Requirements for All Uses in TCMSB Zone. The
TCMSB Zone is a district in which professional office, specialty retail,
service uses, multifamily residential uses and mixed uses of any
permitted uses are allowed. Site plans and building shall be designed in
a manner that will preserve and mimic the rural and historic character
of the area and the Township, preserve the tax base of the Township and
promote the viability of the existing and future commercial areas in the
central business district, promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare, provide adequate open space and preserve
environmentally sensitive lands such as freshwater wetlands, transition
areas, severe slopes and woodlands, promote development in harmony
with the existing Town Center by maintaining the scale, form and
proportions of the adjacent and nearby R-4 and the Town Center Zones.
The TCMSB Zone, therefore, promotes the establishment of
appropriate office, service uses, specialty retail, multifamily residential
uses and mixed uses of permitted uses at appropriate locations in
accordance with their respective environmental requirements. The
TCMSB Zone promotes a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques including unified design, conservation of open
space and prevention of urban sprawl. Demolition or partial demolition
of any structures in the TCMSB Zone shall comply with Subsection
18-4.2 regarding Historic Preservation. A primary consideration in
§ 18-4.36 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.37
A:297
reviewing the suitability of a proposed use is preservation of the
character of the existing buildings within the zone to accomplish the
following goals of the Township of Sparta:
1. To preserve the resources within the Main Street corridor which
reflect the elements of the architectural history.
2. To encourage the continued use of the existing buildings and to
encourage appropriate reuse.
3. To maintain the character of the neighborhood and architecturally
significant buildings.
4. To manage change by preventing alteration or new construction
not in keeping with the zone.
5. To discourage the unnecessary demolition of historic resources and
to encourage renovations and modifications and additions on new
structures which preserve front facades and streetscape
appearance.
b. Principal Permitted Uses.
1. Professional offices.
2. Specialty retail.
3. Public buildings and uses.
4. Cafes/Restaurants without drive through service.
5. Studios/Galleries.
6. Bed and breakfast inns. See definition (Subsection 18-2.1).
7. Multifamily units with mixed uses (mixes of multifamily with other
permitted or conditional uses) in existing buildings or additions and
new buildings.
8. Shared parking with interconnected driveways. Shared parking
arrangements may be approved by the Board to waive or defer
implementation of parking spaces based on demonstrations to the
Board of adequate parking spaces on site or off site.
9. Houses of worship and churches.
c. Conditional Uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
within the TCMSB Zone subject to site plan approval and consideration
of the impact of said use on the neighborhood as outlined in Section
18-4.7c, Application for a Permitted Conditional Use.
1. Essential services pursuant to standards set forth in Subsection
18-4.7c18.
d. Accessory Uses.
§ 18-4.37 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.37
A:298
1. Home occupation.
2. Swimming pools, tennis courts, gate houses, community rooms,
and any other accessory structures incidental to the principal use.
3. Tool shed, maintenance structures, and utilities.
4. Private garages.
5. Decks.
6. Parking lots and shared parking lots.
e. Prohibited Uses.
1. Uses which are not permitted uses, conditional uses or accessory
uses are hereby prohibited.
2. Beauty salons, hair cutting, and nail salons.
3. Fueling stations and automobile services.
4. Tattoo parlors.
5. Dry cleaners.
6. Motorized vehicle dealerships.
7. Convenience stores.
8. Discount stores.
f. Required Standards.
1. Height. The height of a principal structure shall not exceed 45 feet
or 3 1/2 stories, whichever is less. Existing structures with height
greater than 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories may be modified or enlarged
with the same height as the existing height. Conversions, additions
and new buildings containing one or more affordable units may be
up to 3 1/2 stories high and up to 45 feet in height.
2. Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet.
3. Side Yard. There shall be two side yards which shall not be less
than 15 feet each. When the lot in question is a corner lot, the side
yard adjoining the side street shall conform to the front yard
setback.
4. Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of at least 50 feet.
5. Land Coverage. The maximum land area to be covered by all
impervious surfaces shall not exceed 15% of the total site area for
properties served by a septic system, and 40% for properties
connected to the Sparta sewer and water systems. If the lot is
connected to the Sparta water and sewer system and provides at
least one affordable housing unit, the impervious coverage may be
§ 18-4.37 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-4.37
A:299
increased to 50% as an incentive to the mandatory set aside for
affordable housing. Impervious coverage may be increased up to
60% if two units of affordable housing are provided on site.
6. Minimum Frontage. Minimum frontage at the right-of-way line
shall be 75 feet. Minimum lot width at the building line shall be 100
feet. Minimum frontage on the turnaround at the end of a
permanent cul-de-sac shall be 65 feet and the minimum width at
the building line shall be 85 feet.
7. Single family residential structures constructed prior to October 1,
1992 may be expanded provided the structure conforms to the
required yard setback requirements of the R-4 Zone and may be
rebuilt if totally or partially destroyed.
8. Streetscape. All properties with frontage on Main Street, the
connector and parallel service road to Main Street shall provide
streetscape improvements consistent with the Town Center Master
Plan including but not limited to the following:
(a) Street trees every 40 feet or as deemed appropriate by the
Board after review of the landscape plan.
(b) Decorative street lighting, spacing as required.
(c) Sidewalks.
(d) Concrete paver/utility strip.
(e) Benches.
(f) Trash and recycling receptacles.
9. New office, service, specialty retail, and multifamily units with
mixed uses shall include features to promote harmony with the
character of the existing Town Center scale, form, and proportions
of the Town Center Zones. Building additions, renovations and
alterations shall have a historic character consistent in appearance
with the goals of 1997 Town Center Master Plan Amendment.
10. New buildings or conversions of existing buildings may also have
mixed uses of multifamily units with office and/or specialty retail
uses. The number of multifamily units may be up to six dwelling
units per acre provided 20% of the units are affordable units in
accordance with the Township's Affordable Housing Ordinances,
COAH rules and the New Jersey Uniform Affordable Housing
Controls (UHAC) rules and at least 13% of affordable units shall be
affordable to very low income households.
11. New construction must connect to available infrastructure.
12. Distance between unattached buildings shall not be closer than 30
feet to any other building situated on the same lot.
§ 18-4.37 SPARTA CODE § 18-4.37
A:300
§ 18-5. SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN STANDARDS. [Ord. No. 772
§ XVII]
All subdivisions and site plans shall meet the following standards.
§ 18-5.1. Natural Systems. [Ord. No. 636 A 501, 502; Ord. No. 649;
Ord. No. 665; Ord. No. 691 § XXI; Ord. No. 841 §§ XLIV, XLV]
13. More than one principal building and use are allowed on the same
lot.
a. Severely Restricted Lands. No buildings shall be permitted in lands
which are classified as severely restricted. Severely restricted lands are
described as follows:
1. Severely restricted lands contain soils subject to flooding in a storm
classified as 100-year frequency by the State of New Jersey
(N.J.S.A. 58:16A-1 et seq. 1966) or by the United States Army,
Corps of Engineers; also included are soils with a seasonal high
water table at or near the surface as observed during field
investigation or as denoted in the Soil Conservation Service Soils
Interpretation for Sussex County, New Jersey, including but not
limited to the following soil series:
Soil Series Depth of Water Table
Alluvial land Frequent flooding
Atherton loam Seasonal high water table at
surface
Carlisle muck Frequent flooding
Fredon loam 0-1 foot
Halsy loam Seasonal high water table at
surface
Livingston silty clay loam Seasonal high water table at
surface
Lyon silt loam Seasonal high water table at
surface
Norwich silt loam Seasonal high water table at
surface
Preakness Seasonal high water table at
surface
Raynham silt loam 0 to 1 1/2 feet
Sloan & Wayland silt loam Frequent flooding
Swamp Seasonal high water table at
surface
§ 18-4.37 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.1
A:301
Soil Series Depth of Water Table
Whitman extremely stony sandy
loam
Seasonal high water table at
surface
2. Slopes 25% or greater shall also result in a severely restricted
classification.
3. If 40% or more of a unit coverage area contains least or moderately
restricted land conditions, the unit shall be considered to be
located within moderately restricted lands. The slope conditions
shall be determined based on topographic information at two-foot
contour intervals obtained from aerial survey information or field
measurements.
4. A developer of a tract of land with least, moderate and/or severe
land classification may not transfer permitted density from isolated
least and moderate land areas on a single tract to the primary
building area on the same tract without the expressed approval of
the Planning Board.
b. Moderately Restricted Lands. Building coverage within moderately
restricted lands shall not exceed 15% of the total moderate and
severely restricted land. Moderately restricted lands are described as
follows:
1. Moderately restricted lands contain soils subject to a seasonal high
water table within one to three feet of the surface as observed
during field investigation or as denoted in the Soil Conservation
Service Soils Interpretation of Sussex County, New Jersey,
including but not limited to the following soil series:
Soil Series Depth of Water Table
Braceville gravelly sandy loam 1 1/2 to 3 feet
Hero loam 1 1/2 to 3 feet
Hibernia 1/2 to 1 1/2 feet (perched)
Middlebury loam 1 1/2 to 2 1/2 feet
Pompton fine sand loam 1 to 2 feet
Wurtsboro gravelly loam 1 1/2 to 2 1/2 feet
2. Moderately restricted lands shall also include land with soils
considered to have a shallow bedrock of a depth of zero to 3.5 feet
below the surface as observed during field investigation or as
denoted in the Soil Conservation Service Soils Interpretation of
Sussex County, New Jersey. Moderately restricted lands shall
include but are not limited to the following soil series:
§ 18-5.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.1
A:302
Soil Series
Depth to
Repack
Percent of
Outcrop
Nassau rocky silt loam 1 to 1 1/2 feet —
Nassau rock outcrop
complex
— 15 to 25%
Oquaga extremely stony
loam
2 to 3 1/2 feet —
Oquaga rock outcrop
association
— 10 to 20%
Rockaway rock outcrop
association
— 25 to 40%
Rock outcrop Nassau
association
— 30 to 60%
Rock outcrop Rockaway
association
— 70 to 90%
Rock outcrop Oquaga — 40 to 60%
Wassaic silt loam 1 1/2 to 3 1/2
feet
—
Wassaic rock outcrop
association
— 20 35%
3. In addition, areas with forest coniferous or mixed forest as
delineated on Map No. 5 of the Master Plan and confirmed by site
investigation, or slope conditions of 15% to 24%, shall result in
moderately restricted classification.
4. If 40% or more of a unit coverage area contains least restricted
lands, the unit shall be considered to be located within least
restricted lands. The slope conditions shall be determined based on
topographic information at two-foot contour intervals obtained
from aerial survey information or field measurements.
5. A developer of a tract of land with least, moderate and/or severe
land classification may not transfer permitted density from isolated
least and moderate land areas on a single tract to the primary
building area on the same tract without the expressed approval of
the Planning Board.
c. Least Restricted Lands. Least restricted lands do not exhibit most of the
restrictions for severely restricted, Subsection a, and moderately
restricted lands, Subsection b. They represent sites with the least
natural restrictions upon development.
A developer of a tract of land with least, moderate, and/or severe land
classification may not transfer permitted density from isolated least and
§ 18-5.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.1
A:303
§ 18-5.2. Public Facilities. [Ord. No. 636 A 503; Ord. No. 649; Ord.
No. 665; Ord. No. 691 § XXII]
moderate land areas on a single tract to the primary building area on
the same tract without the expressed approval of the Planning Board.
d. Underground Aquifers, Aquifer Recharge Areas and Surface Water
Bodies.
1. Sewage effluent disposal systems other than individual inground
septic shall be designed and constructed to meet the standards set
forth in Subsection 18-5.3 and shall be consistent with the
approved wastewater management plan to minimize adverse
environmental impacts on surface and subsurface water resources.
2. Impervious cover in areas designed as prime aquifers or aquifer
recharge areas by the Subsurface Geology Map of Sparta Township
shall be kept to a minimum. In addition, a storm water drainage
system that promotes the recharge of water into these systems
shall be designed.
3. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and techniques
shall be designed and constructed so that during the construction
phases and into the post construction phases of the project,
sedimentation and siltation of existing water surface bodies will be
kept to a minimum.
e. Scenic and Historic Resources.
1. Development in or near areas designated as possessing unique
scenic resources shall be so designed as to preserve these
resources.
2. All applications for development should, to the greatest extent
practicable, minimize development impact on areas having historic
or archaeological significance.
a. Official Road Map. (Reserved for future use).
b. Municipal Infrastructure. It is the goal of the Township that impacts of
new developments on public facilities such as the transportation
systems, drainage systems, pedestrian networks, educational facilities,
recreational facilities, water systems, sewage disposal systems, and
other publicly provided systems, services and facilities will be either
within the carrying capacity of these systems or that the development
will contribute their pro rata share for improvements or the upgrading
of the facility. The Official Map, the Master Plan and the Capital
Improvement Program of Sparta Township delineate planned system,
facility and service carrying capacity improvements. These documents
should be used to evaluate developer contributions and development
constraints. Additional carrying capacity improvements may be
necessitated by development proposals and these will be carefully
§ 18-5.1 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.2
A:304
§ 18-5.3. Design Standards. [Ord. No. 636 A 504; Ord. No. 649; Ord.
No. 664; Ord. No. 691 §§ XXIII — XXVII; Ord. No. 697 § 1; Ord. No.
714 §§ I, II; Ord. No. 720 § XI; Ord. No. 744 § 1; Ord. No. 750 § 6;
Ord. No. 758 §§ I — IV; Ord. No. 841 § XLVI; Ord. No. 878 § 4; Ord.
No. 1003 § 4; Ord. No. 02-20 §§ 16, 17; Ord. No. 04-05 § 19; Ord. No.
06-13 § 2; Ord. No. 07-26 §§ 2, 3]
evaluated before development proposals are approved. The following
items describe critical public facilities and methods by which the
Township and applicant will evaluate development proposals. (See also
Subsection a.)
1. Traffic. The peak hour traffic generation should be calculated for
the development in question. Once this is done, these numbers
should be added to traffic counts for the critical intersections
affected by the development and a determination of impact upon
the carrying capacity of the critical intersections and roadways
determined. Any planned improvements for new improvements
necessitated by the development should be costed out by the
applicant and pro rated share determined by ratio of existing traffic
to post development traffic.
2. Schools. The number of school children generated by the
application must be looked at in relationship to the carrying
capacity of the school facilities available. Bus routes, student pick
up points and walking districts must be evaluated.
3. Storm Water. Storm water calculation methods and design
standards are contained in Subsection 18-5.3f, Design Standards,
Storm Drainage. Down stream impact calculations are essential
and the capacity of down stream drainage structures or natural
systems to handle increased storm water runoff are essential.
4. Pedestrian Network. Both external and internal pedestrian flows
must be calculated as to safety and provisions made for convenient
pedestrian circulation. (See Subdivision and Site Plan Standards,
Subsection 18-5.3e).
5. Recreational Facilities. Resident needs for recreation and social
intercourse must be planned for and considered in development
proposals. Association meeting places, tot lots, passive and active
recreation areas all must be considered and may be required by the
Township on a reasonable pro rata share basis for each developer.
a. Blocks.
1. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be
such as to accommodate the size of the lot required by the Zoning
Ordinance and to provide adequately for sewage disposal and
convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
§ 18-5.2 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:305
2. Pedestrian sidewalks and crosswalks may be required in locations
deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
b. Lots.
1. Front, side, and rear yards and total area shall not be less than the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and shall provide a
conforming building site.
2. Where building is impracticable on a particular lot because of the
topography, rock conditions, sewage disposal problems or
drainage, the area shall be incorporated into adjoining lots.
3. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
4. Where land has been or will be dedicated for widening of existing
rights-of-way, lots shall begin at the new right-of-way line and yard
requirements shall be measured from such line.
5. Each lot (in the proposed subdivision) shall have the minimum
required frontage abutting upon an approved street.
6. Where there is a question of the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood
conditions, high water table, freshwater wetlands, sewage
disposal, excessive topographic slope or similar circumstances, the
Planning Board (or Zoning Board of Adjustment) may, after
adequate investigation, with professional assistance if deemed
necessary, withhold approval of such lots.
c. Roads and Streets.
1. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate
extension of existing streets, and where necessary in order to
promote the orderly flow of traffic and for the safety, welfare and
convenience of the public, shall be such as to provide for the
appropriate extension to adjoining properties.
2. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
3. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal
service road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting or
some means of separation of through and local traffic as the
Planning Board may determine appropriate.
4. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line
and shall be the following widths:
(a) Local arterial streets: 60 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 50 feet.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:306
(c) Local streets and dead-end streets: 50 feet.
5. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets
shall be approved except where the control and disposal of land
comprising such strips has been placed in control of the Township
Council under conditions approved by the Planning Board.
6. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform with widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map,
or the street width requirements of this chapter, shall dedicate
additional width along either one or both sides of the road. If the
subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width
shall be dedicated.
7. Grade of local arterial and collector streets shall not exceed a
grade of 12%. No road shall have a minimum grade of less than
0.5%.
8. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
9. A tangent shall be introduced between reverse curves. The tangent
required shall be determined based on design speed of the road in
accordance with A.A.S.H.O. Standards.
10. A horizontal curve shall be provided at any point along a street
where the centerline deflects. The centerline radius of a horizontal
curve of not less than 150 feet for local and collector streets shall
be provided. The minimum centerline radius for a local arterial
street shall be not less than 508 feet.
11. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of
sufficient length to provide a smooth transition and proper sight
distance as approved by the Township Engineer, and in accordance
with A.A.S.H.O. Standards.
12. Dead-end streets (cul-de-sac) shall not serve more than 15 single
family dwelling units and shall provide a turnaround at the end
with a paved radius of 42 feet and a right-of-way radius of 50 feet. A
cul-de-sac turnaround shall serve not more than three driveways
and shall be provided with a twenty-foot by ten-foot snow removal
easement beyond the right-of-way line on each lot fronting a cul-desac. A dead-end street or combination of streets shall not exceed a
total length of 1,800 feet.
13. Where the dead-end street is of temporary nature due to the
construction phasing of a subdivision, a turnaround as outlined in
Subsection 12 must be provided and provisions shall be made for
the future extension of the street and reversion of the excess rightof-way to the adjoining properties.
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:307
14. No street or development shall have a name which will duplicate or
so nearly duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing
streets. The continuation of an existing street shall have the same
name.
15. Design standards for streets, in any subdivision or site plan shall
meet the minimum requirements as shown on the Table entitled
"Minimum Road Design Standards for Road Acceptance", which is
an appendix hereto and hereby declared to be a part of this
chapter.
14
16. All local and collector streets shall be constructed with granite
block or concrete curbs.
17. Beam guide rail shall be provided along a street when the
embankment exceeds a depth of five feet below the roadway. Guide
rail may be waived if the embankment slope is 4:1 or greater and if
approved by the Township Engineer.
d. Intersection Standards.
1. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than 60°.
2. The corners at an intersection shall be rounded with a curb return
which provides for a curbline having a radius of not less than 35
feet.
3. Intersections shall have unobstructed sight along both streets and
across the included corner. Sight triangle easements shall be
required and shall consist of the area bounded by the right-of-way
lines and straight line connecting sight points on the street center
lines which are measured from the intersection of the street center
lines. The sight point on a local and collector street shall be 90 feet
from the intersection of the center lines and sight points on the
through collector or arterial streets shall be 300 feet from the
intersection of the street center lines.
4. Where new streets or roads connect with local arterial streets,
acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided. The design
of the acceleration-deceleration lanes shall be designed in
accordance with A.A.S.H.O. Standards.
5. Intersection capacity and level of service analysis shall be
developed in accordance with the Highway Capacity Manual,
Highway Research Board Special Report #87.
6. No new street shall be constructed within 250 feet of an existing
intersection except that a new street may be constructed opposite
to an existing local street.
14.Editor's Note: "Minimum Road Design Standards for Road Acceptance" referred to herein
may be found attached to this chapter as Appendix A.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:308
7. Driveways shall not be constructed within 25 feet of an intersection
return.
8. The design of intersections shall conform to A.A.S.H.O. Standards.
e. Sidewalks.
1. Sidewalks shall be provided to minimize vehicle-pedestrian hazards
which shall be determined by volume of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic and the speed of vehicular traffic. Sidewalks shall be located
to segregate pedestrian and vehicular traffic along local arterial
and collector streets and within off-street parking areas.
2. Sidewalks located within a street right-of-way shall be four feet
wide and constructed with concrete. Construction of the sidewalk
shall conform to the "New Jersey Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction."
3. Sidewalks should be constructed with a four-foot offset from the
street curbs.
4. Depressed sidewalk handicap ramps shall be constructed at all
street intersections and within off-street parking areas.
5. Where concrete sidewalks are required, driveway aprons shall be
constructed of eight-inch thick concrete and shall provide for a
continuous sidewalk.
f. Stormwater Control.
1. Scope and Purpose.
(a) Policy Statement.
(1) Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques
shall be explored before relying on structural BMPs.
Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper
maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls
that prevent pollutants from being placed on the site or
from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions
and the origin, nature, and the anticipated quantity or
amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the
established performance standards for water quality,
quantity, and groundwater recharge.
(b) Purpose.
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:309
(1) It is the purpose of this Subsection f to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for
"major development," as defined in Subsection 18-2.1.
(c) Applicability.
(1) This Subsection f shall be applicable to all site plans and
subdivisions for the following major developments that
require preliminary or final site plan or subdivision review:
(i) Nonresidential major developments; and
(ii) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This Subsection f shall also be applicable to all major
developments undertaken by Sparta Township.
(d) Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
(1) Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site
plans pursuant to this Subsection f are to be considered an
integral part of development approvals under the
subdivision and site plan review process and do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to secure required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other
applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this
Subsection f shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general
welfare. This Subsection f is not intended to interfere with,
abrogate, or annul any other ordinances, rule or
regulation, stature, or other provision of law except that,
where any provision of this Subsection f imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the
more restrictive provisions or higher standards shall
control.
2. General Standards.
(a) Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater
Management Measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major
development shall be developed to meet the erosion
control, groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff
quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
Subsection f3. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies into the design. If
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:310
these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures
necessary to meet these standards shall be incorporated
into the design.
(2) The standards in this Subsection f apply only to new major
development and are intended to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in
receiving water bodies and maintain groundwater
recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional
stormwater management plan or Water Quality
Management Plan adopted in accordance with Department
rules.
3. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major Development.
(a) The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development in accordance with Subsection
f9.
(b) Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse
impacts of concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and
endangered species as documented in the Department's
Landscape Project or Natural Heritage Database established
under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150, particularly
Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlnebergi
(bog turtle).
(c) The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of Subsections f3(f)
and (g):
(1) The construction of an underground utility line provided
that the disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line provided
that the existing conditions are maintained to the
maximum extent practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a
sidewalk or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet,
provided that the access is made of permeable material.
(d) A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff
quality requirements of Subsections f3(f) and (g) may be
obtained for the enlargement of an existing public roadway or
railroad; or the construction or enlargement of a public
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:311
pedestrian access, provided that the following conditions are
met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for
the project that cannot be accomplished by any other
means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives
analysis, that through the use of nonstructural and
structural stormwater management strategies and
measures, the option selected complies with the
requirements of Subsections f3(f) and (g) to the maximum
extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the
requirements of Subsections f3(f) and (g), existing
structures currently in use, such as homes and buildings,
would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have
other rights to areas, including the potential to obtain
through condemnation lands not falling under Subsection
f3(d)(3) above within the upstream drainage area of the
receiving stream, that would provide additional
opportunities to mitigate the requirements of Subsections
f3(f) and (g) that were not achievable on site.
(e) Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in
Subsections f3(f) and (g) shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies set
forth at Subsection f3(e) into the design. The applicant
shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends
that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in
Subsection (2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy
considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies
incorporated into site design shall:
(i) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or
areas particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment
loss;
(ii) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or
disconnect the flow of runoff over impervious
surfaces;
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:312
(iii) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features
and vegetation;
(iv) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration"
from preconstruction to post-construction. "Time of
concentration" is defined as the time it takes for runoff
to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of
the watershed to the point of interest within a
watershed;
(v) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and
grading;
(vi) Minimize soil compaction;
(vii) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that
encourages retention and planting of native
vegetation and minimizes the use of lawns, fertilizers
and pesticides;
(viii) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(ix) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize
the use or exposure of pollutants at the site, in order
to prevent or minimize the release of those pollutants
into stormwater runoff. Such source controls include,
but are not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent
accumulation of trash and debris in drainage
systems, including features that satisfy
Subsection f3(e)(3) below;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent
discharge of trash and debris from drainage
systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial
developments; and
[d] When establishing vegetation after land
disturbance, applying fertilizer in accordance
with the requirements established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection
f3(e)(2)(ix)[b] above shall comply with the following
standard to control passage of solid and floatable
materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:313
subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended,
or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection f3(e)(3)(iii) below.
(i) Design engineers shall use either of the following
grates whenever they use a grate in pavement or
another ground surface to collect stormwater from
that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in
that grate has an area of no more than seven
square inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches
across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard
include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion
(non-curb-opening portion) of combination inlets,
grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates,
trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include
surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater
basin floors.
(ii) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet,
the clear space in that curb opening (or each
individual clear space, if the curb opening has two or
more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than
seven square inches, or be no greater than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(iii) This standard does not apply:
[a] Where the review agency determines that this
standard would cause inadequate hydraulic
performance that could not practicably be
overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards;
[b] Where flows from the water quality design storm
as specified in Subsection f3(g)(1) are conveyed
through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting
facility, manufactured treatment device, or a
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:314
catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum,
to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
[1] A rectangular space four and 4 5/8 inches
long and 1 1/2 inches wide (this option does
not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
[2] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5
inches.
[c] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack
that has parallel bars with one inch spacing
between the bars, to the elevation of the water
quality design storm as specified in Subsection
f3(g)(1); or
[d] Where the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection determines, pursuant
to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes
an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater
management measure to meet the performance standards
in Subsection f3(f) and (g) shall be dedicated to a
government agency, subjected to a conservation
restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's office,
or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that
ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater
management measure approved by the reviewing agency
is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management
strategies is available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be
obtained from the address identified in Subsection f6, or
found on the Department's website at
www.njstormwater.org.
(f) Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and
performance standards to control erosion, encourage and
control infiltration and groundwater recharge, and control
stormwater runoff quantity impacts of major development.
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:315
(i) The minimum design and performance standards for
erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq. and implementing rules.
(ii) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[a] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions
and factors for stormwater runoff and
groundwater recharge calculations at Subsection
f4, either:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis that the site and its
stormwater management measures maintain
100% of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the site; or
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis that the increase of
stormwater runoff volume from
preconstruction to post-construction for the
two-year storm is infiltrated.
[b] This groundwater recharge requirement does not
apply to projects within the "urban redevelopment
area," or to projects subject to Subsection [c]
below.
[c] The following types of stormwater shall not be
recharged:
[1] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant
loading. High pollutant loading areas are
areas in industrial and commercial
developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded,
stored, or applied, areas where pesticides are
loaded/unloaded or stored; areas where
hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40
CFR 302.4; areas where recharge would be
inconsistent with Department approved
remedial action work plan or landfill closure
plan and areas with high risks for spills of
toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:316
[2] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source
material." "Source material" means any
material(s) or machinery, located at an
industrial facility that is directly or indirectly
related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities, which could be a source
of pollutants in any industrial stormwater
discharge to groundwater. Source materials
include, but are not limited to, raw materials;
intermediate products; final products; waste
materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and
detergents that are related to process,
manufacturing, or other industrial activities
that are exposed to stormwater.
[d] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic
impact on the groundwater table and design the
site so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts.
Potential adverse hydraulic impacts include, but
are not limited to, exacerbating a naturally or
seasonally high water table so as to cause surficial
ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage
disposal systems and other subsurface structures
in the vicinity or downgradient of the
groundwater recharge area.
(iii) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts, the design engineer shall, using the
assumptions and factors for stormwater runoff
calculations at Subsection f4, complete one of the
following:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-
, and 100-year storm events do not exceed, at any
point in time, the preconstruction runoff
hydrographs for the same storm events;
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that there is no increase, as compared to
the pre-construction condition, in the peak runoff
rates of stormwater leaving the site for the two-,
ten-, and 100-year storm events and that the
increased volume or change in timing of
stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall
include the analysis of impacts of existing land
uses and projected land uses assuming full
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:317
development under existing zoning and land use
ordinances in the drainage area;
[c] Design stormwater management measures so that
the post-construction peak runoff rates for the
two-, ten-, and 100-year storm events are 50, 75
and 80%, respectively, of the preconstruction
peak runoff rates. The percentages apply only to
the post-construction stormwater runoff that is
attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied
to post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal
flood hazard areas if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff will not increase flood damages
below the point of discharge; or
[d] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff
quantity analysis in accordance with Subsections
[a], [b] and [c] above shall only be applied if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff could
increase flood damages below the point of
discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that
meets the definition of major development at Subsection
18-2.1 shall be submitted to the appropriate Soil
Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this subsection and
any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the
purposes of this subsection, "agricultural development"
means land uses normally associated with the production
of food, fiber and livestock for sale. Such uses do not
include the development of land for the processing or sale
of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally related
products.
(g) Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to
reduce the post-construction load of total suspended solids
(TSS) in stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load
from the developed site, expressed as an annual average.
Stormwater management measures shall only be required
for water quality control if an additional 1/4 acre of
impervious surface is being proposed on a development
site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to any
stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a
numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the
New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:318
(NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge
specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches
of rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall
take into account the distribution of rain from the water
quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The
calculation of the volume of runoff may take into account
the implementation of nonstructural and structural
stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 06250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs
designed in accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. The BMP Manual
may be obtained from the address identified in Subsection
f6, or found on the Department's website at
www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in Subsection f6.
TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal
rates and methods of calculating removal rates may be
used if the design engineer provides documentation
demonstrating the capability of these alternative rates and
methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate
shall be provided to the Department at the following
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:319
address: Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418,
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the
required 80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall
utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from
application of both BMPs, and
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
first BMP
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the
second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management
Practice
TSS Percent Removal
Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See Subsection 18-5.3f5(c)
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80%
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless
the runoff from the subareas converge on site in which
case the removal rate can be demonstrated through a
calculation using a weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed
to reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction nutrient load of the anticipated load from the
developed site in stormwater runoff generated from the
water quality design storm. In achieving reduction of
nutrients to the maximum extent feasible, the design of the
site shall include nonstructural strategies and structural
measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:320
achieving the performance standards in Subsections f3(f)
and (g)
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the
New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual, which may be obtained from the address
identified in Subsection f6.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C.
7:9B-1.4, stormwater management measures shall be
designed to prevent any increase in stormwater runoff to
waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be
established along all waters designated Category One at
N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial or intermittent streams that
drain into or upstream of the Category One waters as
shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the County
Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of
water quality, aesthetic value, exceptional ecological
significance, exceptional recreational significance,
exceptional water supply significance, and exceptional
fisheries significance of those established Category One
waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(i) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special
water resource protection area in accordance with
one of the following:
[a] A 300-foot special water resource protection area
shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the
top of the bank outwards or from the centerline of
the waterway where the bank is not defined,
consisting of existing vegetation or vegetation
allowed to follow natural succession is provided.
[b] Encroachment within the designated special
water resource protection area under Subsection
[a] above shall only be allowed where previous
development or disturbance has occurred (for
example, active agricultural use, parking area or
maintained lawn area). The encroachment shall
only be allowed where applicant demonstrates
that the functional value and overall condition of
the special water resource protection area will be
maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In
no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:321
150 feet as measured perpendicular to the top
of bank of the waterway or centerline of the
waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subsection
shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
(ii) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow
through the special water resource protection area
and shall comply with the Standard for Off-Site
Stability in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey," established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(iii) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing
through the special water resource protection area
cannot comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability
in the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control in New Jersey," established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be
placed within the special water resource protection
area, provided that:
[a] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within
150 feet of the Category One waterway;
[b] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed
by this section shall achieve a 95% TSS postconstruction removal rate;
[c] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no
impact on the receiving waterway;
[d] The encroachment shall only be allowed where
the applicant demonstrates that the functional
value and overall condition of the special water
resource protection area will be maintained to the
maximum extent practicable;
[e] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held
with the appropriate Department staff and Soil
Conservation District staff to identify necessary
stabilization measures; and
[f] All encroachments proposed under this section
shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:322
(iv) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed
by a regional stormwater management planning
committee as an element of a regional stormwater
management plan, or by a municipality through an
adopted municipal stormwater management plan. If a
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway
subject to Subsection f3(g)(8) has been approved by
the Department of Environmental Protection, then the
provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special
water resource protection area requirements for that
waterway. A stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection f3(g)(8) shall maintain
or enhance the current functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection f3(g)(8)(i)[a] above. In
no case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow
the reduction of the Special Water Resource
Protection Area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(v) Paragraph f3(g)(8) does not apply to the construction
of one individual single family dwelling that is not part
of a larger development on a lot receiving preliminary
or final subdivision approval on or before February 2,
2004, provided that the construction begins on or
before February 2, 2009.
(h) Major developments that are granted a variance or exemption
from the stormwater management design and performance
standards must comply with the Mitigation Plan identified in
the Sparta Township Municipal Stormwater Management Plan.
Inserted as follows:
"Mitigation Plans
This mitigation plan is provided for a proposed development
that is granted a variance or exemption from the stormwater
management design and performance standards.
Mitigation Project Criteria
The mitigation project shall be implemented preferably in the
same drainage area as the proposed development. The project
must provide additional groundwater recharge benefits, or
protection from stormwater runoff quality and quantity from
previously developed property that does not currently meet the
design and performance standards outlined in the Municipal
Stormwater Management Plan. The developer must ensure
the long-term maintenance of the project, including the
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:323
maintenance requirements under Chapters 8 and 9 of the
NJDEP Stormwater BMP Manual.
The mitigation project may also provide mitigation that is not
equivalent to the impacts for which the variance or exemption
is sought, but that addresses the same issue. For example, if a
variance is given because the 80% TSS requirement is not met,
the selected project may address water quality impacts due to
a fecal impairment.
The developer may provide funding or partial funding to the
municipality for an environmental enhancement project that
has been identified in the Municipal Stormwater Management
Plan. The funding must be equal to or greater than the cost
to implement the mitigation outlined above, including costs
associated with purchasing the property or easement for
mitigation, and the cost associated with the long-term
maintenance requirements of the mitigation measure.
The applicant can select one of the following projects listed
to compensate for the deficit from the performance standards
resulting from the proposed project. More detailed information
on the projects can be obtained from the Township Engineer.
Listed below are specific projects that can be used to address
the mitigation requirement.
1. Sparta Glen Park/Sparta Glen Brook
The purpose of this project is to restore the stream and the
stream environs to significantly reduce non-point source
pollution. The limit of the project is approximately 5,700
feet length of the Sparta Glen Brook through the Sparta
Glen Park — block 7, Lot 57.
The major components of the project consist of rechannelization of the stream, re-establishment of in
stream habitat environs, re-stabilization of stream bank
and re-vegetation of the riparian buffer zone and upland
forest transition area.
2. Station Park/Wallkill River
The major components of the project consist of rechannelization of the stream, re-establishment of in
stream habitat environs, re-stabilization of stream bank
and re-vegetation of the riparian buffer zone.
3. Wallkill River from confluence with Sparta Glen Brook
downstream to Station Road County Bridge Q-08: The
major components of the project consist of rechannelization of the stream, re-establishment of in
stream habitat environs, re-stabilization of stream bank
and re-vegetation of the riparian buffer zone.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:324
4. Drainage improvements, including solids removal at
Balsam Parkway, Birch Parkway, Cherry Tree Lane, and
Hopkins Corner Road retention basin overflow.
5. Price's Lane landfill closure soil stabilization installation
and maintenance.
6. Existing stormwater discharges within close proximity
(100 feet) of surface waters shall be equipped with
structural stormwater management measures as defined
in Chapter 9, N.J. Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual. Such techniques are applicable in existing
developed areas, where low impact development
techniques are not easily implemented.
a. Rivers/Streams
Priority shall be given to C-1 designated streams and
those with a defined TMDL. (Reference is made to
Figure C-2, Township & Its waterways)
b. Lakes/Ponds
Lakes and ponds are divided into two categories as
follows:
Moderate to Heavily Developed at Present
Seneca Lake
Lake Grinnell
Sparta Lake
Fox Hollow Lake
Lake Saginaw
Sunset Lake
Lake Mohawk
Beiser Pond
Upper Lake Mohawk
Fox Trail Lake
Arapaho Lake
Madonna Lake
Low Development at Present
Rock Island Lake
Glen Lake
Ryker Lake
White Lake
Blue Heron Lake
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:325
Low Development at Present
Morris Lake
Mud Pond
Green Ridge Lake
Hawthorne Lake
Priority shall be given to more heavily developed areas where
stormwater controls would result in the greatest benefit.
An applicant may propose a specific mitigation project. All
projects shall be prioritized and approved by the Township
Engineer, Director of Planning, and the Sparta Township
Planning Board and shall be at the sole discretion of Sparta
Township."
4. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater Recharge.
(a) Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(i) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
(NRCS) methodology, including the NRCS Runoff
Equation and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as
described in the NRCS National Engineering
Handbook Section 3 — Hydrology and Technical
Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(ii) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified
Rational Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and
groundwater recharge, there is a presumption that the
preconstruction condition of a site or portion thereof is a
wooded land use with good hydrologic condition. The term
"runoff coefficient" applies to both the NRCS methodology
at Subsection f4(a)(1)(i) and the Rational and Modified
Rational Methods at Subsection f4(a)(1)(ii). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an
existing condition may be used on all or a portion of the
site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic
condition has existed on the site or portion of the site for at
least five years without interruption prior to the time of
application. If more than one land cover have existed on
the site during the five years immediately prior to the time
of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff
potential shall be used for the computations. In addition,
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:326
there is the presumption that the site is in good hydrologic
condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park),
with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if
the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the
design engineer shall account for all significant land
features and structures, such as ponds, wetlands,
depressions, hedgerows, or culverts, that may reduce
preconstruction stormwater runoff rates and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms,
the design engineer shall consider the relative stormwater
runoff rates and/or volumes of pervious and impervious
surfaces separately to accurately compute the rates and
volume of stormwater runoff from the site. To calculate
runoff from unconnected impervious cover, urban
impervious area modifications as described in the NRCS
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater
management measure is below the flood hazard design
flood elevation as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design
engineer shall take into account the effects of tailwater in
the design of structural stormwater management
measures.
(b) Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with
the following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A
Method for Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in
New Jersey, incorporated herein by reference as amended
and supplemented. Information regarding the
methodology is available from the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey
Geological Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427,
Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
5. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management Measures.
(a) Standards for structural stormwater management measures
are as follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to take into account the existing site conditions,
including, for example, environmentally critical areas,
wetlands; flood-prone areas; slopes; depth to seasonal
high water table; soil type, permeability and texture;
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:327
drainage area and drainage patterns; and the presence of
solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed to minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance
and repairs, and ensure proper functioning. Trash racks
shall be installed at the intake to the outlet structure as
appropriate, and shall have parallel bars with one inch
spacing between the bars to the elevation of the water
quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet
structure shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of
the diameter of the orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with
a minimum spacing between bars of one inch and a
maximum spacing between bars of six inches. In addition,
the design of trash racks must comply with the
requirements of Subsection f7(b).
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be
designed, constructed, and installed to be strong, durable,
and corrosion resistant. Measures that are consistent with
the relevant portions of the Residential Site Improvement
Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4, and 7.5 shall be
deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin, the orifice size shall be a minimum of
2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet
the minimum safety standards for stormwater
management basins at Subsection f7.
(b) Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual. Other stormwater management measures may be
utilized provided the design engineer demonstrates that the
proposed measure and its design will accomplish the required
water quantity, groundwater recharge and water quality
design and performance standards established by Subsection
f3.
(c) Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the
requirements of Subsection f3, provided the pollutant removal
rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department.
6. Sources for Technical Guidance.
(a) Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can
be found in the documents listed at Subsections (1) and (2)
below, which are available from Maps and Publications, New
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:328
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, 428 East
State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625;
telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are
contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, as amended. Information
is provided on stormwater management measures such as:
bioretention systems, constructed stormwater wetlands,
dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious
paving, sand filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual,
as amended.
(b) Additional technical guidance for stormwater management
measures can be obtained from the following:
(1) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation
Committee and incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of
these standards may be obtained by contacting the State
Soil Conservation Committee or any of the Soil
Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New
Jersey, 08625; (609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service,
732-932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C.
2:90-1.3(a)4. The location, address, and telephone number
of each Soil Conservation District may be obtained from
the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330,
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609) 292-5540.
7. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
(a) This Subsection f7 sets forth requirements to protect public
safety through the proper design and operation of stormwater
management basins. This subsection applies to any new
stormwater management basin.
(b) Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape
Provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris
and prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:329
shall be installed at the intake to the outlet from the
stormwater management basin to ensure proper
functioning of the basin outlets in accordance with the
following:
(i) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no
greater than six-inch spacing between the bars.
(ii) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely
affect the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or
structure.
(iii) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash
rack is not to exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full
range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be
computed on the basis of the net area of opening
through the rack.
(iv) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be
designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading of
300 lbs./ft. sq.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow
grate, such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(i) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet
structure but removable for emergencies and
maintenance.
(ii) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two
inches across the smallest dimension.
(iii) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed
to be rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall
be designed to withstand a perpendicular live loading
of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection (3), escape provisions
means the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs,
or other features that provide easily accessible means of
egress from stormwater management basins. Stormwater
management basins shall include escape provisions as
follows:
(i) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet
structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in
or on the structure. With the prior approval of the
reviewing agency identified in Subsection f7(c) a
freestanding outlet structure may be exempted from
this requirement.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:330
(ii) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all
new stormwater management basins having a
permanent pool of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such
safety ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each
step shall be four to six feet in width. One step shall be
located approximately 2 1/2 feet below the permanent
water surface, and the second step shall be located
one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See Subsection f7(d) for an illustration of safety
ledges in a stormwater management basin.
(iii) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum
interior slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or
berm shall not be steeper than 3 horizontal to 1
vertical.
(c) Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
(1) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for
stormwater management basins may be granted only upon
a written finding by the appropriate reviewing agency
(municipality, County or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
(d) Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater
Management Basin.
8. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
(a) Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a
development subject to this Subsection f, the applicant
shall submit all of the required components of the
Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater Plan at
Subsection f8(c) below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan
approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this Subsection f.
(3) The applicant shall submit 15 copies of the materials listed
in the checklist for site development stormwater plans in
accordance with Subsection f8(c).
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:331
(b) Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's
site development project shall be reviewed as a part of the
subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board
or official from which municipal approval is sought. That
municipal board or official shall consult the engineer retained
by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as appropriate) to
determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards
set forth in this Subsection f.
(c) Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be
required:
(1) Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may
require upstream tributary drainage system information
as necessary. It is recommended that the topographic base
map of the site be submitted which extends a minimum of
200 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development, at
a scale of one inch equals 200 feet or greater, showing twofoot contour intervals. The map as appropriate may
indicate the following: existing surface water drainage,
shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters, wetlands and flood plains along with
their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other
wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing manmade structures, roads, bearing and distances of property
lines, and significant natural and man-made features not
otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic
description of the natural and man-made features of the
site and its environs. This description should include a
discussion of soil conditions, slopes, wetlands, waterways
and vegetation on the site. Particular attention should be
given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive
features and to those that provide particular opportunities
or constraints for development.
(3) Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at
the scale of the topographical base map indicating the
location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking
areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater
management and sediment control, and other permanent
structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where
alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
ground water elevations. A written description of the site
plan and justification of proposed changes in natural
conditions may also be provided.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:332
(4) Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan
shall provide a demonstration of how the goals and
standards of Subsections f2 through f5 are being met. The
focus of this plan shall be to describe how the site is being
developed to meet the objective of controlling
groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land
management and source controls whenever possible. The
Low Impact Development Checklist, as contained in
Appendix A of the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual shall be submitted.
(5) Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
(i) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation
thereon, and details of the proposed plan to control
and dispose of stormwater.
(ii) Details of all stormwater management facility designs,
during and after construction, including discharge
provisions, discharge capacity for each outlet at
different levels of detention and emergency spillway
provisions with maximum discharge capacity of each
spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(i) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design
calculations for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for the design storms
specified in Subsection f3.
(ii) When the proposed stormwater management control
measures (e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the
hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall
be submitted. The soils report shall be based on onsite boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and
location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be
determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the
location of the control measure.
(7) Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of
the stormwater management facility shall meet the
maintenance requirements of Subsection f9.
(8) Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal
official or board reviewing an application under this
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:333
Subsection f may, in consultation with the municipal
engineer, waive submission of any of the requirements
in Subsections f8(c)(1) through 8(c)(6) of this Subsection
f when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a
hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not
materially affect the review process.
9. Maintenance and Repair.
(a) Applicability.
(1) Projects subject to review as in Subsection 1(c) of this
Subsection f shall comply with the requirements of
Subsections f9(b) and (c).
(b) General Maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for
the stormwater management measures incorporated into
the design of a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates,
including estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash
removal; and the name, address, and telephone number of
the person or persons responsible for preventative and
corrective maintenance (including replacement).
Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management
measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example,
a public agency or homeowners' association) as having the
responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility, or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or
transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual
property in a residential development or project, unless
such owner or tenant owns or leases the entire residential
development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection f9(b)(2) above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on
Subsection f9(b)(7) below shall be recorded upon the deed
of record for each property on which the maintenance
described in the maintenance plan must be undertaken.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:334
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be
performed to maintain the function of the stormwater
management measure, including repairs or replacement to
the structure; removal of sediment, debris, or trash;
restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence
repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation; and
repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection f9(b)(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of
all preventative and corrective maintenance for the
structural stormwater management measures
incorporated into the design of the development, including
a record of all inspections and copies of all maintenance
related work orders. This information shall be made
accessible for review by Sparta Township staff.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection f9(b)(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness
of the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust
the plan and the deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection f9(b)(2) above shall retain and make available,
upon request by any public entity with administrative,
health, environmental, or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by
Subsections f9(b)(6) and (b)(7) above. Access to the
stormwater management facilities for inspection purposes
shall be allowed to Sparta Township staff.
(9) The requirements of Subsections f9(b)(3) and (b)(4) do not
apply to stormwater management facilities that are
dedicated to and accepted by the municipality or another
governmental agency.
(10)In the event that the stormwater management facility
becomes a danger to public safety or public health, or if it
is in need of maintenance or repair, the municipality shall
so notify the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of
that notice, the responsible person shall have 14 days to
effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner
that is approved by the Municipal Engineer or his
designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may extend
the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to
perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality or
County may immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the
cost thereof to the responsible person.
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:335
(c) Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which
the major development is located from requiring the posting of
a performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
(1) A maintenance guarantee, with a two-year term for
specifically stormwater management facilities shall be
posted with Sparta Township, and shall be applicable to
initial defective workmanship and materials, and not
routine operating and maintenance tasks. This security
shall be required from the developer for all stormwater
facilities, including facilities to be dedicated to Sparta
Township or another public entity; or to those remaining
under private ownership and operation.
(2) A twenty-five-year term, sinking fund escrow account shall
be posted with Sparta Township to cover operating and
maintenance costs of stormwater management facilities,
which are dedicated to Sparta Township. The maintenance
costs, as referenced in Subsection f9(b)(2) shall be
approved by the Township Engineer. This fund shall be
established in a Developer's Agreement with the Township
Council.
(3) A "Sparta Township Stormwater Management Facility
Operating & Maintenance" permit shall be secured by the
property owner from Sparta Township. The permit fee is as
established under § 18-8, Fees of the Township of Sparta
Comprehensive Land Management Code.
10. Penalties. Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs,
converts, maintains, or uses any building, structure or land in
violation of this Subsection f shall be subject to the penalties
defined in Township of Sparta's Comprehensive Land Management
Code, § 18-7, Administration and Enforcement (18-7.2 Penalties).
g. Top Soil Protection. Top soil which shall be moved in the course of
regrading or building within a subdivision shall not be used as spoil or
be removed from the subdivision site. Such top soil shall be
redistributed over building sites and stabilized by seeding or planting.
h. Parking Standards.
1. Standards for Off-Street Parking Requirements:
(a) All nonresidential uses shall provide off-street parking
facilities. The number of parking spaces required shall be
based on the following standard for parking ratio
requirements:
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:336
Type of Use Specific Uses Required Spaces
Retail 1/200 square feet of gross leasable
area
Office and banks 1/200 square feet of gross leasable
area
Medical 1/200 square feet of gross leasable
area
Hotels, motels 1 per sleeping room
Funeral homes 10 plus 1 for every 50 square feet of
gross floor area
Dance studio, karate studio or
similar use
1/100 square feet of gross area
Restaurants 1 for each 3 seats or 1 for each 50
square feet of service and eating
area (excluding kitchen and storage,
whichever is greater)
Commercial
Real estate offices for commercial or
residential properties
1/100 square feet of gross area
Warehousing 1/employee or 1/500 square feet
Light manufacturing 1/employee or 1/500 square feet
Industrial
Heavy manufacturing 1/employee or 1/500 square feet
(whichever is the greater)
Wholesale store, building materials
store, appliance and furniture store
1 for each 300 square feet of gross
leasable floor area
Churches, auditoriums, theaters,
assembly halls, dance halls,
community buildings
1 for each 3 seats
Hospitals, nursing homes, medical
institutions
1 for each 2 beds
Institutional
Senior citizen assisted living,
residential care and/or independent
living units
0.20 parking spaces per bed for
assisted living or similar use and 1
space per unit for independent living
units or similar use. There shall be
at least 1 space per employee and
10% of the total parking shall be
added to the total as visitor parking
(b) Each such parking space shall have an area of not less than
180 square feet exclusive of access drives or aisles, and shall
be a minimum of nine by 20 feet. In commercial zones, parking
is not permitted in the front or side yards unless specifically
approved by the Planning Board with a site plan waiver.
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:337
(c) Any building containing more than one use shall meet the
combined parking space requirements for all uses in the
building. Any change in use within a building shall be required
to meet the minimum parking requirements for the new use.
(d) Where appropriate, because of defined use schedule
separation, parking requirements may be shared, in full or
part, if specifically approved by the Planning Board.
(e) If it can be clearly demonstrated that because of the peculiar
nature of any use all of the required parking is not necessary,
the Planning Board may permit a reduction in the amount of
parking area to be paved; provided, however, that the entire
required parking area shall be shown on the site plan so that it
will be available in the event future conditions should so
require.
(f) All off-street parking areas other than agricultural and
residential parking areas shall be paved with bituminous
concrete two inches thick after compaction, on a stable base of
soil aggregate class 5 Type "A" four inches thick after
compaction and approved by the Township Engineer.
(g) All parking and loading areas shall be graded and equipped
with adequate drainage facilities as approved by the Township
Engineer.
(h) All parking and loading spaces shall be appropriately marked
with painted lines four inches wide.
(i) Lighting in connection with off-street parking shall be so
arranged and shielded as to reflect the light downward away
from adjoining streets or properties. An average of 0.5 foot
candle intensity shall be the minimum intensity in a parking
area.
(j) All parking areas shall provide for adequate ingress and egress
and safe, convenient traffic circulation and the following
minimum standards:
(1) Any off-street parking area with 40 or less parking spaces
and not exceeding 200 feet in length from the remotest
point to the point of access to a public cartway and which
has at least one hammerhead turnaround at or near the
remotest point, may have one means of ingress-egress.
(2) Any off-street parking area with greater than 40 but less
than 120 parking spaces and which does not exceed 600
feet in length from the remotest point to the point of
access to a public cartway and which has at least one full
turnaround as required by Subsection 18-5.3j5 to provide
full clearance for a fire truck and/or standard trailer
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:338
moving van at or near the remotest point may have one
means of ingress-egress.
(3) All other conditions shall require as a minimum at least
two separate means of ingress-egress with one-way
circulation loops preferred.
(k) The off-street parking area shall be effectively screened on any
side which adjoins or faces premises situated in any residential
zones, by a fence or wall not less than four nor more than six
feet in height, maintained in good condition provided, however,
that a screening or hedge or other natural landscaping may be
substituted for the required fence or wall if approved by the
Planning Board. The fence as required by this subsection may
be waived by the Planning Board if, in the Board's judgment,
because of topographical or other unusual conditions, said
fence is not necessary to screen adjoining residential property.
(l) Off-street parking areas shall be used solely for the parking of
passenger automobiles and no commercial repair work or
service of any kind shall be conducted on the parking lot nor
shall such lots be used for the parking of disabled, dismantled,
inoperable or unregistered vehicles.
(m) No signs other than "entrance", "exit", or conditions of use
signs shall be maintained not to exceed one square foot for
each face.
(n) Parking areas shall be enclosed by concrete curbing six inches
above the paved surface or granite block as approved by the
Planning Board, and unless otherwise required by this
subsection, located at least five feet from any property line or
nearest structural wall of a building, except that in the
commercial zones parking areas may be constructed up to the
property line which abuts a parking area on property in the
commercial zones and further provided proper access and
circulation between the two parking areas is provided.
(o) All parking areas shall be designed with service aisles to meet
the following standards:
Angle Aisle Width
Parallel parking 12 feet
30° angle parking 11 feet
45° angle parking 13 feet
60° angle parking 18 feet
90° angle parking 24 feet
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:339
(p) All portions of the property not used for off-street parking shall
be attractively landscaped with grass lawns, trees and shrubs
as required in Subsection 18-5.3o.
(q) All off-street parking areas shall be subject to the approval of
the Planning Board to insure their adequacy, relation to traffic
safety and protection of the adjacent properties.
(r) Off-Street Parking Exceptions. Any owner or group of owners
of a nonresidential building, buildings or uses in commercial or
industrial districts may jointly sponsor off-street parking
facilities provided that the area of the parking facilities equals
the total parking area requirements of each owner
participating therein, that such jointly sponsored facilities
comply with all the other requirements of this chapter and
further provided that any participating use is no farther from
the parking area than 300 feet.
(s) Off-Street Loading Spaces. In all zones for every building or
use requiring the receipt or distribution in vehicles of
materials or merchandise, there shall be provided on the same
property with such building or uses off-street loading spaces in
relation to the floor area as follows:
Floor Area in Square Feet Number of Spaces
9,999 or less 1
10,000 to 19,999 2
20,000 to 49,999 3
50,000 to 100,000 4
Each additional 100,000 or part
thereof
1
(1) Each loading space shall be at least 12 feet in width, 30
feet in length and have a fourteen-foot clearance above
grade, provided, however, that the Planning Board may
require additional length of up to 55 feet depending on the
length of vehicles using said space.
(t) Setbacks. All off-street parking areas shall be separated from
sidewalks by a minimum setback of four feet and from other
vehicular paved areas by a minimum of eight feet.
(u) Planting. Planting shall be in accordance with Subsection
18-5.3o, Landscaping Design Standards.
(v) Residential Off-Street Parking Standards.
(1) Provisions shall be made for two off-street parking spaces
for every dwelling unit, one of which shall be in an
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:340
enclosed garage for each single family detached dwelling
unit constructed subsequent to 1977, Ordinance No. 518.
Such off-street parking areas and all driveways shall be
constructed in accordance with the specifications
contained in Subsection (2) below.
(2) Residential off-street parking spaces and driveways which
slope toward any street, at an average grade of more than
3% within 50 feet of the street shall be constructed in
accordance with the following specifications, except as
provided in Subsection (5) below:
(i) Base Material — Minimum four inches of Soil
Aggregate, Type 5, Class "A".
(ii) Surface Material — F.A.B.C. - 1, two inches thick as
per the New Jersey Department of Transportation
Specifications.
(3) Driveway grades shall not exceed 15% at any point along
its entire length. In addition, the driveway grade shall not
exceed 8% for a distance of eight feet from the curbline
and a vertical curve provided between said 8% grade and
any increase in grade. Driveway grades shall be no more
than 8% within 12 feet of a garage.
(4) The side slopes of driveways shall be topsoiled, seeded,
fertilized and mulched to prevent erosion. If banks reach
or exceed a 2:1 slope, crownvetch or some other
stabilizing material shall be planted or retaining walls
constructed based on recommendation of the Township
Engineer.
(5) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, driveways in
excess of 100 feet in length with grades not exceeding 4%
may, in lieu of the requirements in Subsections (2)(i) and
(2)(ii), be constructed of shale, stone or other material as
approved by the Township Engineer to a minimum depth of
two inches. All other requirements of Subsections (3) and
(4) shall apply. Driveways in excess of 100 feet in length
exceeding a grade of 3% shall be constructed in
accordance with standards and specifications as
recommended by the Township Engineer.
(6) Individual lots shall have a driveway located no closer than
five feet from an adjoining property line.
i. Swimming Pools.
1. Private Swimming Pools.
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:341
(a) Application for Permit. No person shall locate and construct,
alter or install a private swimming pool without first having
obtained a permit therefor as hereinafter prescribed, except
that a permit for construction or installation of a wading pool is
not required. Before excavation or any other work is
commenced on the construction or installation of a pool or the
alteration, enlargement, remodeling or other improvement
thereof, an application shall be made to the Construction
Official in a form approved by the Council, which shall be
accompanied by final plans, specifications and reports showing
the following data:
(1) Detailed plat plan of the entire property showing existing
structures on the premises and adjoining premises,
including the location of nearby septic tanks, disposal
fields and seepage pits, as well as the proposed pool drawn
to scale, with pertinent dimensions and grade elevations
shown at pool, buildings and property lines.
(2) Detailed plans to scale with dimensions and specifications
for the construction of the pool (or other change in existing
pools) including piping arrangement, pumps, water
treatment facilities, including operating instructions
therefor, source of water to be used and report showing
quality thereof for potable purposes, provisions for
emptying pool and disposal of waste water and all other
facilities proposed by the applicant or required by this
chapter.
(b) Issuance of Permit; Certificate of Occupancy. When the plans
and specifications are filed in a form complying with this
section, and have been approved by the Construction Official,
Sanitarian and Plumbing Inspector, a permit to construct the
same shall be issued. Upon completion, no pool shall be used
until inspected by the Construction Official, Sanitarian and
Plumbing Inspector and a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the Construction Official.
(c) Design and Construction Requirements. No permit shall be
issued for the construction or other change in a pool unless the
construction or installation conforms to the following minimum
standards.
(1) No pool shall be designed or located so as to constitute a
nuisance or hazard to nearby owners of property or the
public.
(2) Outdoor pools must be located within the setback lines
prescribed by the zoning regulations of the Township and
in no event shall a pool be located so that water therein
will be closer than 10 feet to any outside property lines or
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:342
any building on the premises or adjoining premises. The
body of a pool (that part used for swimming or bathing)
may not be closer than 25 feet to a septic tank, disposal
field or seepage pit.
(3) The surface area of the water in the pool shall not exceed
50% of the side, front or rear yard area where it is located.
(4) Fences. The Township Council expressly declares that
pools which are not properly fenced are detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Township.
Therefore, all pools now existing or hereafter constructed,
installed, established or maintained shall be completely
enclosed by a permanent fence or wall enclosure of
durable material not less than four feet in height but
otherwise conforming to other applicable ordinances
limiting fence height, and shall be constructed with no
openings, meshed holes or gaps larger than four inches in
dimension either in the fence or beneath it and should
reasonably prevent any person from gaining access
beneath any parts of the fence. If a picket fence is erected
or maintained, the spaces between the pickets shall not be
in excess of four inches. A dwelling or accessory building
may be used as part of such enclosure. All fence openings
or points of entry into the pool area enclosure shall be
equipped with self-enclosing and self-latching devices
placed at the top of the gate and made inaccessible to
small children. Above-the-ground pools with straight sides
four feet or more in height are excluded from the
provisions of this section. Any access ladder or steps used
with any of the above-ground type pools whether
permanent or portable, shall be removed from the pools
when not in use. Removal shall be defined as not capable
of being used to enter the pool.
(5) The pool must be constructed of an impervious material
which provides a watertight tank. Sand or dirt bottoms or
sides are therefore prohibited.
(6) The grade of the area surrounding the pool or its
construction shall not allow the flow of surface water into
the pool.
(7) The water to be used for filling or makeup purposes shall
be of drinking water quality and the pool shall not be filled
from lakes or streams not meeting these standards. No
cross connection between a pool and a public water supply
is permitted.
(8) The pool must be equipped with a pressure gauge and
filter, having a relief valve, a diatomaceous filter or an
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:343
approved equivalent having sufficient capacity to provide
complete recirculation of the pool water in eight hours or
less.
(9) Adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of pool
water when emptying same and for the disposal of
backwash water. Effluent may be used upon or in lawns,
fields, woods or dry wells provided such disposal areas are
entirely on the property of the applicant. Water emptied
into streams or lakes must be treated so as to have
between one and six parts per million of chlorine. Where
feasible, public storm drains may be used provided the
applicant, after written application, receives written
permission therefor from the Township Engineer.
(10) Piping and drains shall comply with the Township
Plumbing Code. A fill pipe is not required and the pool may
be filled with a hose. The fill pipe or hose must be a
minimum of six inches above the trim of the pool.
Prefabricated pools shall be assembled according to
manufacturer's specifications.
(11) Electrical Requirements.
(i) No overhead current carrying electricity conductors
shall cross pools or be located within 10 feet of such
pool.
(ii) All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or
adjacent to pools which might become electrically
alive as a result of contact with broken overhead
conductors or from any other cause shall be effectively
grounded.
(iii) Lights used to illuminate any pool shall be so arranged
and shaded as to reflect light away from the adjoining
premises. No unshielded lights shall be permitted.
(iv) Underwater lights shall be prohibited unless they are
30 volts or less.
(v) All electrical equipment shall comply with the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
(d) Regulation of Use.
(1) No pool shall be maintained or used in such a manner as to
violate the design or construction standards.
(2) The gate or gates in the fence or enclosure around the pool
shall be kept securely locked at all times with a padlock or
other lock and key when the pool is not in use.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:344
(3) No commercial use of a pool is permitted.
(4) The entire volume of water shall be filtered and chemically
treated by circulation through the filter system once each
day during the swimming season.
(5) Approved disposal of water must be used in emptying pool
or disposing of backwash water as provided by Subsection
i1(c)(9).
(6) The police, Sanitarian and Construction Official shall be
permitted to inspect the pool area at any time.
(7) Pool water shall be tested monthly during the swimming
season for residual chlorine by the orthotolindine text and
color comparator. Residual chlorine must be maintained
between 2/10 and 6/10 parts per million during the period
when the pool is in use. The pH of the pool water shall
range from neutral 7.0 to slightly alkaline (not to exceed
7.6).
(e) Penalty. The provisions of Subsection 18-7.2 of this chapter
shall be applicable to this Subsection i1.
2. Public Swimming Pools. This section shall not be deemed to apply
to or include private swimming pools as defined in § 18-2.
(a) Adoption of Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey.
(1) The Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1970) is hereby
incorporated in this subsection by reference and made a
part hereof as fully as though it had been set forth at
length herein.
(2) In accordance with law, 10 printed copies of the Swimming
Pool Code of New Jersey (1970) have been placed on file in
the office of the Township Clerk and in the office of the
Sanitarian of the Township and shall remain on file in said
offices for the use and examination of the public so long as
this subsection shall remain in effect.
(3) The Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1970) shall mean
and refer to that certain code approved by the State
Department of Health, for adoption by reference by local
boards of health in accordance with law, being a code:
(i) Regulating and controlling the location and
construction, alteration and operation of swimming
pools as therein defined;
(ii) Regulating and controlling the issuance of licenses to
locate and construct, alter or operate swimming pools
as therein defined; and
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:345
(iii) Declaring and defining certain swimming pools as
nuisances.
(4) Whenever the following words, terms or phrases are used
in the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1970), they
shall have the following meanings herein given:
BOARD OF HEALTH — Shall mean and refer to the Health
Department of the Township.
REGISTERED MAIL — Shall include certified mail.
(b) Expiration of Permits and Licenses; License Renewals.
(1) Permits to locate and construct or alter a swimming pool
shall expire nine months after issuance unless extended by
the issuing authority for cause.
(2) Licenses issued for the operation of swimming pools shall
expire on May 29 following the date of issuance.
(3) Applications for license renewals together with the
required license fee shall be submitted prior to operation
in each new license year.
(c) Denial or Suspension or Revocation of Permit or License.
(1) A permit or license required under this section may be
denied or suspended or revoked by the Sanitarian or
Construction Official for failure to comply with any
provision of this section including the Swimming Pool
Code of New Jersey (1970) incorporated herein by
reference.
(2) The person whose license has been denied or suspended
or revoked may take an appeal to the Township Council
within 45 days of the denial or suspension or revocation.
(d) Penalty. The provisions of Subsection 18-7.2 of this chapter
shall be applicable to this Subsection i2.
j. Fire Protection Systems.
1. All major subdivisions of six lots or more and all site plans shall
provide a central fire protection system meeting the following
minimum requirements:
(a) All central fire protection systems shall conform to all
applicable standards of the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA), American Water Works Association
(AWWA), N.J.A.C. 7:10-1 through 7:10-11.3 (commonly known
as the "Safe Drinking Water Act Regulations") and any
revisions or amendments thereto.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:346
(b) Total firefighting water supply shall be no less than 2,000
gallons per dwelling unit. The maximum volume of firefighting
water supply required for residential type units shall be 60,000
gallons.
(c) Water storage facilities for firefighting water shall be designed
to automatically maintain the required capacity for fire
protection purposes.
(d) The maximum distance from each dwelling unit to the nearest
fire hydrant shall not exceed 500 feet by way of an improved
road.
(e) Each fire hydrant shall be capable of supplying a minimum flow
of 500 gallons per minute at no less than 20 p.s.i. residual
system pressure at the highest elevation of the water system.
(f) All components of the central fire protection system shall
comply with the design standards as specified in Subsection
18-5.3k, Central Water Facilities where applicable.
2. All occupancies other than R-4 as defined by the BOCA National
Building Code shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Minimum firefighting water supply requirements shall conform
to NFPA Standard 1231-84.
(b) The maximum distance from an occupancy or structure to the
firefighting water source shall not exceed 500 feet by way of a
hard surfaced and maintained road or designated fire lane.
(c) If a drafting standpipe is used for firefighting purposes, then
plans and specifications shall meet the approval of the Sparta
Township Fire Prevention Bureau.
3. All developments must be designed to allow for the access of
emergency vehicles, including fire apparatus, ambulances and
police cars. Fire lanes shall be provided for commercial and
industrial type developments to provide access to fire protection
facilities.
4. If a stream or pond exists on a property that requires a central
water system, and the stream or pond can be developed into an
adequate and reliable water supply, then a standpipe shall be
constructed as a backup supply of water to the central water
system for fire protection purposes.
5. Prior to final approval of any major subdivision or site plan which
requires a firefighting water supply system, the Fire Prevention
Bureau shall conduct or witness any and all tests necessary to
ensure that the system meets the firefighting requirements of the
Sparta Fire Department. The Fire Prevention Bureau shall then
issue a letter to the Planning Board indicating that the system has
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:347
been tested and is accepted by the Fire Prevention Bureau. This
requirement is in addition to the tests and inspections conducted
by the Township Engineer, Water Department and inspections
conducted by or other required agencies.
6. Any subdivision of land that expands a previously approved
subdivision that did not require a central fire protection system at
the time of its creation due to the number of lots involved, to the
point where a central fire protection system is required based on
the total number of proposed lots and previously approved lots,
shall provide a central fire protection system capable of protecting
both the proposed subdivisions and the previously approved
subdivision in accordance with the standards as outlined herein.
7. Existing occupancies other than use group R-4 shall be required to
conform to the requirements of NFPA Standard 1231-84 whenever
an application for site plan approval is submitted in order to
provide the minimum water supply requirements for firefighting
purposes for the entire site.
k. Central Water Facilities.
1. Any subdivision or site plan on property that is adjacent to a central
water facility shall provide all necessary central water facility
systems to support itself after interconnecting with the existing
approved central water facility.
2. Any multifamily development shall provide central water.
3. Any major subdivision or major site plan shall provide central
water.
4. Any major subdivision that is not capable of being subdivided into
15 lots or more after applying the applicable zoning requirements
and constraint calculations shall still provide all components of a
central water system, except that the Planning Board may waive
the requirement of a source of water and treatment facilities as
recommended by the Township Engineer. If a source of water is
waived by the Planning Board, each dwelling shall be serviced by
an individual well until such time as the distribution system is
interconnected with an approved central water system. At that time
each dwelling owner shall be required to properly abandon his well
and finalize his connection to the central water system. A deed
restriction to this effect shall be placed on the final subdivision plat.
5. All central water facilities shall conform to N.J.A.C. 7:10-1 through
7:10-11.13, commonly known as the "Safe Drinking Water Act
Regulations" and any revisions or amendments thereto, except
where the standards contained herein exceed those contained in
the "Safe Drinking Water Act Regulations," in which case the
standards contained herein shall apply.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:348
6. All construction of central water facilities shall comply with all
applicable standards as set forth by the American Water Works
Association (AWWA) as said standards apply to the various
components of a central water facility.
7. All central water systems shall be designed to operate as a pumpstorage type of system using gravity flow.
8. Wellhouse. The following information shall be required in addition
to all the other requirements specified in the standards referenced
hereinabove.
(a) Architectural plans of the proposed wellhouse shall be
submitted, showing plan view, elevation views of all sides,
typical sections, landscaping plan and a plot plan showing all
site improvements to be installed to service the wellhouse,
including but not limited to the following items:
(1) Driveway.
(2) Fencing.
(3) Lighting.
(4) Drainage.
The wellhouse shall be sized to provide at least three feet of
clearance around the various components of the water system to
permit ready access to the plant operators.
(b) A complete auxiliary generator system with interconnecting
wiring shall be provided for all central water facilities.
(c) Pressure gauges graduated in increments not higher than five
p.s.i. shall be provided at appropriate locations in the
wellhouse piping system.
(d) Sampling taps shall be provided for raw water samples and
finished water samples in the wellhouse. There shall be at least
18 inches of clearance below these taps to permit the use of
large sampling bottles.
(e) Floor drains in wellhouses shall be piped to an approved
discharge.
(f) Well water level indicators shall be provided with indicator
gauges that can be calibrated to read the water level in the
well directly on the gauge. An air pump shall be supplied as
part of the standard equipment in the wellhouse.
(g) A test sink shall be provided in the wellhouse to test for
chlorine residual. The waterline serving this sink shall be
tapped into the watermain and supplied with a separate curb
stop and curb box. The tap shall be located a sufficient distance
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:349
away from the point of chlorination to allow at least the
minimum amount of contact time specified by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection. Calculations shall be
submitted to support the proposed design.
(h) All central water systems shall be provided with the following
materials and equipment in a storage cabinet furnished in the
wellhouse.
(1) D.P.D. test kit with one year's supply of reagents to test for
chlorine residual.
(2) Repair parts needed to service any treatment equipment
or pumping equipment installed in the wellhouse.
(3) A pre-cut bypass pipe with the necessary fitting to permit
the removal of the main meter in the wellhouse for
servicing while keeping the water system operable at the
same time.
(4) One year's supply of reagents used in the treatment
processes performed in the wellhouse.
(5) A comprehensive manual containing manufacturers
information on all components of the central water system,
suppliers and service representatives, serial numbers and
model numbers of all components and warranties.
(6) Two prints of an as-built map showing the layout of the
central water system, complete with ties from permanent
structures to every gate valve and curb box in the system.
(7) A gate valve wrench and curb box wrench large enough to
operate every valve in the system.
(8) An industrial size first aid kit.
(i) Warning signs shall be posted on the exterior of the wellhouse
indicating any dangerous chemicals or substances used in the
wellhouse.
(j) All central water systems shall be provided with at least two
wells, irregardless of the number of users or average daily
water demand on the system. The two wells shall be located at
least 100 feet apart.
9. Storage Tanks. The following information shall be required in
addition to all the other requirements specified in the standards
referenced hereinabove.
(a) Storage tank(s) shall be sized to provide at least 1 1/2 days
water requirements based on the average annual demand, plus
the volume of water as required for fire protection.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:350
(b) A method of corrosion control shall be provided for the storage
tank(s).
(c) Level control in storage tank(s) shall be by float control
method.
(d) Visible and audible alarm systems shall be installed in the
central water system wellhouse to indicate low or highwater
levels in the water storage tank(s).
(e) Manual methods of measuring the water level in any water
storage tank(s) involved with the central water system shall be
provided, along with an appropriate measuring device.
10. Distribution Systems. The following information shall be required
in addition to all the other requirements specified in the standards
referenced above.
(a) All distribution lines shall be looped to eliminate dead-end
waterlines in the water system. The distribution lines shall be
extended to the main road(s) that the subdivision fronts on and
constructed along the entire frontage on said main road(s)
from outermost property line to outermost property line to
permit future tie-ins. The distribution lines shall also be
extended to the outside property lines of the subdivision in
areas where future expansion is possible on adjacent property
to promote additional looping of the distribution system. The
size of said distribution lines shall be as recommended by the
Township Engineer.
(b) A Hardy-Cross analysis of the proposed central water system
shall be provided showing that the flow required for fire
protection at a fire hydrant can be achieved without lowering
the water pressure on the first floor of any dwelling units
served by the water system to less than 20 p.s.i.
(c) Watermain pipe shall be ductile iron, Class 52 or higher, double
cement lined. Bronze wedges supplied and approved by the
watermain pipe manufacturer shall be installed in each joint to
assure electrical conductivity. Watermain pipe shall be buried
to provide at least 4.5 feet of suitable cover material over the
top of the pipe. Concrete sand shall be placed around the
watermain pipe to provide at least six inches of concrete sand
below and above said pipe, and at least 12 inches on each side
of said pipe.
(d) Watermain fittings, including but not limited to tees, wyes,
bends, and offsets shall be mechanical joint type, and be
provided with integrally cast lugs to accommodate reinforcing
rods and other types of restraint devices. Each watermain
fitting shall be provided with concrete thrust blocks poured
against virgin earth. The size of each thrust block shall be
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:351
sufficient enough to withstand at least twice the maximum
thrust force that the fitting is ever expected to experience.
(e) Gate valves shall be provided on all legs of any tee, wye or
cross-type fitting, on each fire hydrant lead, on each blowoff
pipe, and at the terminus of any watermain that may be
extended in the future. Each gate valve shall be double rodded
back to the nearest fitting for restraint. Gate valves shall open
by turning the operating nut in a counterclockwise direction
when viewed from the top.
(f) Valve boxes of the slide type shall be provided on all gate
valves. The internally cast lugs of the top section of the valve
box shall not bear directly on the lower portion of the valve box
or any extension. The top portion of the valve box shall be 1/2
inch below finished grade. The valve box cover shall have the
word "water" integrally cast in it.
(g) In locations where vent pipes or blowoffs may discharge water,
suitable protection must be provided to prevent erosion and/or
discharge onto adjacent properties. Easements permitting the
open discharge of water from the central water system through
blowoffs must be provided.
(h) Each dwelling unit shall have its own individual service line,
complete with individual corporation stop, curb stop, curb box,
and meter. The curb box shall be located at least three feet
from the face of the curb, but within the right-of-way of the
roadway. The size of each service line shall be calculated to
supply each dwelling unit with sufficient water at sufficient
pressure to meet the requirements of the local building codes,
but in no event shall the service line be less than 3/4 inch in
diameter. The service line shall be constructed using type "K"
copper water service tubing.
(i) The distribution system shall be subjected to a static pressure
test(s) and dynamic flow test(s) prior to being accepted. Said
tests shall be witnessed by the Township Engineer or his
representative and a representative of the Fire Department.
11. General Provisions. The following information shall be required in
addition to all the other requirements specified in the standards
referenced hereinabove.
(a) All components of the central water system, including but not
limited to wellhouses, gate valves, and storage tank covers
shall be secured with commercial grade padlocks or door locks
keyed alike. Panic bar hardware shall be provided on all doors.
(b) All components of the central water facility shall be designed
to be compatible and standardize with equipment that
presently exists in the water system being tied into, or other
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:352
water supply facilities owned and operated by the Township of
Sparta.
(c) A cost estimate for the construction of the central water facility
shall be provided.
(d) The annual cost of operating and maintaining the central water
system shall be calculated and submitted. The estimated
quarterly charge to the users of the central water system shall
also be calculated and submitted.
(e) A hydraulic profile of the water system shall be provided
starting at the source of the water, through the wellhouse and
distribution system to the user's tap.
l. Central Sewage Facilities. (Reserved)
m. Signs.
1. Purpose and Intent.
(a) The purpose of this subsection is to control the size, location
and character of all exterior and on-premises signs so as to
provide for attractive, coordinated and efficient signage in the
Township. Also it is the intent of this chapter to promote signs
which are 1) compatible with their surroundings, expressive of
the identity of the individual proprietors and of community
character; 2) orderly, readable and appropriate to the activity
to which they pertain; and 3) nondistracting to motorists and
do not constitute a traffic hazard.
2. Applicability of Regulations. The following regulations shall apply
to all signs and outdoor advertising and shall be in addition to other
regulations for specific uses elsewhere in this chapter.
3. General Provisions. The following general provisions are applicable
to all zones and shall apply to all permitted and pre-existing
nonconforming signs.
(a) Sign Permit Required. No sign, either permanent or temporary,
shall be constructed or displayed unless a construction and/or
sign permit shall have first been obtained from the
Construction Official. Nonstructural maintenance and/or
repairs do not require a permit.
(1) Exemptions.
(i) Customary warning, trespassing and posted signs,
traffic directional signs, and safety signs.
(ii) Garage sale or similar activity, such signs are not to
exceed one square foot and shall be removed within
48 hours after the event has taken place.
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:353
(iii) Railroad crossing.
(iv) Mailbox signs not exceeding two square feet.
(v) Temporary signs, including political signs.
(b) All signs shall relate to the premises upon which they are
displayed or erected, unless otherwise stated. Advertising
signs shall not be permitted in any zone district in the
Township.
(c) Any signs not specifically permitted are hereby prohibited.
(d) Signs, whether portable, permanent or temporary, shall not be
displayed or erected within the street right-of-way, nor shall
any sign be located so as to interfere with traffic visibility or
constitute a traffic hazard.
(e) The area of a sign shall be computed as the total square foot
content upon which the lettering, illustration or display is
presented. If there is no background, the sign area shall be
computed as the product of the largest horizontal width and
the largest vertical height of the lettering, illustration or
display. No portion of the supporting members of any sign
which is used solely for such purpose shall be included when
computing the area of any sign. For a sign with two display
faces, the maximum area requirement shall be permitted for
each face. Signs with more than two display faces are
prohibited.
(f) The use and display of spinners or similar objects and devices
across, upon, over or along any premises or building, whether
as a part of any sign or for advertising or public attraction or
otherwise, is prohibited in any zone; provided, however, that
this provision shall not apply to decorations customarily used
for locally celebrated holiday displays or Township
celebrations. [Amended 10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-17]
(g) Permanent signs within the interior of the structure designed
to be seen and read from the exterior such as those painted on
glass windows or neon signs shall be considered as part of any
maximum sign area.
(h) No flashing, moving or apparently moving signs shall be
permitted.
(i) No sign as permitted shall extend or project above the highest
elevation of the wall or parapet to which it is attached nor shall
any sign be erected on or attached to the roof of a building.
Signs attached to and parallel to the face of a wall shall not
extend farther than six inches from the face of the building
upon which it is attached.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:354
(j) Illuminated signs shall be either indirectly lighted or of the
diffused lighting type. No sign shall be lighted by means of
flashing or intermittent illumination.
(k) The area surrounding freestanding signs shall be kept neat,
clean and landscaped. The tenant, owner, or occupant to which
the sign applies shall be responsible for maintaining the
condition of the areas.
(l) All signs shall be kept in good repair, which shall include
replacement or repair of broken structural elements, casings
or faces and the maintenance of legibility. All lighting elements
shall be kept working.
(m) If and when any sign is altered, moved or replaced, but not
including minor and nonstructural maintenance and/or repairs,
the so changed sign shall conform to all requirements of this
chapter.
(n) Directional signs having areas of less than three square feet
are exempt from area and location regulations but shall be
shown on an approved site plan and further provided they do
not constitute a hazard to the traveling public.
(o) Any location where business goods are no longer sold or
produced or where services are no longer provided shall have
90 days to remove any remaining or derelict on-premises signs
following notification by the Township and at the expense of
the owner of such property. Where due written notification has
been given by the Township and compliance has not been made
within the required ninety-day period, the Township may cause
removal of such signs and charge the cost of such removal to
the owner.
(p) Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the
safety of the building or the public, the Construction Official
shall order such sign to be made safe or removed. Such order
shall be complied with within 10 days of the receipt thereof by
the person, firm, or corporation owning or using the sign or the
owner of the building or premises on which such unsafe sign is
affixed or erected.
(q) Applicant shall also comply with all applicable County, State
and Federal sign regulations.
(r) Each site plan shall include a sign plan showing the specific
design, location, size, color, letter style, etc. for all signs to be
utilized on the site. To the maximum extent possible the sign
plan shall include details on any freestanding, affixed signs to
the buildings, directional, directory signs and other assorted
signs.
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:355
(s) Institutional Signs. Signs of schools, colleges, churches and
other institutions of a similar public or semi-public nature may
be erected and maintained provided that:
(1) The size of any freestanding sign shall not exceed 30
square feet and not more than one such sign is placed on a
property, unless such property fronts upon more than one
street, in which instance a sign may be erected on each
frontage. Said sign shall be 20 feet from the street right-ofway line or any property line.
(2) Signs affixed to the facade of the structure shall be
permitted, provided the sign shall not exceed 5% of the
building facade.
(t) Signs for multi-use developments, shopping centers or
industrial parks, planned residential developments, multitenanted structures of multi-structure uses shall be governed
by the following regulations:
(1) Each such development shall submit a sign plan to the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment where
applicable for approval. Such sign shall include details on:
(i) Letter style.
(ii) Lighting.
(iii) Color.
(iv) Construction and materials.
(v) Height of sign.
(vi) Height above grade or below roof line.
(vii) Locations.
(viii) Standards.
(2) The sign plan shall be based on an integrated design
theme to include all of the elements mentioned in
Subsections m3(t)(1)(i) — (viii). All of the above elements
shall be designed to be in harmony and consistent with
each other, the architecture and materials of the principal
structures and the landscaping plan. Replacement of signs
approved as part of an overall sign plan, shall be
consistent in details with the approved sign plan.
Additionally, it is the intent of this subsection to encourage
the use of one or more directory signs, located within the
interior of the site, listing the names and location of
specific tenants and to have a sole freestanding
identification sign for the site located near the roadway.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:356
The use of the freestanding sign near the roadway should
not be used to list individual tenants located within the
building(s) or complex but instead should serve as a site
identification sign.
Directory signs, located within the interior of a site and
approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment as part of any site plan approval, shall not
be considered additional freestanding signs. The Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment where appropriate,
in its sole discretion, shall determine if a proposed sign
plan meets the goals and objectives of this subsection.
(3) The total area of all signs affixed to a structure shall not
exceed 5% of the building facade of the structure. The
Planning Board may permit a total sign area of up to 7% if,
in the Planning Board's judgment, such additional area
shall assist in developing a harmonious and integrated
sign plan in accordance with the goals and objectives of
this subsection.
(u) Automotive service stations and public garages may display
the following signs:
(1) One freestanding or pylon sign advertising the name of the
station or garage or the principal products sold on the
premises, including any special company or brand name,
insignia or emblem, provided that this one sign shall not
exceed 24 square feet in area on a side and shall be hung
or supported not more than 18 feet above the ground and
shall be at least five feet from any property line. A pricing
sign may be included as part of this freestanding or pylon
sign.
(2) Directional signs or lettering displayed or individual
entrance doors or bays, consisting only of words
"washing," "lubrication," repair," "mechanic on duty," or
other words closely similar in import provided that there
shall be no more than one such sign over each entrance or
bay, that the letters thereof shall not exceed 12 inches in
height, and that such letters shall be limited to a single
line which does not exceed 12 feet in total length.
(3) Customary lettering or other insignia which are a
structural part of a gasoline pump and canopy consisting
of the brand name of gasoline sold, lead warning sign, a
price indicator, and any other sign required by law, and not
exceeding a total of three square feet on each pump and if
illuminated, such signs shall be nonflashing and shall not
in any manner constitute a traffic hazard with respect to
adjacent streets or intersections.
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:357
(4) One nonilluminated credit card sign not exceeding two
square feet in area on each side.
(5) Signs or insignias incorporated into the side of an
overhead canopy shall not exceed 10% of the area of the
canopy side on which it is displayed.
4. Permitted Signs in Residential Zones.
(a) Nameplate and identification signs provided that the sign shall
be no larger than two square feet. A permitted home
occupation may be included as part of said sign. If such a sign
is illuminated, the direct source of light shall be shielded in
such a manner that it is not visible from the street or any
adjoining residential property.
(b) Nonilluminated for sale/for lease/for rent signs. One such sign
not exceeding six square feet shall be permitted upon the
premises upon which it is placed. These signs must be
promptly removed upon sale or lease of property.
5. Permitted Signs in the C-1 Zone.
(a) A business establishment may display one or more signs
relating to its business. The total area for all signs affixed to
the building face fronting on the street shall not exceed 5% of
the area of said face. No individual sign shall exceed 24 square
feet. The maximum height of any sign shall not exceed 10% of
the wall height or two feet, whichever is less. The maximum
width of any sign shall not exceed 50% of the width of the wall
to which it is attached or 12 feet, whichever is less.
(b) One freestanding sign per lot may be permitted provided the
area of the sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area. The
maximum height of any permitted freestanding sign shall not
exceed eight feet and such sign shall be at least five feet from
any property line.
(c) Overhanging signs, that is a sign attached to and
perpendicular to the building are prohibited if larger than six
square feet per face. Time and temperature signs are
permissible subject to the limitations set forth in the general
provisions of this subsection.
(d) Traffic direction signs.
(e) For Sale/For Lease/For Rent Signs. One such sign to be placed
on the property is permissible provided that it does not exceed
eight square feet and a sign permit is obtained.
(f) A temporary permit can be obtained to allow for special signs
advertising the opening of a business or commercial
enterprise, subject to the following conditions:
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:358
(1) Such signs are located on the same property as the
business.
(2) Such signs shall be located so as to not interfere with
traffic visibility or traffic safety.
(3) Such signs shall not include any flashing, rotating,
intermittent or rotating illumination. [Amended
10-22-2019 by Ord. No. 19-17]
(4) Except in number and size, such signs shall conform to all
other requirements for signs in the zone.
(5) Such signs shall be maintained in an orderly manner at all
times.
(6) Such signs shall be removed immediately upon expiration
of permit.
6. Permissible Signs in the C-2 Zone. Either one freestanding or one
wall mounted sign advertising the name of the building and names
of tenants or services provided within said buildings shall be
permitted provided:
(a) The maximum area of any sign shall not exceed 12 square feet
per face or side. In cases of corner lots one sign, either
freestanding or wall mounted, may be permitted along both
frontages.
(b) The maximum height of any permitted freestanding sign shall
not exceed eight feet and such signs shall be at least 10 feet
from any property line. The maximum area of a freestanding
sign shall not exceed 12 square feet.
(c) For Sale/For Lease/For Rent Signs. One such sign to be placed
on the property is permissible provided that it does not exceed
eight square feet and a sign permit is obtained.
7. Permissible Signs in the C1-H, C2-H and the R-4 Zones.
(a) To coincide with the historic preservation goals of the Cl-H,
C2-H, and R-4 Zones, signs shall be constructed, to the
maximum extent feasible, of natural materials, i.e., wood,
stone, etc. and the design shall be consistent with the
architecture of the building situated on, or contemplated for,
the premises. The design, i.e., colors, shape, lettering, and
materials shall be coordinated with the architectural theme of
the building.
Internally lit signs are discouraged in the historic zones.
Indirect lighting is recommended, with the source of light
concentrated upon the sign face in such a manner as to prevent
glare upon the street or adjacent property. No sign shall be
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:359
erected, relocated or maintained in such a manner as to cover
or intrude upon any architectural features of buildings such
as windows, columns, molding, or any major decoration or
architectural feature.
(b) One freestanding sign may be permitted provided the area of
the sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area. The maximum
height of any permitted freestanding sign shall not exceed
eight feet and such sign shall be at least five feet from any
property line.
(c) For Sale/For Lease/For Rent Signs. One such sign to be placed
on the property is permissible provided that it does not exceed
eight square feet and a sign permit is obtained.
8. Permissible Signs in the ED and ED-1 Zones.
(a) One freestanding sign may be permitted provided that the area
of the sign shall not exceed 48 square feet. Signs erected back
to back (double-faced) are permitted. The freestanding sign
shall be set back at least 25 feet from the street right-of-way
line and shall not be in excess of 16 feet in height.
(b) The maximum area of all signs on a lot shall not exceed 100
square feet.
(c) Signs attached to a building are permitted provided the size of
any sign shall not exceed 3% of the area on which the sign is
located. The height of said sign shall not exceed two feet and
the length shall not exceed 25 feet.
(d) In conjunction with Subsection m3(t), as a part of any
subdivision in the ED and ED-1 Zones, an overall sign plan
shall be submitted for the entire development, as well as for
individual lots where practical. This plan shall include details
on directory sign(s), directional sign(s), address signs and
individual tenant signs. There shall be a consistent design
theme throughout the development.
(e) For Sale/For Lease/For Rent Signs. One such sign to be placed
on the property is permissible provided that it does not exceed
32 square feet and a sign permit is obtained.
9. Permitted Temporary Signs.
(a) Signs advertising major subdivisions. Developments with four
or more homes for sale or industrial properties may be
advertised on a temporary sign not to exceed 32 square feet. If
the development fronts on more than one street, one such sign
shall be permitted along each frontage. All development signs
shall be removed when 95% of the lots have been sold.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:360
(b) For Sale/For lease signs on individual lots within a subdivision
must comply with the maximum size restrictions for those type
signs in the particular zone district in which they are located.
10. Temporary Signs.
(a) Temporary signs are prohibited in all districts, except that the
owner or owners of premises may post, display or erect a
maximum of three temporary signs on their premises, subject
to the following conditions:
(1) Temporary signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area,
which area shall be calculated pursuant to Subsection
18-5.3m3(e).
(2) Temporary signs shall not be posted, displayed or erected
prior to 40 days of the date of the related event, occasion
or election and must be removed within seven days after
the event, occasion or election related to the sign.
(3) Temporary signs are subject to all other general provisions
set forth in Subsection 18-5.3m3, and no temporary sign
shall be displayed within 10 feet of any intersection.
n. Fences and Walls. Fences and walls above grade shall be subject to the
following limitations:
1. No fence shall be erected within 25 feet of a street centerline nor
within five feet of a street right-of-way line.
2. Fences erected in a front yard shall not exceed four feet in height
and shall not be more than 50% solid.
3. All fences must have finished side facing out from property.
4. Electrified fences shall be permitted in all residential zones in the
side and rear yard only under the following conditions. The electric
fence must be placed five feet from any property boundary. A
traditional fence must be placed along the property line in front of
the electric fence. Permitted agricultural uses in the RR, RC-1,
RC-2 and commercial zones are exempt from this standard.
5. No walls shall be located in the proposed right-of-way of a public or
private road. No walls shall be higher than four feet in height.
6. Fences erected in the side or rear yards shall not exceed six feet in
height along or in combination with a wall except for commercial or
economic development property where maximum height shall be
10 feet. In addition, fences erected in the rear yard of lake front
properties shall conform to the requirements of Subsection 2 for
front yard fences.
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:361
7. The foregoing limitations shall not apply to fences used in
connection with agricultural uses provided the same do not
obstruct vision for purposes of traffic safety, nor shall said
limitations apply to fences or walls required by the Planning Board
in connection with site plan approval.
8. A building permit shall be required to construct bulkheads or any
wall 3.5 feet high or higher. Walls shall not exceed eight feet in
height. Walls shall be separated by a distance of at least 1 1/2 times
the wall height of the wall with the greatest vertical height. Timber
walls shall not exceed 3 1/2 feet in height.
9. Retaining walls shall not be erected within 25 feet of a street
centerline nor within five feet of a street right-of-way line, side or
rear property lines. A retaining wall constructed at the required
minimum setback shall not exceed 3.5 feet in height. The height of
retaining walls constructed beyond the minimum required setback
shall not exceed 2/3 of the distance from the wall to the property
line. These requirements may be waived in instances where repair
or construction of new walls may be required for replacement and/
or alteration of a failing septic system or similar such circumstance
where the public safety and welfare would be imperiled.
10. Railroad tie retaining walls may be constructed to a maximum
height of eight ties above grade. If a railroad tie retaining wall
exceeds eight ties, the wall shall be designed as a closed face
timber crib retaining wall with a maximum height of 12 feet. Walls
in excess of eight ties high or bulkheads shall be designed by a
professional engineer or architect.
11. Railroad tie retaining walls and timber crib retaining walls shall be
constructed in accordance with Section 1310, Retaining Walls and
Section 1315, Protection Against Decay and Termites of the BOCA
Code. The ties shall be in accordance with the American Wood
Preserver Bureau Standards as referenced in Appendix "A" of the
BOCA Code.
12. Railroad tie retaining walls shall conform to the following minimum
requirements.
(a) Tiebacks shall be a minimum length of seven feet and shall be
provided with four-foot minimum length dead mean.
(b) Tiebacks shall be installed on alternate courses at 16 feet on
center and shall be offset horizontally eight feet from the
tieback below.
(c) The face of the wall shall have a minimum batter of two inches
per foot.
(d) The bottom course of the tie wall shall be set in an eight inch
sand bed and shall be pinned to firm ground with 2 1/2 inch
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:362
diameter steel rods per bottom tie. The rods shall have a
minimum length of 30 inches. The top of the bottom course tie
shall be set at the finished grade at the bottom of the wall.
(e) All ties shall be spiked with four drift pins per tie and shall be
of sufficient length to penetrate two members and four inches
into the third member.
(f) All cuts or bored holes shall be swabbed with two coats of the
same preservative used to treat the timber.
(g) Crib wall fill shall be clean stone or porous fill. The backfill
above the wall may not exceed a slope of 2:1 and should not
exceed the height of the wall or adjacent crib. Walls shall be
positively drained by providing sufficient underdrain
installation. Surface drainage shall not be permitted to flow
directly against the face of the wall.
o. Landscaping.
1. Design Standards for Landscaping. The following standards shall
apply to the installation and maintenance of all landscaping,
screening and barriers required by provisions of this section.
(a) Landscaping plan at a scale of one inch equals 20 feet shall be
submitted as part of site plan. The landscaping plan shall be
drawn to scale, including dimensions and distances, and
clearly delineate all existing and proposed structures,
walkways, parking spaces or other vehicle areas, access aisles,
driveways, and the location, size, common name, botanical
name of all landscaping materials.
(b) Generally, planting required by this subsection should be an
irregular line and spaced at random.
(c) Existing vegetation which is suitable for use in compliance
with the requirements of this subsection to provide planting
and screening may and should be used as required planting.
(d) A percent of the site equal to a minimum of 30% of all
impervious surfaces shall be dedicated to plant mass areas.
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:363
(e) All specimen trees with sixteen-inch diameter or greater
(measured 4 1/2 inches above ground) shall be preserved to
the greatest extent possible.
2. Interior Parking Lot Landscaping.
(a) Any parking lot of 20 or more spaces shall be provided with
interior landscaping covering not less than 5% of the total area
of the parking lot. Such planting shall be in addition to
foundation planting or landscaping within six feet of a building,
planting or landscaping required as peripheral planting and
transitional screening as may be required.
(b) The primary landscaping materials used in interior parking lot
landscaped areas shall be deciduous shade trees suitable for a
parking lot environment. Shrubs and other live planting
material shall be used to complement the tree landscaping but
shall not be the sole contribution to the landscaping.
(c) The landscaping shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot.
3. Peripheral Parking Lot Landscaping. All parking lots shall be
provided with peripheral parking lot landscaping. In areas of the
property where transitional screening is required the peripheral
parking lot landscaping is not required. Peripheral parking lot
landscaping shall be required as follows:
(a) Where the property line abuts land not in the right-of-way of a
street:
A landscaping strip at least five feet in width shall be located
between the parking lot and the abutting property lines, except
where driveways or other openings may necessitate other
treatment. For each 100 lineal feet of curbline, the landscaping
strip shall consist of a mixture of shrubbery and trees generally
consisting of not less than the following:
(1) Eight low shrubbery (three feet maximum growth height).
(2) Twelve medium shrubbery (seven-foot maximum growth
height).
(3) Four large shrubbery (twelve-foot maximum growth
height).
(4) Two trees (maximum growth height over 12 feet).
(5) No greater than 50% of the plant material may be
deciduous varieties.
(6) Spacing of shrubbery and trees shall be designed to fill
within three years.
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:364
(7) Shrubbery planted in sight triangles shall have no greater
than eighteen-inch maximum growth height.
(8) At least one deciduous tree for each 50 feet shall be
planted in the landscaping strip; however, this shall not be
construed as requiring the planting of the trees on 50
centers.
(b) Where the property line abuts the right-of-way of a street: A
landscaping strip 10 feet in width shall be provided for any
parking areas in the front yard. The landscaping strip shall not
include the sidewalk area. The landscaping strip shall be
planted as outlined in Subsection o1 except that there shall be
at least one deciduous tree for each 40 feet of frontage and the
number of shrubs required shall be doubled for each 100 feet
of frontage.
4. Transitional Screening.
(a) Transitional screening shall be provided at the outer boundary
of any proposed C-1 Commercial, E-D Industrial, multifamily or
conditional use which adjoins or is across the street from lands
zoned for residential use.
(b) Transitional screening area shall consist of an unbroken strip
of open space a minimum of 25 feet wide. There shall be one
large deciduous tree with an ultimate height of 50 feet or
greater for every 15 linear feet of strip plus one medium
evergreen tree with an ultimate height of 20 feet to 40 feet for
every five linear feet of strip and one medium evergreen shrub
with an ultimate height of 12 feet or less for every linear foot of
strip.
(c) In certain circumstances of topography or to alleviate certain
specific problems such as the blocking of glare, muting of noise
etc., the Board may require use of earth berms, masonry walls,
wood fences, or dense evergreen hedges to enhance the
transitional screening.
5. Transitional Screening Waivers and Modifications.
(a) Transitional screening barriers may be waived or modified by
the Board in any of the following circumstances. The Board
may attach conditions to any waiver or modification which
would assure that the results of the waiver or modification
would be in accordance with the purpose and intent of this
section.
(1) Transitional screening and barriers may not be required
between uses that are to be developed under a common
development plan or series of development plans within a
common site plan.
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:365
(2) Where the strict provisions of this section would reduce
the usable area of a lot due to lot configuration or size to a
point which would preclude a reasonable use of the lot,
transitional screening and/or barriers may be waived or
modified by the Board where the side of a building, a
barrier and/or the land between that building and the
property line has been specifically designed to minimize
adverse impact through a combination of architectural and
landscaping techniques.
(3) Transitional screening and barriers may be waived or
modified where the adjoining land is designated in the
adopted comprehensive plan for use which would not
require the provision of transitional screening between the
land under site plan and the adjoining property.
(4) Transitional screening and barriers may be waived or
modified where the adjacent property is zoned to allow a
use similar to that of the parcel under site plan.
(5) Transitional screening and barriers may be waived or
modified where the adjoining property is used for any
public purpose other than a school or hospital.
(6) The Board may waive or modify the barrier requirements
where the topography of the lot providing the transitional
screening and the lot being protected is such that a barrier
would not be effective.
6. Maintenance.
(a) The owner, or his agent, shall be responsible for the
maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping
materials and barriers as may be required by the provisions of
this section.
(b) All plant material shall be tended and maintained in a healthy
growing condition, replaced when necessary and kept free of
refuse and debris.
(c) Fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair.
p. Cut and Fill. All subdivisions and site plans shall maintain at least a 2:1
grade in area where slope disturbance is proposed and in areas where
yards are proposed, a maximum of 3:1.
q. Two Septic System Disposal Areas, Percolation Tests and Soil Logs. The
following standards shall be applied by the Planning Board for the
creation of new building lots or the approval of new structures through
site plans or subdivisions.
For all new lots, two septic system disposal areas are required, both
of which shall meet applicable requirements. Only one disposal area
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.3
A:366
needs to be constructed initially, the other shall be available if a repair
or expansion of the system is necessary. One percolation test and one
soil log is required for each individual disposal area and they shall be
witnessed by a representative of the Health Department. An additional
soil log shall be conducted within each disposal area prior to the
issuance of a septic system permit.
r. Setbacks of Structures and Improvements from Lakes and Waterways.
Any building structure or improvements shall be set back from any lake,
pond, river, stream or waterway by the following minimum distances:
1. Setbacks to lakes or ponds of a size of one acre or greater. All
structures and improvements, including roadways and parking
area shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from the ordinary high
water mark of any lakes or ponds.
2. Setbacks to ponds of a size of less than one acre, rivers, streams,
and waterways. All structures or improvements, including
roadways and parking areas shall be set back 75 feet from the
ordinary high water mark of any rivers, streams and waterways.
However, in the case of ponds, rivers, streams or waterways
providing a habitat for endangered species as identified by the
State of New Jersey or the United States of America, the minimum
setback shall be 100 feet.
These minimum setback areas shall not be disturbed, regraded or
constructed upon and to the extent reasonably practical these areas shall
be maintained in open space and natural vegetation. These setback areas
may include the rear, front or side yards of permitted residential,
commercial or industrial uses but shall not include any septic systems.
These minimum setback requirements shall apply regardless of any
additional or more restrictive requirements of other governmental
agencies. In the event of more restrictive requirements by other
governmental agencies, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. In
the event of less restrictive requirements by other governmental agencies,
then these minimum setbacks shall apply.
s. Building Design and Layout.
1. The design and layout of buildings and parking areas shall be
presented to the reviewing board by means of preliminary
architectural renderings, sketches and/or photographs of the
existing buildings and sketches of the proposed changes.
2. The design and layout of buildings and parking areas for
commercial uses shall be reviewed so as to provide an exterior
architectural design and a proposed plan for the structure, which
when constructed, will not be so different from those structures
already constructed or in the course of construction in the
immediate neighborhood as to cause substantial depreciation of
the property values of said neighborhood. Particular attention shall
§ 18-5.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.3
A:367
§ 18-5.4. Open Spaces/Community Organization. [Ord. No. 636 A
505; Ord. No. 02-20 § 18]
be given to safety and fire protection; handicapped access; impact
on surrounding development and contiguous and adjacent
buildings and lands; and environmental and ecological
considerations.
3. Applicants for commercial site plan approval or waivers shall
submit to the Board preliminary architectural plans, sketches or
handwritten drawings of the proposed elevations of the building
and photographs of the existing facades. The applicant shall
provide to the Board copies of brochures or samples of the
materials to be utilized in the proposed changes to the facade and
alternatives that the applicant is considering. The applicant shall
present to the reviewing board the proposed colors and material
sections and any options that the applicant would consider.
a. Short Title. This subsection shall be known and may be cited as an
organization for the ownership and maintenance of open space within
the Township of Sparta.
b. Purpose. It is the purpose of this subsection to establish a means by
which the Township may insure proper organization, ownership and
maintenance of any open space for the benefits of owners or residents
of any development where the open space is not dedicated to the
municipality. It is also the purpose of this subsection to provide a
mechanism by which the Township may act in the event there is a
default by any homeowner association or organization charged with the
responsibility of maintaining such open space.
c. Designation of Responsible Officer. The Township Planner/Deputy
Manager shall be designated as the municipal officer responsible for
implementing the policies and procedures set forth in this subsection.
d. Establishment of Open Space Organizations. Applications for
development providing for residential clusters shall provide for an
organization or association which shall own and maintain all open space
which is not dedicated to the Township or other governmental agency.
An organization formed pursuant to this subsection shall not dispose of
any open space by sale or otherwise, except to an organization
conceived and established to own and maintain the open space for the
benefit of such development and thereafter such organization shall not
be dissolved or dispose of any of its open space without first offering to
dedicate the same to the Township.
e. Dedication of Open Space to the Municipality. The Township may, at any
time and from time to time, accept the dedication of land or any interest
therein for public use and maintenance. If an applicant offers to
dedicate open space to either the Township or a homeowners or open
space organization, the applicant shall provide the following
§ 18-5.3 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.4
A:368
documentation, at its sole cost and expense, to the homeowners or open
space organization or the Township, whichever is proposed to receive
the dedication:
1. A survey for the property being dedicated.
2. A title insurance commitment and title insurance policy in a
nominal amount of $1,000 conforming that the property is
insurable at regular rates.
3. A Phase I Environmental Site Assessment and if necessary a Phase
II Environmental Site Assessment by a qualified environmental
consultant and certified to the party to whom the land is dedicated
in accordance with the ATSM standards and Federal and State laws
sufficient to provide that the Township or the homeowner's
association or open space organization will be an "innocent owner"
pursuant to Federal and State statutes.
4. A bargain and sale covenants against the grantors act deed and
affidavit of title.
5. The above documents shall be provided prior to the recording of
the final plat and shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Township Attorney, Planning Board Attorney and Planning Board
Engineer.
f. Failure to Maintain Open Space. In the event that an organization
formed under this subsection shall fail to maintain the open space in
reasonable order and condition, the Township Planner/Deputy Manager
may serve written notice upon such organization or developers setting
forth the manner in which they have failed to maintain the open space
in reasonable condition. The notice shall also include a demand that
such deficiencies of maintenance be cured within 35 days thereof. In
addition, the notice shall state the date and location of a hearing which
shall be held within 15 days of the notice.
g. Hearing. At such hearing, the Township Planner/Township Manager
may modify the terms of the original notice as to deficiencies and may
give a reasonable extension of time to cure the deficiencies not to
exceed 65 days.
h. Entry by the Township. If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice
or modification thereof shall not be cured within the original 35 days or
any permitted extension thereof, the Township, in order to preserve the
open space and maintain the same, for a period of one year, may enter
upon and maintain the land. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest
in the public any rights to use the open space except when the land is
voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners.
i. Continued Maintenance by the Township. Before the expiration of the
one year, the Township Planner/Deputy Manager shall, upon his
initiative or upon request of the organization responsible for the
§ 18-5.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.4
A:369
§ 18-5.5. Industrial Standards. [Ord. No. 636 A 506; Ord. No. 649;
Ord. No. 665; Ord. No. 691 § XXVIII]
maintenance of the open space, call a public hearing upon 15 days'
written notice to such organization and to the owners of the
development, to be held by the Township Planner/Deputy Manager
at which such organization and/or developer shall show cause why
such maintenance by the Township shall not, at the election of the
Township, continue for a succeeding year. If the Township Planner/
Deputy Manager shall determine that such organization is ready and
able to maintain said open space in a reasonable condition, the
Township shall cease to maintain said open space at the end of the
first year. If the Township Planner/Deputy Manager shall determine
such organization is not ready and able to maintain said open space
in a reasonable condition, the Township may, in its discretion, continue
to maintain said open space during the succeeding year, subject to a
similar hearing and determination, in each year thereafter. The decision
of the Township Planner/Deputy Manager shall constitute a final
administrative decision subject to judicial review.
j. Cost of Maintenance. The cost of such maintenance by the Township
shall be assessed pro rata against the properties within the
development that have a right of enjoyment of the open space in
accordance with assessed value at the time of imposition of the lien,
and shall become a lien and tax on said properties and be added to and
be a part of the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon, and enforced
and collected with interest by the same officers and in the same manner
as other taxes.
a. No materials listed in N.J.A.C. 7:26-8, 13 and 14 shall be permitted in
any commercial or industrial use unless a waiver is granted by the
Planning Board after notification of all residents within 20 feet and a
public hearing. In addition, no such waiver shall be permitted unless
the Environmental Commission has reviewed the proposal and reported
to the Planning Board or failed to report within 45 days of receipt of
said request by the Planning Board.
b. No materials except of domestic waste handled by approved sewage
disposal systems shall be disposed of by any industrial or commercial
use on site.
c. Commercial and Industrial Use Considerations.
1. Commercial. Retail commercial buildings other than approved
combination residential commercial buildings shall be designed
with a parking area and access to a public street separate from that
provided for a residential building. A common architectural theme
shall be reflected in commercial buildings by means of building
materials, architectural style, sign controls, and/or color
coordination. A separate pedestrian and/or bikeway access shall be
§ 18-5.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.5
A:370
designed in such a way that no glare extends into residential
buildings.
2. Industrial. Industrial buildings shall be situated in a defined section
of the development with separate vehicular access to public road.
Parking and loading areas shall not be shared with commercial or
residential uses. A separate pedestrian and/or bikeway access shall
be provided to residential areas located within 200 feet. No
industrial use shall create any glare, heat, odor, noise or physical
vibrations perceptible at a property line. No principal entrance to
an industrial site shall be within 350 feet of a residential building. A
compatible architectural theme shall be reflected in industrial
buildings by means of building materials and landscaped open
space. A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
only when the intended use will not exceed the following limitations
or violate the following requirements:
(a) Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities shall be carried on
only in fireproof structures which conform to the standards of
the National Board of Fire Prevention Code, whichever is the
more restrictive. All operations shall be carried on and
explosive raw materials, fuels, liquids and finished products
shall be stored in accordance with the standards of said Board
of Fire Underwriters.
(b) Radiation. All use of materials, equipment for facilities which
are or may be sources of radiation shall comply with all
controls, standards, and requirements of the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended, as well as the Radiation Protection
Act, Chapter 116, P.L. 1958, as amended, and Title 7, Chapter
28, of the New Jersey Administrative Code, whichever shall be
more stringent.
(c) Odors. There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other
odorous matter in such quantity as to be readily detectable
with instruments. Table III (Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5, "Air
Pollution Abatement Manual," copyright 1951, by the
Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D. C.,
or the latest approved revision thereof shall be utilized as a
guide in determining such quantities or offensive odors.
(d) Smoke. There shall be no emission of visible gray smoke of a
shade darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as
published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines (Power's
MicroRingelmann Chart, McGraw Hill Publishing Company,
copyright 1954 may be used), except that visible gray smoke of
a shade not darker than No. 2 on said chart shall be emitted for
not more than five minutes in any one hour period. These
provisions, applicable to visible gray smoke, shall also apply to
visible smoke of a different color but with an equivalent
apparent opacity.
§ 18-5.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.5
A:371
(e) Dust. Solid or liquid particles shall not be emitted in
concentration exceeding 0.2 grains per cubic foot of the
conveying gas or air. For measurement of the amount of
particles in gases resulting from combustion, standard
corrections shall be applied to a stack temperature of 500° F.
and 50% excess air.
(f) Gases and Other Forms of Air Pollution. No emission of fly ash,
dust, fumes, vapors, gases or other forms of air pollution shall
be permitted which can cause any damage to the health of
persons, animals, or vegetation or other forms of property or
which can cause any excessive soiling.
(g) Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to
the human sense of feeling beyond the immediate site on which
such use is conducted.
(h) Noise. There shall be no noise emanating from the operation or
use which exceeds the limitations set forth in "An Ordinance to
Control Noises in the Township of Sparta" and any
amendments thereto.
(i) Liquid or Solid Waste. No industrial operation shall discharge
industrial wastes of any kind into any reservoir, pond or lake or
into the ground. The discharge of untreated industrial wastes
into a stream is prohibited. All methods of sewage and
industrial waste treatment and disposal shall be approved by
the Township Board of Health and the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection. Effluent from a
treatment plant shall at all times comply with the following
standards:
Maximum five-day biochemical
oxygen demand
5 parts per million
Maximum quantity of effluent 10% of minimum daily
stream flow
Maximum five day biochemical
oxygen demand after dilution
(B.O.D. of effluent multiplied by
quantity of effluent divided by
quantity of stream flow)
0.25 parts per million
Maximum total solids 5,000 parts per million
Maximum phenol 001 parts per million
§ 18-5.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.5
A:372
§ 18-5.6. Environmental Constraints Cluster Standards. [Ord. No.
636 A 507; Ord. No. 720 § XIII; Ord. No. 750 § 3; Ord. No. 841 § XL
VIII; Ord. No. 9-8-98 § V]
No effluent shall contain any other acids, oils, dust, toxic
metals, corrosive or other toxic substance in solution or
suspension which would create odors, discolor, poison or
otherwise pollute the stream in any way. In addition, no
industrial use shall discharge into any public sanitary sewer
system quantities of water beyond the capacity of said sewer
system.
(j) Glare. There shall be no direct or sky-reflected glare exceeding
0.5 foot candles measurable beyond the property line of the lot
occupied by such use. This regulation shall not apply to lights
used at the entrance or exit of service drives.
3. Office. Office buildings shall be designed with a parking area and
access to a public street separate from those provided for
residential buildings except multifamily buildings. A compatible
architectural theme shall be reflected by means of building
materials, architectural style and/or color coordination. No lighting
system shall create a glare on adjacent residential buildings. No
manufacturing or retailing of goods shall be permitted, except
those pertinent to office operations such as newsstands or
cafeterias, etc.
a. Allowable Minimum Residential Site Size. In order to promote the
environmental soundness in layout and design of proposed
environmental constraints cluster subdivisions, the cluster residential
site adjustment factors shall be applied to determine the actual
minimum residential site size in environmental constraints cluster
subdivisions and shall apply to the future environmental constraints
cluster option subdivisions of lands in accordance with the following
criteria:
1. The total number of net cluster residential sites (hereinafter
"residential sites") in the cluster subdivision shall not exceed the
total tract divided by five gross acres. Therefore, there shall be no
more than one residential site for each five acres of land in the total
tract. The actual residential site created by subdivision in an
environmental constraints subdivision may be reduced by the
environmental constraints cluster adjustment set forth in
Subsection 2 below.
2. The minimum residential site is the minimum residential site size
permitted, and such residential site size shall be determined by
applying the following net residential site adjustment factors to
each individual residential site sought to be created:
§ 18-5.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.6
A:373
Cluster Residential Site Adjustment Factors
Constraint
Cluster
Adjustment
Factor Per
Acre
Resultant
Minimum Lot
Size
Slopes — 25% or more .20 5 acres
Slopes — 15% to 24% deep
soils
0.33 3 acres
Seasonal high water table on
surface
0.33 3 acres
Seasonal high water table 1-3
feet
0.5 2 acres
Shallow depth to bedrock
0-3.5 feet
0.33 3 acres
Depth to bedrock 3.5 feet or
more
1.00 1 acre
Flood plains, lakes, ponds,
rivers, streams, waterways
and wetlands
0 0 acre
3. After determining maximum number of lots permitted on the tract
in accordance with Subsection 1, each residential site sought to be
created shall be required to have a minimum area as is determined
by the constraints applicable to each residential site sought to be
created. In determining minimum allowable residential site size,
each of the constraints to which residential sites shall be subject
shall be determined in the same manner, utilizing the same plant
information, as set forth above. The size of any individual
residential site may be reduced below five acres by applying the
density factor in accordance with the area (in acres) of the
residential site subject to the constraints set forth.
The numbers of acres subject to each particular constraint are
multiplied by a corresponding "cluster adjustment" factor. The
products of each of these multiplications are totaled, and the
resultant net lot area must be equal to or greater than one.
Example: Assuming a three acre net residential site is subject to
the following constraints, one acre has slopes of 25% or more
and two acres have shallow depth to bedrock. Applying the above
formula, the calculations would be as follows:
1 acre x 0.2 units/acre = 0.2 units
2 acre x 0.33 units/
acre
= 0.66 units

§ 18-5.6 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.6
A:374
§ 18-5.7. Energy Standards. [Ord. No. 636 A 508]
Total = 0.86 units
The total of the above calculations is 0.86. Since the resultant
figure, as set forth in the formula, must be equal to or greater
than 1.0, the example three acre residential site is of insufficient
size. This residential site would have to be enlarged so that the
resultant calculations, with the appropriate constraints applied
thereto, would result in 1.0 or greater. In cases where portions of
residential sites are subject to two different types (overlapped) of
constraint categories, the more stringent "density" factor shall be
applied.
4. The Planning Board may, in its discretion, require the submission of
a site-specific plot plan for any such residential site depicting the
proposed location thereon of the dwelling house or other principal
structure, the septic system and driveway access thereto, the
feasibility of which shall be demonstrated by such plot plan to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Board as a condition
precedent to the grant of preliminary major subdivision or
preliminary site plan approval.
a. Intent. It is the purpose of this subsection to provide the minimum
standards so that new construction in the Township will be energyefficient.
b. Purpose. All subdivisions and site plans shall address maximum
effective use of passive solar energy site design techniques and other
energy-saving methodology.
c. Standards. All subdivisions and site plans shall conform to the
following:
1. All proposed structures shall have no shaded solar access to the
south facing wall 75% of the time on December 21 from 8:45 a.m.
to 3:20 p.m. Eastern Standard Time unless topographical or natural
features of the site require a waiver of this provision by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
2. Newly created lots and subdivisions shall contain deed restrictions
enforcing the above required solar access standards for all new
construction and planting.
3. 75% of all proposed structures shall have their perpendicular line
from the long axis located within 30° of true south unless
topographical or natural features on the site require a waiver of
this provision.
4. Where building location, based upon the above requirements,
causes a conflict with setback requirements, said setbacks may be
§ 18-5.6 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-5.7
A:375
§ 18-5.8. Livestock Standards. [Ord. No. 636 A 509]
In order to provide for adequate space, the following area standards shall
be applied to the establishment of all new livestock areas in the Township.
waived so long as they do not adversely affect buffering with the
contiguous uses.
5. All subdivisions and site plans shall contain an energy conservation
submission which shall be composed of a map at a scale of at least
one inch equals 100 feet with the following:
(a) Direction of true north.
(b) Orientation of all proposed buildings.
(c) Slope information — a minimum of five-foot intervals.
(d) Limits of clearing and pruning to achieve solar access.
(e) Any additional standards which will be applied for energy
conservation purposes.
d. Energy Option. Where developers propose structures which meet the
following minimum requirements, they will receive a 15% density bonus
on all least restricted lands or a 15% density bonus on moderately
restricted slopes which face south in the Rural Residential and
Conservation Residential zones:
1. All the above standards of Subsection c shall be met.
2. 90% of all proposed buildings shall have the perpendicular long
axis located within 30° of true south.
3. All north, east and west windows shall be triple glazed. All south
windows shall be double glazed.
4. R38 insulation shall be required in the ceilings, R19 insulation in
the walls and R11 insulation in the floor below the lowest living
level.
5. South facing glazing shall be maximized and night shades and
overhangs will be utilized for the purpose of shading hot summer
sun and providing additional insulation in the evenings.
6. Any foundations on slabs should have two-inch styrofoam
perimeter insulation.
e. Evaluation Procedure. The Planning Department shall compute the
shadowing and orientation of buildings based on overlays available in
the Sparta Township Planning Department. These evaluations shall be
presented to the Planning Board and will be utilized in evaluating the
energy considerations of new developments.
§ 18-5.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-5.8
A:376
Any animal other than house pets, cattle, horses and ponies shall be kept at
a distance of at least 100 feet from any property line. The following ratios of
animals per acre of land exclusive of the first acre shall be complied with:
§ 18-6. LAND SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN REVIEW.
§ 18-6.1. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 636 A 601]
§ 18-6.2. Procedure for Submission. [Ord. No. 636 A 602; Ord. No.
691 § XXX]
a. Cattle, horses and ponies — 1:1
b. Swine, sheep and goats — 5:1
The above provisions shall not be construed to permit feed lots, commercial
piggeries, fur farms and/or animal processing facilities. The regulations in this
section shall not apply to house pets. Provided the lot involved consists of two
acres or more, the keeping of one horse for riding purposes is permitted. For
each one acre in the lot involved over a minimum of two acres, an additional
horse shall be permitted.
a. Short Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as "The Land
Subdivision Ordinance of the Township of Sparta."
b. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the Township in order to promote
its public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. It shall be
administered to insure orderly growth and development, conservation,
protection and proper use of land and adequate provision for
circulation, utilities and services.
c. Administration. The provisions of this section shall be administered by
the Township of Sparta Planning Department and Planning Board and
where permitted by statute, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, in
accordance with all applicable provisions of C. 40:55D-1 et seq.
d. Construction of Section Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances,
other than the Zoning Ordinance of the Township of Sparta which are
inconsistent with the provisions of this section are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency.
a. Applications for Development. All applications for development, as the
term is defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, and Subsection 18-4.2, Subsections
c, d and e, shall be filed with the Planning Department. Each application
shall be filed as follows:
1. Twelve copies of the sketch of the proposal for purposes of
classification, preliminary discussion and appropriate action.
2. Four copies of the application.
§ 18-5.8 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.2
A:377
§ 18-6.3. Minor Subdivision. [Ord. No. 636 A 603; Ord. No. 691
§§ XXI, XXXII]
The minor subdivision plat shall be at a scale not less than one inch
equals 100 feet, prepared and certified to by a licensed surveyor and
complying with all other requirements of the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960
c. 141 (C.40:23-9.9 et seq.) (if applicable), to enable the entire tract of
which the subdivision is a part to be shown on one sheet, in one of four
sizes, namely, 8 1/2 by 13 inches, 15 inches by 21 inches, 24 inches by 36
inches, or 30 inches by 42 inches, which shows or includes the following
information:
3. A fee in accordance with Subsection 18-6.5 Subsection b of this
chapter.
The Planning Department shall process the application and shall issue
an application number. Once an application has been assigned a number,
such number shall appear on all papers, maps, plats and other documents
submitted for processing in conjunction with the application.
b. Distribution. At least 10 days prior to the first regularly scheduled
monthly meeting of the Board, the Planning Department shall distribute
the 12 copies of the sketch and copies of the application in the following
manner: One copy of each to
1. Township files.
2. Township Engineer.
3. Health Department.
4. Police Department.
5. Fire Marshal.
6. Construction Official.
7. Environmental Commission.
8. Industrial Commission (when appropriate).
9. Shade Tree Committee (when appropriate).
10. School Board (when appropriate).
11. Planning Board Chairman.
Remaining copies are provided to the Planning Board for their
consideration.
a. A key map showing the location of the entire tract, the portion being
subdivided clearly delineated by cross hatching of some other
appropriate means, adjoining properties and the tax map, lot and block
designation of the subject premises and adjoining premises, the street
§ 18-6.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.3
A:378
on which the subdivision is located, and at least two intersections. The
scale of the key map portion of the subdivision plat shall not be less
than one inch equals 2,000 feet.
b. The entire tract from which a portion is to be subdivided and a north
arrow and scale.
c. The portion sought to be subdivided.
d. Location of all existing structures and the distances of said structures
from the existing property lines and from any new lines sought to be
established, location of street right-of-way line and existing pavement.
e. The location and designation of any streams, ponds, brooks or other
natural features.
f. Location and size of all drainage structures.
g. A metes and bounds description of the lots to be subdivided. The plat
shall show property lines to the nearest hundredth, bearings to nearest
second and lot acreage to the nearest tenth of an acre.
h. Area of the entire tract, area and width of the lot at the street line of the
lot sought to be created, and the road frontage of the remainder
portion.
i. Name of street and width of right-of-way on which the property fronts
and existing pavement.
j. In legend form, there shall be indicated the names of all abutting
owners and their tax lot and block designations according to the latest
tax rolls of the municipality, the name and address of the owner,
subdivider, date of the latest revision, and the number of new lots
sought to be created, together with the plat containing the above
information. Where new lots to be created by minor subdivision will be
served by individual sewage disposal systems, the subdivider shall
furnish to the Planning Board satisfactory proof of proper sewage
disposal by soil tests. A subsoil test shall be required for each new lot to
be created. All tests shall be performed by a licensed professional
engineer in the presence of a representative of the Township
Department of Health. If a building permit is sought for any lot within
one year of the date when a satisfactory subsoil test was made thereon,
a new test shall not be required for the building site involved, providing
that the sewage disposal system is to be located in the area previously
tested and the subsequent regrading or filling of the area does not, in
the judgment of the Township Sanitarian, affect the validity of the
original subsoil test.
k. Zone and zone yard requirements.
l. List of variances if required.
§ 18-6.3 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.4
A:379
§ 18-6.4. Concept Plan or Plat. [Ord. No. 636 A 604]
An applicant may, at his option, request an informal concept review by the
Planning Board prior to undertaking a preliminary application. Although
it is expected that concept review would pertain to larger projects, the
Planning Board welcomes discussion on conventional subdivisions and site
plans. The purpose of a concept review is to identify items of major concerns
to the Township inherent to the development proposal, allowing the
applicant an opportunity to consider said concerns during the preparation
of a preliminary application. The concept review shall not be binding upon
the Board or the applicant. Concept plans should include the following:
a. A letter of intent.
b. A key map showing the entire tract and its relation to the surrounding
areas, at a scale of one inch equals not less than 2,000 feet.
c. Title block.
1. Name of subdivision or development, municipality and County.
2. Name and address of subdivider or developer.
3. Name and address of the owner or owners of record.
d. Scale and north arrow.
e. Date of original preparation and of each subsequent revision thereof.
f. Existing block and lot numbers of the lots to be subdivided or developed
as they appear on the municipal tax map.
g. Subdivision or development boundary line, indicated with a heavy solid
line.
h. The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, buildings,
with an indication as to whether existing buildings will be retained or
removed, parking spaces, loading areas, driveways, watercourses,
railroads, bridges, culverts, drain pipes and any natural features such
as wetlands and treed areas, both within the tract and within 100 feet of
its boundary.
i. The approximate location and approximate width of all existing and
proposed utility easements.
j. Zoning district boundaries affecting the tract and tax map sheet
number.
k. Proposed buffer and landscaped areas.
§ 18-6.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.5
A:380
§ 18-6.5. Preliminary Subdivisions or Site Plans. [Ord. No. 636 A
605; Ord. No. 691 §§ XXXIII, XXXIV; Ord. No. 750 § 4; Ord. No. 841
§ XLIX]
Preliminary subdivisions or site plans shall submit the following materials in
order to be deemed complete by the administrative officer and his designee
and put before the Planning Board. Certain requirements may be waived
by the administrative officer and his designee if they are not necessary
for proper review. All waivers must be in writing and furnished to the
applicant and Chairman of the Planning Board. Township standards should
be reviewed in developing your application.
a. Application form.
b. Fees as delineated in the Fee Ordinance.15
c. Preliminary Plats.
1. Preliminary plats or site plans shall be prepared by the following as
permitted by law:
(a) A licensed New Jersey land surveyor.
(b) A licensed architect.
(c) A licensed engineer.
(d) A licensed planner.
2. The preliminary plat or site plan shall show or be accompanied by
the following information:
(a) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to the
surrounding areas.
(b) The tract name, tax map sheet, block and lot number, date,
reference meridian, graphic scale and the following names and
addresses:
(1) Record owner.
(2) Subdivider.
(3) Person who prepared the map.
(c) Acreage of tract and each proposed lot to be subdivided or
developed shall be provided to the nearest tenth of an acre. In
addition the acreage of each lot of a subdivision within the
required depth from the road which is established by each zone
shall be shown.
15.Editor's Note: Fees may be found in Volume I, Appendix A of the Revised General
Ordinances.
§ 18-6.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.5
A:381
(d) Existing and proposed contours at five-foot vertical intervals
for slopes averaging 15% or greater and at two-foot vertical
intervals for land of lesser slope. Datum of all elevations shall
be that of the United States Geodetic Survey. The estimated
quantity of cut and fill shall be provided.
(e) The location of existing and proposed property lines, street
rights-of-way within the subdivision and within 200 feet of its
boundaries, street names, location and width of right-of-way
and pavement and type of pavement, buildings, watercourses,
railroads, bridges, culverts, drain pipes and any natural
features such as wooded areas and rock formations.
(f) Plans of proposed utility layouts, sewers, storm drains, water,
gas and electricity, showing feasible connections to existing or
any proposed utility system. Any connections proposed shall be
substantiated by documentation of size of service lines,
capacity of storage, existing pressure, etc. When an individual
water supply or sewage disposal system is proposed the plan
for such system must be approved by the appropriate local,
County or State health agency. When a public sewage disposal
system is not available, the developer shall have percolation
tests made and shall submit the results with the preliminary
plat as required by the Health Officer and § 18-5.
(g) A copy of any protective covenants, deed restrictions or
proposed homeowners association document applying to the
land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat for review by the Planning Board Attorney.
(h) A typical road cross section and proposed cross sections for all
new streets shall be provided. The cross sections shall clearly
indicate the type and width of pavement, location of curb and
sidewalks, if any, tree planting strips, maximum slope of
embankments, swales and berms, all drainage structures and
cross drains. In addition, cross sections of the proposed roads
and existing grade shall be provided at a minimum of fifty-foot
intervals along the entire length of the road. Cross sections
shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals five
feet for the horizontal and vertical planes. Each cross section
shall give the quantity of cuts and fills in square feet, stripping
in cut and fill in linear feet, topsoiling in linear feet. An
earthwork summary, in cubic yards, shall be provided on that
last sheet of the cross sections showing the following.
Excavation unclassified from cross sections C.Y.
Excavation unclassified from plans C.Y.
Excavation unclassified from ditches and
drives
C.Y.
§ 18-6.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.5
A:382
Excavation unclassified C.Y.
Wet excavation C.Y.
Unsuitable excavation C.Y.
Fill needed from cross section C.Y.
Fill needed from plans C.Y.
Fill needed to refill wet excavation areas C.Y.
Fill needed to refill unsuitable areas C.Y.
Total embankment needed C.Y.
Excavation available for embankment C.Y.
Borrow excavation C.Y.
(i) A centerline profile of all proposed roads shall be provided and
shall include the existing and proposed grades, proposed
drainage structures, percent of proposed grade, vertical curve
data including elevation and station of P.V.I., P.V.C., P.V.T. and
length of curve. The profile shall be drawn to a scale of not less
than one inch equals five feet in the vertical plane, and one
inch equals 50 feet in the horizontal plane. Return calculations
and grades at intersections shall be provided. Profiles of
ditches shall be submitted along with cross sections of ditches
every 50 feet showing cuts and fills, stripping in cuts, stripping
in the fill and topsoil quantities. Profiles of sight lines at
intersections shall be provided.
(j) The preliminary plat of site plans, profiles and cross sections of
the existing roads on which the subdivision or site plan fronts
as outlined above. The plan sheets shall be at a scale of one
inch equals 30 feet and shall include the following information.
(1) The existing and proposed right-of-way and centerline
alignment data including horizontal curve data and
centerline stationing.
(2) The existing and proposed edge of pavement.
(3) Cut and fill limits.
(4) Existing and proposed guide rail, utilities, storm drainage
systems including location of inlets, invert elevations and
size of storm sewers.
(5) Existing trees, hedges, fences, buildings, structures,
property lines, driveways, walkways, sidewalks, etc.
located within 30 feet of the existing edge of pavement.
(6) In addition to cross sections at fifty-foot intervals along the
road, cross sections at existing driveways and cross drains
shall be provided.
§ 18-6.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.5
A:383
(k) Land classification data which clearly delineates portions of
the tract with the following:
(1) Severely restricted.
(2) Moderately restricted.
(3) Least restricted.
(l) The preliminary plans and site plans, profiles and cross
sections shall include the proposed storm drainage
improvements and shall be accompanied by drainage
calculations including a map showing the subdrainage areas
and calculated flow rates at each inlet. When a stream
encroachment is proposed all applicable stream encroachment
data conforming to Department of Environmental Protection
Standards shall be provided as part of the preliminary plat or
plan. The drainage system shall be designed based on a storm
frequency period of 100-year storm or as required by the
Township Engineer.
(m) The preliminary plat or site plan shall include construction
details for inlets, manholes, headwalls, flared end sections,
standard curb, depressed curb for driveways and depressed
curb for handicapped, sidewalks, fence, ditches, guide rail,
parking and soil erosion details.
3. Cluster Development. In the RR, RC-1, RC-2 and R-1 zones, an
applicant for a major development may apply to the Planning Board
for a cluster development. Such application, as proposed in a letter,
shall be accompanied by a qualifying map, a proposed cluster
design plat indicating the proposed layout, the area to be retained
in open space, and proposed use of the area.
(a) Ownership of Common Land. Applicant may apply for
homeowner's ownership of common land or Township
ownership. If the Township ownership is requested, and in
opinion of the Planning Board such ownership will assist in
achieving the objectives of the Master Plan or Official Map,
then the Planning Board shall request approval from the
Governing Body that said open space or land resulting from the
application of cluster development will be accepted by the
Township. If said approval is not granted, applicant may submit
a cluster plan providing only for homeowner's ownership of
common land. He shall proceed in accordance with the regular
subdivision procedures as provided in the Land Subdivision
Ordinance.
(b) Planning Board Option. The Planning Board may, if in their
opinion the specific situation so warrants, require that a
conventional subdivision plan be submitted rather than a
cluster plan. The reasons for disallowing cluster may be due to
§ 18-6.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.5
A:384
topographic problems, soil conditions, access and circulation,
character of surrounding development, sanitary disposal
problems and possible substantial adverse impact on
surrounding area.
(c) (1) Applicant shall demonstrate that adequate percolation
exists to permit lot size reduction or that alternate
satisfactory methods of sanitary waste disposal are
feasible.
(2) Evidence of the availability of an adequate water supply
shall be submitted to the Planning Board in report form
from any public or private utility. If no public or private
utility exists, a certified copy of well tests, geological
analysis, and other data related to verifying adequate
water supply as deemed necessary by the Planning Board
shall be submitted. A minimum of one soil lot and perc test
shall be done for each proposed lot.
(3) The minimum tract size for cluster shall be 20 acres.
(4) The minimum lot sizes shall conform to the minimum
cluster requirements of the zone. The yard setbacks of any
site shall conform to the R-2 minimum yard requirements.
(5) The maximum number of lots permitted shall be based on
an approved qualifying map.
(6) All roads in a cluster subdivision shall be built to Township
standards.
(d) General Design Criteria.
(1) The following lands shall require special consideration by
the Planning Board. In some cases, development should be
avoided and in other cases, very low density development
is recommended. Additional improvements and safeguards
to protect significant environmental features and elements
shall be required.
(i) Flood Plain Lands. Lands which lie adjacent to
streams and are periodically inundated and flooded by
rains as the streams and watercourses overflow. These
areas generally should not be developed with
buildings. The ban on development in this area is to
protect the lives and property of those living in the
flood plain from flooding, prevent flooding
downstream which results when flood plain areas are
developed, and prevent pollution of streams and rivers
because of inadequate percolation.
§ 18-6.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.5
A:385
(ii) Areas of Excessive Slope. These are lands with slopes
in excess of 25%. Depending on the nature of the soil
bearing capacity, erosion factor and degree of slope,
development densities may vary from no building to
very low densities with appropriate safeguards. In
general, as slope increases, the density of
development should decrease. The reasons are to
prevent landslides and erosion and sedimentation
resulting from excessive stripping and cutting of land.
This in turn causes siltation of streams and the
clogging up of drainage structures along roads which
will intensify flooding in the Township.
(iii) Areas Characterized by Soil Classified as Having
Severe Problems by the Soil Conservation Service.
This is land often characterized by high water table,
poor bearing capacity, high erosion factors, or
incapable of supplying water. Special treatment is
necessary to prevent health hazards because of the
poor bearing capacity of the soil, and the possibility of
inadequate water for fire and health reasons.
(iv) Areas of Significant Horticultural or Conservation
Features. These include mountain ridges, valleys,
vistas, and significant horticultural features. These
areas are valuable because of their beneficial impact
in our environment and their importance in the
ecological systems. Development should be designed
to preserve these areas.
(v) Land Suitable for Specific Purposes. Land suitable for
active or passive recreational purposes such as
baseball fields, tennis courts, etc., or for other
municipal purposes or because of their location such
as land adjoining similar lands on abutting properties.
(2) Applicants using cluster to protect the areas listed above
should submit designs which generally allow for smaller
lots closest to existing roads on flat, well drained land.
Larger lots should be platted in areas of increasing slope,
poorer (but still passable) percolation, and lands closest to
flood plains.
(3) Lots adjacent to through roads shall have deeper depths to
permit larger back yards and provision for shrubs and
trees to serve as buffers.
(e) Location, Use and Maintenance of Dedicated Lands.
§ 18-6.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.5
A:386
(1) The Planning Board shall have full authority to approve or
disapprove the location and proposed uses of lands
required to be dedicated in accordance with the foregoing.
(2) Dedicated areas proposed to be deeded to the Township
shall be deeded free and clear of all mortgages and
encumbrances.
(3) If deeded to a property owner's association, cooperative,
or condominium corporation, it shall be deeded free and
clear of all mortgages and encumbrances, for their use,
control and management for open spaces, recreation, or
agricultural use and including appropriate restrictions to
assure the effectuation of the purpose of this chapter to
provide for the maintenance and control of the area. All
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 relating to the
establishment of open space organizations shall be
complied with.
(f) Right of Owner. Proposals in accordance with this section shall
only be approved by the Planning Board if, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, it will not adversely effect the overall benefit
of Sparta Township or the health, safety and general welfare.
Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring a developer to
elect this means of developing his tract.
4. Environmental Impact Statement.
(a) General Provisions. The environmental impact generated by
land developed projects necessitates a comprehensive analysis
of the variety of problems. This constitutes an environmental
impact statement. In evaluating environmental impact, the
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not
approve any submission until it determines and finds that the
proposed development:
(1) Will not result in appreciable harmful effects to both the
natural and aesthetic environments.
(2) Has been designed and conceived with a view toward the
protection of the regional resources and energy saving
techniques.
(3) Will not place a disproportionate or excessive demand
upon the total resources available for such proposal.
§ 18-6.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.5
A:387
The term "board" shall apply to Planning Board and Zoning Board
of Adjustment as appropriate throughout the remainder of the
environmental impact statement.
In order to accomplish these goals, the Board shall condition any
approval upon the agreement to implement performance controls
deemed necessary to assure the protection of the environment.
Any approval shall also be conditioned upon the receipt of
licenses, permits or other approvals required by law. Those factors
outlined in Subsection 4(d)(5) below, along with supplemental
requirements adopted by the Board shall be used to determine the
environmental performance controls that are necessary.
(b) General Requirements. It is further recognized that the level of
detail required for various types of applications will vary
depending on the size of the proposal, the nature of the site
and the location of the project. Therefore, having determined
that some flexibility is needed in preparing the environmental
impact statement (a revised environmental impact statement
may be required if significant changes to the site plan as
determined by the Planning Board prior to final approval were
done since original submission), the requirements for such a
document are listed as follows:
(1) Plot plan applications for a single or a two family dwelling
on an existing lot of record are specifically exempt from
the environmental impact statement requirements. In
addition, minor subdivisions shall, in general, be exempt
unless required by the Environmental Commission/
Planning Board due to sensitive environmental situations.
Finally, all agricultural operations are exempt that are
conducted in accordance with a plan approved by the Soil
Conservation District and all silviculture operations are
exempt that are conducted in accordance with a plan
prepared by a professional forester or the New Jersey
Division of Parks and Forests.
(2) A pre-application conference shall be held with the
Township Planner and the Environmental Commission
Chairman to determine the content of the environmental
impact statement as outlined in Subsection (d) below
along with any supplemental guidelines adopted by the
Board. Waivers of specific environmental impact statement
requirements shall be granted by Planning Board with
input from the Environmental Commission.
(3) When the environmental impact statement is prepared by
an individual other than the applicant, the credentials and
expertise of that individual shall be submitted with the
environmental impact statement. All applicable material
on file in the Sparta Township Planning Office pertinent to
§ 18-6.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.5
A:388
local conditions shall be consulted. Any additional material
pertinent to evaluation of potential regional impacts shall
also be considered. Furthermore, as much original
research as necessary shall be conducted to develop a
comprehensive environmental impact statement.
(4) Eight copies of each environmental impact statement shall
be submitted with the appropriate development
application. One copy of the environmental impact
statement shall be forwarded immediately to the
Environmental Commission for review and comment. The
Environmental Commission shall submit its written
comments within 30 days to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment. Four copies of the environmental
impact statement shall be circulated among the municipal
departments that participate in the application review
process. The remaining copies shall be retained by the
planning office and Sparta Township Public Library and
shall be made available for public review and comment.
(5) The environmental impact statement shall consist of
written and graphic materials which will clearly present
the information that is required. The scale of all maps shall
be one inch equals 50 feet, unless the Planner and/or
Planning Board agree to another scale. Contours, when
required, shall be provided at two-foot intervals for slopes
of less than 10% or greater.
(6) Upon receipt of the environmental impact statement, the
Planner shall determine within 45 days if it is complete or
incomplete. If it is incomplete, it shall be returned to the
applicant with recommendations regarding the additions,
deletions and/or corrections which are needed.
(7) In preparing the environmental impact statement, the
applicant shall make himself aware of the requirements
specified in other sections of the land development
ordinance so that unnecessary duplication of effort is
avoided.
(c) Application Types.
(1) All major subdivision applications, preliminary and final
site plan applications, consisting of less than 10 acres and
those minor subdivision sites lying within sensitive
environmental areas, shall be accompanied by an
environmental impact assessment except as set forth
herein. The information required shall be presented in a
concise report unless environmentally sensitive areas are
involved. When environmentally sensitive areas are
involved, the report shall be supplemented with additional
§ 18-6.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.5
A:389
graphic and explanatory material as required in
Subsection (b)(2). Environmentally sensitive areas in
Sparta Township include, but are not limited to:
(i) Stream corridors and floodplains.
(ii) Streams and water bodies.
(iii) Wetlands.
(iv) Slopes greater than 15%.
(v) Erodible soils.
(vi) Mature forests of sugar maple or hemlock.
(vii) Aquifer recharge areas.
(viii) Aquifer discharge areas.
(ix) Unique natural features and habitats.
(x) Residence of protected flora and fauna species.
(2) All preliminary and final major subdivision applications,
preliminary and final site plan applications, consisting of
10 acres or more, and conditional use applications,
consisting of 10 acres or more, shall be accompanied by an
environmental impact statement. The information
required shall be presented in a detailed report which
shall include written, graphic or other explanatory
material.
(3) Any use variance application not involving a site plan or
subdivision application may be required, at the discretion
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, to be accompanied by
an environmental impact statement. The information to be
required shall be determined by the Zoning Board in
consultation with the Planner and the Environmental
Commission.
(d) Format. When an environmental impact statement is required,
the following format shall be utilized and the information
requested shall be provided.
(1) Project Description. Indicate the purpose and scope of the
proposed project. Enumerate the benefits to the public, if
any, which will result from the proposed project and
describe the suitability of the site for the intended use. A
description of the proposed project shall be presented to
indicate the extent to which the site must be altered, the
kinds of facilities to be constructed, how they are to be
considered and the uses intended. The resident
population, working population and visitor population
§ 18-6.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.5
A:390
shall be estimated. The compatibility or incompatibility of
the proposed project shall be described in relation to the
following:
(i) Township Master Plan, especially the land use and
open space elements.
(ii) Master Plans of adjacent municipalities.
(iii) Sussex County Master Plan.
(iv) Regional and State planning guides.
(v) Other pertinent planning documents.
(2) Site Description and Inventory. Provide a description of
environmental conditions on the site which shall include,
but not be limited to, the following items:
(i) Types of Soils. List and description of each soil type
located on the site. If applicable, percolation data and
soil analysis as required by the Sparta Township
Health Department shall be provided. Where the
proposed area of land disturbance will involve soils
with moderate or severe limitations, as per Sussex
County Soil Survey, Soil Conservation Service, relative
to the type of project proposed, a complete mapping of
all soil types on the site shall be required indicating
where those moderate and severe limitations exist.
(ii) Topography. Description of the topographic conditions
within the site and extending 200 feet beyond the
property lines. When 15% or more of the proposed
area of land disturbance encompasses slopes in excess
of 10%, the following slope ranges shall be mapped for
the entire site: to 15%; 15% to 20%; 20% and up.
(iii) Geology. Description of the geologic formations and
features associated with the site as well as depth to
bedrock conditions. Delineation of those areas where
bedrock is in close proximity to the surface (i.e.,
within two feet of the surface) as well as major
bedrock outcroppings.
(iv) Vegetation. Description of the existing vegetation on
the site. When required, sketch the location of major
vegetation groupings such as woodland, open field
and wetland. Where woodlands are delineated the
forest type shall be indicated. Should include unique
features and protected species (i.e., dogwood, black
walnut trees, etc.)
§ 18-6.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.5
A:391
(v) Surface Water. Description of existing watercourses
and water bodies that are partially or totally on the
site and their relationship to the area of land
disturbance. Existing surface runoff from the site shall
be calculated using the methods contained in Soil
Conservation Survey Manual No. 55. When the natural
drainage pattern will be significantly altered, or
sewage effluent added to a watercourse or body, an
analysis shall be conducted which will investigate
flow, depth, capacity and water quality of receiving
waters. When required, floodplain areas shall be
mapped in consultation with the Department of
Environmental Protection. Existing drainage
structures shall be mapped and the capacity of the
drainage network shall be determined.
(vi) Subsurface Water. Description of subsurface water
conditions on the site, both in terms of depth to
ground water and water supply capabilities of the site.
Where existing conditions warrant, detailed
information regarding existing wells within 500 feet of
the site relative to depth, capacity and water quality
shall be provided. The water supply capabilities of the
adjacent areas and the recharge capabilities of the
site shall be discussed.
(vii) Unique, Scenic and/or Historic Features. Description
and map of those portions of the site that have unique,
scenic and/or historic qualities.
(viii) Existing Development Features. Description of any
existing features on the site that are not considered to
be part of the natural environment. This may include,
but not necessarily be limited to, roads, housing units,
accessory structures and utility lines.
(ix) Miscellaneous. When warranted, an analysis shall be
conducted of existing air quality and noise levels as
prescribed by the Department of Environmental
Protection, or the Sparta Township Health
Department.
(x) Energy Conservation Features. Siting for solar access
and maximum energy efficiency with respect to land
features.
(xi) Wetlands. All environmental impact statements shall
include a certified wetlands delineation prepared by
an expert qualified to delineate wetlands pursuant to
the definitions of this chapter and the requirements of
the United States Army Corps of Engineers and the
§ 18-6.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.5
A:392
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
The environmental impact statement shall include a
copy of the expert's curriculum vitae or resume and
a short summary of the expert's experience with
wetlands delineation. The certified delineation shall
be set forth in the environmental impact statement
and on the subdivision or site plan plans. The
delineation shall be mapped on a survey of a licensed
surveyor and said survey shall be set forth on the
plans. The applicant need not obtain an approval of
the delineation plan from the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers or the N.J. Department of Environmental
Protection prior to determination of completeness of
the application to Sparta Township. However any
approval by Sparta Township will be conditioned upon
approval of the delineation by the applicable State or
Federal agency.
(3) Area and Regional Description. A description of the
surrounding environs shall be provided as well as the
existing land use patterns. When required, the existing
infrastructure, with respect to the drainage and
transportation network, as well as any central sewerage
and water supply facilities shall be described in detail. An
appropriate regional analysis relative to the proposed
project shall be included.
(4) Impact. Discuss the negative and the positive on-site and
off-site impacts as they affect the items listed in
Subsections (d), (2), (iii) and (iv) hereinabove. Indicate
those negative impacts that are unavoidable. Indicate
those resources affected by the proposal which will be
irretrievably lost and those resources which are
renewable. The specific concerns that shall be considered
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(i) Soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from surface
runoff.
(ii) Flooding and floodplain disruption.
(iii) Degradation of surface water quality.
(iv) Groundwater pollution.
(v) Reduction of groundwater capabilities.
(vi) Sewage disposal.
(vii) Solid waste disposal.
(viii) Vegetation destruction.
§ 18-6.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.5
A:393
(ix) Disruption of wildlife habitats.
(x) Destruction of scenic and historic features.
(xi) Air quality degradation.
(xii) Noise levels.
(xiii) Energy utilization.
(xiv) Neighborhood deterioration.
(xv) Effect on public services, such as schools, fire and
police.
(xvi) Traffic congestion.
(xvii) Health, safety and welfare of existing residents
(xviii) Regional development policies.
(5) Recommendations to Mitigate Adverse Environmental
Impact. Describe in detail what measures will be employed
during the planning, construction and operation phases
which will minimize or eliminate negative impacts on-site
and off-site that could result from the proposed project. Of
specific interest are:
(i) Drainage plans which shall include, but not be limited
to, soil erosion and sedimentation controls. Every
effort shall be made to limit off-site runoff to predevelopment levels.
(ii) Sewage disposal techniques.
(iii) Water supply and water conservation proposals.
(iv) Site design techniques sensitive to the natural
environment which should include innovative
landscape, building and circulation design/solar
access siting.
(v) Energy conservation measures.
(vi) Noise reduction techniques.
(vii) Construction schedule.
(viii) Miscellaneous on-site and off-site public
improvements.
(6) Alternatives. Discuss what alternatives were considered
both in terms of building design, site design, and project
location. Indicate why an alternative was rejected if it
§ 18-6.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.5
A:394
would have resulted in less of a negative impact than the
subject proposal.
(7) Licenses, Permits, and Other Approvals Required by Law.
The applicant shall list all known licenses, permits and
other forms of approval required by law for the
construction and operation of the proposed project. This
list shall include, but will not be limited to approval
required by the Township, as well as agencies of the
County, State and Federal governments. Where approvals
have been granted, copies of such approvals shall be
attached. Where approvals are pending, a note shall be
made to that effect.
(8) Documentation. All publications, file reports, manuscripts
or other written sources of information related to the
project, the project site and the Township which were
consulted and employed in compilation of the
environmental impact statement shall be listed. A list of
agencies and individuals from whom pertinent information
was obtained orally or by letter shall be listed separately.
Dates and locations of all meetings shall be specified. A
revised environmental impact statement may be required
if significant changes to the site plan, as determined by the
Planning Board prior to final approval, were done since
original submission.
5. Landscape Plan. All site plan applications shall include a
landscaping plan drawn at 1:50 scale that shall include the
following items:
(a) Name and address of person, firm or organization preparing
landscape plans.
(b) Plant list in legend form including the following:
(1) All plant material to be used, keyed plan and grouped
according to low shrubbery, medium shrubbery, tall
shrubbery and trees. Plant materials shall be listed by both
botanical and common names.
(2) Quantity of each species to be used.
(3) Size of material to be planted. All sizing specifications
shall conform with American Standards for Nursery Stock
(latest copyright by American Association of Nurserymen,
230 Southern Building, Washington, D.C.) or better.
(c) Total square footage of plant mass areas required by
Subsection 18-5.3o1 of this chapter.
(d) Total square footage of proposed plant mass areas.
§ 18-6.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.5
A:395
(e) Methods to be used in welling, staking, wrapping and mulching
of plant materials.
(f) Location of all existing plant material to remain shown at scale
at present size.
(g) Indication of buffer planting required by ordinance.
(h) Indication of plant mass area.
(i) Location and spacing of each plant to be shown to scale.
Spacing may be shown graphically or by notation.
6. Financial Impact Statement. (Reserved)
7. Facility Impact Statement.
(a) Sewer and Water Plan and Report. This submission shall
include the following:
(1) A sewer and water facilities map showing the location of
major collection and distribution lines for serving the
proposed site development; how and where these systems
will tie into existing sewer and water lines; or, the location
of on-site sewage disposal facility or water processing
facility (if applicable).
(2) The Sparta Township Preliminary Application Sewer and
Water Report shall be submitted. This report shall include:
(i) An explanation of plans to tie into existing sewer or
water facilities and information on the status of efforts
to have such tie-ins approved by the appropriate
authorities; description of proposed sewage treatment
and water processing facilities to be built on the site
(where a Federal, State, County or regional agency
must approve any such facility before it can be built, a
copy of the application to such agency should be
submitted in addition to such description); outline of
all approvals by non-Township agencies which are
required for the erection and operation of such a
plant.
(ii) Calculations of water demands and sewage generation
resulting from the proposed development.
(iii) An evaluation of existing sewer and/or water systems
to determine their capacity. This evaluation shall state
the existing capacities, if any, of the existing systems
and relate these capacities to projected demands to
determine what, if any, adverse impacts are to be
expected.
§ 18-6.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.5
A:396
(iv) If this evaluation of the sewer and/or water systems
reveals that projected generations and demands will
exceed the identified capacities, then a detailed report
shall be submitted describing what improvements
shall be implemented to increase this capacity to a
level that will accept these generations and demands.
(v) If an independent on-site or interim sewage treatment
facility is proposed, then a description and analysis of
the quality of the water of the discharge from the
system and an analysis of the impact of that discharge
on any stream or underground aquifer likely to be
affected by it shall be submitted.
(vi) Data and methods for calculating sewage generations
and water demand for the capacity-demand evaluation
are contained in Subsection 18-5.3k and 1. Standards
relating to sewage effluent discharge depend on
where and into what element it is discharged. These
standards are contained in Section 18-5. If these
standards are not utilized, then a clear, concise
explanation for alternatives in addition to the required
calculations shall be included in the report to be
submitted.
(b) Circulation Plan and Traffic Report. This submission shall
include the following:
(1) A map showing streets, roads, parking areas and
pedestrian/bicycle pathways. The cartway and right-of-way
width for all streets, roads and pathways shall be shown on
the map. The dimension and capacities of parking areas
shall also be shown on the map. The map shall also show
landscaped areas in or immediately adjacent to any part of
the circulation system.
(2) The Sparta Township Preliminary Application Circulation
and Traffic Report shall be submitted. This report shall
include:
(i) An evaluation of the internal circulation plan and how
it relates to the anticipated traffic volumes it will
handle, how layout relates to the terrain and any
proposed deviation from design standards in
Subsection 18-5.3.
(ii) An evaluation of the external circulation systems and
the impacts of the traffic to be generated by the
development of this system.
(iii) A designation as to what identified critical intersection
the generated traffic will flow as indicated on the
§ 18-6.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.5
A:397
§ 18-6.6. Submission of Final Plat of Major Subdivision. [Ord. No.
636 A 606; Ord. No. 691 § XXXV]
Township Road and Traffic Map. If traffic is projected
to flow to more than one critical intersection, then
a traffic study performed by a certified engineer,
indicating the flows of the anticipated traffic to the
multiple critical intersections, shall be submitted. This
study shall clearly and concisely define the standards
and methods utilized to document this analysis.
(iv) Calculations of the number of motor vehicle trips
expected to enter and leave the site for an average
peak hour (PHT).
(v) Calculation and analysis of the impact of the traffic to
be generated by the development on the identified
critical intersections shall be made.
(vi) Data, methods and factors for calculating traffic
generations for the capacity-demand evaluation are
contained in Subsection 18-5.2 b,i. Critical
intersection capacities are to be found in the Township
Road and Traffic Map. If these standards, methods
and factors are not utilized, a clear, concise
explanation of alternatives shall be submitted in the
report.
(c) Facility Impact Statement. (Reserved).
a. The final plat shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning Board
for final approval within the time specified in Subsection 18-6.2 of this
chapter and in accordance with the provisions of the Land Use
Procedures Ordinance of the Township of Sparta.
b. Two original tracings, one mylar, one cloth print, 12 black or blue-onwhite prints and three copies of the completed application shall be
submitted to the secretary.
c. The final plat and accompanying documents required shall be in the
form and detail as required by Subsection 18-6.5. The final plat shall
contain provisions for certification and approval as required by law and
by this chapter.
d. Distribution of Copies. Copies of the final plat shall be forwarded by the
Secretary of the Planning Board to the following:
1. Township files.
2. Township Engineer.
3. Health Department.
§ 18-6.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.6
A:398
§ 18-6.7. Effect of Preliminary Approval. [Ord. No. 636 A 607]
Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for
a three-year period from the date of the preliminary approval:
4. Police Department.
5. Fire Marshal.
6. Construction Official.
7. Environmental Commission.
8. Industrial Commission (when appropriate).
9. Shade Tree Committee (when appropriate).
10. School Board (when appropriate).
11. Planning Board Chairman.
Remaining copies are provided to the Planning Board for their
consideration.
e. Letters Required Prior to Final Approval. Prior to final approval, the
Planning Board shall have received the following:
1. A letter containing a list of all items to be covered by a performance
guarantee, the quantities of each item, the cost of each of them and
the total amount of all items.
2. A letter from the Township Engineer stating that the required
improvements have been installed to his satisfaction and in
accordance with applicable Township specifications, and that the
performance guarantee is adequate to cover the cost of remaining
improvements.
3. A letter from the applicant's engineer stating that the final plat
conforms to the preliminary plat as submitted and approved. The
subdivider shall be liable for additional engineering fees incurred
by the Township where such certification is not correct.
a. The general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was
granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to, use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract improvements.
b. The applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration
date of preliminary approval, the whole or a section or sections of the
preliminary plat or plan.
c. The applicant may apply for and the Board may grant extensions on
such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least one year,
but not to exceed a total extension period of five years, provided that if
§ 18-6.6 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.7
A:399
§ 18-6.8. Effect of Final Approval. [Ord. No. 636 A 608]
Final approval of a subdivision or site plan shall confer upon the applicant
the following rights for a two-year period from the date of final approval:
§ 18-6.9. Variances. [Ord. No. 636 A 609; Ord. No. 691 § XXXVI]
All applications for variance relief to the Board of Adjustment not involving
any related site plan, subdivision or conditional use proposal shall meet the
following map standards:
the design standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised
standards may govern.
a. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer, whether
conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed.
b. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, the board may extend the period of protection for extensions
of one year each, not exceeding three such extensions.
a. North arrow and scale not less than one inch equals 50 feet.
b. Title block including:
Name of development.
Name, address and certification of preparer of plans; owner, applicant;
site block and lot numbers and tax sheet; date and preparation of each
subsequent revision.
c. Zone and zone yard requirement.
d. Key map showing entire site and its relationship to surrounding areas.
e. Subdivided lots.
f. Adjoining properties, lot and block number, and owner.
g. Area of entire site and existing yard setback lines.
h. Metes and bounds of lot(s).
i. Area and frontage of lot(s).
j. Road locations, type, size, width of right-of-way, paving materials,
curbs, sidewalks, catch basins, and parking.
k. Buildings and other structures, drainage, all utilities, right-of-ways,
easements, and connections.
l. Existing and proposed grades.
§ 18-6.7 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.9
A:400
§ 18-6.10. Guarantees and Inspections. [Ord. No. 636 A 610; Ord.
No. 649; Ord. No. 665; Ord. No. 691 § XXIX; Ord. No. 841 §§ L, LI]
m. Existing and proposed structures, curbs, swales, berms, guiderails,
edge of pavement, sidewalks, parking, and loading spaces.
a. Performance Guarantee Estimate.
1. No final application for development shall be approved by the
Board until the satisfactory completion and performances of all
such required improvements have been certified to the Board by
the Township Engineer, unless the owner shall have filed with the
Township a performance guarantee assuring the installation of
such improvements on or before an agreed date, and as hereinafter
provided.
2. Except as hereafter provided, the remaining required
improvements shall be at least 50% completed as to each category
set forth in the performance guarantee within one year from the
date of final approval, or by such time as 50% of the lots in the
section in question have been conveyed, in any manner, by the
applicant, whichever shall first occur. At least 75% of the remaining
required improvements in each category shall be completed as set
forth in the performance guarantee within 18 months from the date
of final approval, or at such time as 75% of the lots in the section in
question have been conveyed in any manner by the applicant,
whichever shall first occur. Such improvements shall be 100%
completed and accepted by the Township within two years from the
date of final approval, or at such time as all of the lots in the section
in question have been conveyed in any manner by the applicant,
whichever shall first occur. It is the intention of the Township
Council that this requirement will provide to those living in each
new section of the subdivision of a lot that is as complete as
possible with respect to tract and individual lot improvements.
3. A performance guarantee estimate shall be prepared by the
Township Engineer setting forth all requirements for improvements
as fixed by the Board and their estimated cost. The Township
Council shall pass a resolution either approving or adjusting this
performance guarantee.
4. "As built" plans for any development shall be provided to the
Township as directed by the Township Engineer.
b. Approval by the Township Attorney.
1. The subdivider or developer shall present two copies of the
performance guarantee, in an amount equal to 120% of the
approved performance guarantee estimate, for approval as to form
and execution by the Township Attorney.
§ 18-6.9 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.10
A:401
2. The Attorney for the Board shall notify the Secretary of the Board
prior to the meeting that the performance guarantee has been
properly executed and can be added to the agenda.
c. Bonding and Cash Requirements.
1. The performance guarantee shall be 120% of the performance
guarantee estimate, and as surety, a performance bond, in which
the owner shall be principal, shall be provided by an acceptable
surety company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey,
or in lieu of the bond, cash or a certified check shall be deposited
with the Township by payment to the Township Treasurer. The
Township Treasurer shall issue a receipt for such cash deposits and
shall cause such cash to be deposited in a bank named by the
Township, in the name of the Township, to be retained as security
for completion of all requirements and to be returned to the owner
on completion of all required work and expiration of the period of
maintenance guarantee, or in the event of default on the part of the
owner, to be used by the Township to pay the cost and expense of
obtaining completion of all requirements. Every bond, whether
cash or surety, shall contain a clause to the effect that a
determination by the Township Engineer that the principal has
defaulted in the performance of his obligation shall be binding and
conclusive upon the surety and the principal. A performance
guarantee shall be valid for a period of two years upon acceptance
by the Township. If improvements or significant percentage of
improvements have not been completed at this time, the
performance guarantee will be renegotiated with the applicant and
revised accordingly with one-year extension periods.
2. 10% of the amount of the approved performance guarantee
estimate shall be deposited by the owner in cash with the
Township. The remaining 90% may be in cash or surety bond. In the
event of default, the 10% fund herein mentioned shall be first
applied to the completion of the requirements and the cash or
surety bond shall thereafter be resorted to, if necessary, for the
completion of the requirements. The cash or surety bond may
recite the foregoing provisions.
d. General Liability Insurance.
1. In addition to the performance guarantee, the subdivider or
developer shall file with the Board a general liability insurance
policy at the same time as he files his performance guarantee
covering all operations in the development including contractual
liability with limits of not less than $100,000 for bodily injury to
each person, and $300,000 liability on the aggregate, for each
accident, and $50,000 aggregate property damage liability. The
Attorney for the Board shall approve the policy for form and
execution. The policy shall be of the same term as the performance
guarantee and shall be extended in conformance with any
§ 18-6.10 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.10
A:402
extension of the performance guarantee. The policy shall name the
Township and all of its officials as an assured and provide that
the Township may nevertheless assert claims against the other
assured.
e. Inspections and Tests.
1. All improvements and utility installations shall be inspected during
the time of their installations under the supervision of the Township
Engineer to insure satisfactory completion. The cost of such
inspection shall be the responsibility of the owner and he shall
deposit with the Township Treasurer, for placement in a special
trust fund account, a sum equal to 5% of the amount of the
performance guarantee estimate of the cost of public
improvements to be applied to payment of inspection costs. If
inspection costs exceed such fund, the owner shall deposit with the
Township Treasurer additional sums upon notice from the
Township Engineer. The inspection fee shall in no case be less than
$100. The Township Treasurer shall return to the owner any
balance of the inspection deposit, together with the paid invoices
for all expenses charged, upon expiration of the maintenance bond.
2. In no case shall any paving work, including prime and seal coats, be
done without permission from the Township Engineer's office. At
least two days' notice shall be given to the Township Engineer's
office prior to any such construction so that he or a qualified
representative may be present at the time the work is to be done.
3. The Township Engineer's office shall be notified after each of the
following phases of the work has been completed so that he or a
qualified representative may inspect the work:
(a) Road subgrade.
(b) Curb and gutter forms.
(c) Curbs and gutters.
(d) Road paving.
(e) Sidewalk forms.
(f) Sidewalks.
(g) Drainage pipes and other drainage before back filling.
(h) Street name signs.
(i) Sanitary sewers and/or septic tanks.
(j) Monuments.
4. A final inspection of all improvements and utilities will be started
within 10 days notification by the developer to determine whether
§ 18-6.10 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.10
A:403
the work is satisfactory and in agreement with the approved final
drawings and the Township specifications. The general condition
of the site shall also be considered. Upon a satisfactory final
inspection report, action shall be taken to release or declare in
default the performance guarantee covering such improvements
and utilities.
5. Inspection by the Township of the installation of improvements and
utilities shall not operate to subject the Township to liability for
claims, suits or liability of any kind that may at any time arise
because of defects or negligence during construction or at any time
thereafter; the owner and his contractors shall be responsible for
maintaining safe conditions at all times during construction and for
providing proper utilities and improvements.
6. After completing the construction of the public improvements
covered by the performance guarantee, the developer shall prepare
a set of the approved Public Improvement and Utility Plans and the
Profiles amended to read "as constructed" and apply to the
Township Engineer for final inspection of the work. The Township
Engineer shall report to the Township Council on the condition of
the work and recommend that the performance guarantee be
released, extended or declared in default.
f. Release. The Township Council shall, by resolution, release or declare
in default each performance guarantee. Such performance guarantee
shall remain in effect until released by the Council. The amount of the
performance guarantee may be reduced by the Council by resolution
when portions of the required improvements have been installed and
have been inspected and approved by the Township Engineer, provided
that no such reduction shall be approved until the Township Engineer
has certified the estimated cost of completing any remaining required
improvements. If any improvements have not been installed in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety
shall be liable thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost over and
above the 10% cash deposit on the improvements not installed and,
upon receipt of the proceeds thereof, the Township shall install such
improvements. The Township shall also have all other remedies as may
be lawfully available.
g. Conditions for Acceptance of Improvements. The approval of any
application for development by the Township shall in no way be
construed as acceptance of any street or drainage system, or any other
improvement, nor shall such approval obligate the Township in any way
to maintain or exercise jurisdiction over such street or drainage system
or other improvement. No improvement shall be accepted by the
Township Council unless and until all of the following conditions have
been met:
§ 18-6.10 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.10
A:404
§ 18-6.11. Off-Tract Improvements. [Ord. No. 636 A 611]
1. The Township Engineer has certified in writing that the
improvements are complete and that they comply with the
requirements of this chapter;
2. The final application for development has been approved by the
Planning Board; and
3. The owner has filed with the Township Council a maintenance
guarantee in an amount equal to not more than 15% of the original
estimate of the cost of installing the improvements. The
maintenance guarantee shall run for a period of two years. The
procedures and requirements governing such maintenance
guarantee shall be identical with the procedures and requirements
for a performance guarantee set forth in this chapter.
a. Improvements to be Constructed at the Sole Expense of the Developer.
In cases where the need for an off-tract improvement is created by the
proposed subdivision or site plan, and where no other property owners
receive a special benefit thereby, the Planning Board may recommend
to the Township Council that it require the subdivider or developer, as a
condition for subdivision or site plan approval, at the subdivider's or
developer's expense, to acquire lands outside of the subdivision or tract
and improve and dedicate such lands to the Township or the County, or,
in lieu thereof, require the subdivider or developer to deposit with the
Township a sum of money sufficient to allow the Township to acquire
and to improve such lands.
b. Other Improvements.
1. In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is created by
the proposed subdivision or site plan and where the Planning Board
determines that properties outside of the subdivision or tract will
also be benefited by the improvement, the Planning Board shall
forthwith forward to the Township Council a list and description of
all such improvements together with its request that the Council
determine and advise the Board of the procedure to be followed in
the construction or installation thereof. The Planning Board shall
withhold action upon the subdivision or site plan until receipt of the
Council's determination or until the expiration of 90 days after the
forwarding of such list and description to the Council without such
determination having been made, whichever occurs sooner.
2. The Township Council, within 90 days after the receipt of such list
and description, shall determine and advise the Planning Board
whether:
(a) The improvement or improvements are to be constructed or
installed by the Township.
§ 18-6.10 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.11
A:405
(1) As a general improvement, the cost of which shall be borne
at general expense, except as hereinafter otherwise
provided as a contribution thereto by the subdivider or
developer, or
(2) As a local improvement, all or part of the cost of which
shall be especially assessed against properties benefited
thereby in proportion to benefits conferred by the
improvements in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq.,
except as hereinafter otherwise provided as a contribution
thereto by the subdivider or developer; or
(b) The improvement or improvements are to be constructed or
installed by the subdivider or developer under a formula for
partial reimbursement as hereinafter set forth.
3. If the Township Council determines that the improvement or
improvements shall be constructed or installed under Subsection
b2(a) above, the Planning Board shall estimate, with the aid of the
Municipal Engineer or such other persons as have pertinent
information or expertise, the amount if any, by which the total cost
thereof will exceed the total amount by which all properties,
including the subdivision or tract, will be especially benefited
thereby, and the subdivider or developer shall be liable to the
Township for such excess. Further, the Township Council shall
adopt an ordinance authorizing and providing for the financing of
the improvement or improvements in a manner consistent with the
obligation of the subdivider or developer for any excess of total cost
over total benefits conferred, as set forth above.
4. If the Township Council determines that the improvement or
improvements shall be constructed or installed under Subsection
b2(a)(2) above, the Planning Board shall, as provided in Subsection
d of this subsection, estimate the difference between the total costs
to be incurred and the total amount by which all properties to be
benefited thereby, including the subdivision property or tract, will
be especially benefited by the improvement, and the subdivider or
developer shall be liable to the Township therefor, as well as for the
amount of any special assessments against the subdivision property
or tract for benefits conferred by the improvement or
improvements. Further, the Township Council shall adopt an
ordinance authorizing and providing for the financing of the
improvement or improvements and the assessment of benefits
arising therefor in a manner consistent with the obligation of the
subdivider or developer with respect thereto, and proceedings
under such ordinance shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56-1
et seq., except to the extent modified by the obligation of the
subdivider or developer for any excess of total costs over total
benefits conferred, as set forth above.
§ 18-6.11 SPARTA CODE § 18-6.11
A:406
5. If the Township Council determines that the improvement or
improvements are to be constructed or installed by the subdivider
or developer under Subsection b2(b) above, the Planning Board
shall in like manner estimate the amount of such excess and the
subdivider or developer shall be liable to the Township therefor as
well as for the amount of any special assessments against the
subdivision property or tract for benefits conferred by the
improvement or improvements. However, the subdivider or
developer shall be entitled to be reimbursed by the Township for
the amount of any special assessments against property other than
the subdivision property or tract for benefits conferred by the
improvement or improvements, and proceedings under such
ordinance shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq.
However, any such assessment against the subdivision property or
tract shall be marked paid and satisfied in consideration of the
construction or installation of the improvement or improvements
by the subdivider or developer.
6. If the Township Council shall not adopt such an ordinance or
resolution within such time, the final subdivision layout or site plan
shall be designed accordingly, and the Planning Board shall
thereupon grant or deny final approval.
c. Performance Guarantee. The subdivider or developer shall be required
to provide, as a condition for final approval of his subdivision or site
plan application, a performance guarantee running to the Township as
follows:
1. If the improvement is to be constructed by the subdivider or
developer under Subsection a or Subsection b2(b), a performance
bond with surety in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the
improvement, or any part of the improvement that is to be acquired
or installed by the Township under Subsection 18-6.11a, a cash
deposit equal to the estimated cost of such acquisition or
installation by the Township.
2. If the improvement is to be constructed by the Township as a
general improvement under Subsection b2(a)(1), a cash deposit
equal to the amount of the excess of the estimated cost of the
improvement over the estimated total amount by which all
properties, including the subdivision property or tract, will be
specially benefited thereby; and
3. If the improvement is to be constructed by the Township as a local
improvement under Subsection b2(a)(2), a cash deposit equal to
the amount referred to in the preceding subsection plus the
estimated amount by which the subdivision property or tract will be
especially benefited by the improvement.
d. Refund of Deposit Where Improvements Are Not Authorized Within
Five Years. In any case in which a subdivider or developer shall deposit
§ 18-6.11 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-6.11
A:407
§ 18-6.12. County Planning Board Review. [Ord. No. 636 A 612]
Any site plan involving land development along a County road for
commercial use, industrial use, multifamily structures containing five or
more units, off-street parking area or any development producing surface
runoff in excess of one cubic foot per second per acre shall be submitted
to the County Planning Board for review and approval. The site plan shall
contain such additional information and shall be accompanied by a check
payable to the Sussex County Planning Department for an appropriate
amount, all as required by the Land Development Standards of the County
of Sussex, New Jersey. The Board shall not act on the site plan until receipt
of the County Planning Board report or until 30 days have elapsed from the
time of referral to said County Board.
§ 18-7. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
§ 18-7.1. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 636 A 701; Ord. No. 841 § LII]
money with the Township for the completion of an improvement that
is to be constructed pursuant to this chapter by the Township, the
subdivider or developer shall be entitled to a full refund of such deposit
if the Township Council has not enacted an ordinance authorizing the
improvement within five years after the date all other improvements
are completed.
e. Deposit of Funds. All monies paid a subdivider or developer pursuant to
this chapter shall be paid over to the Township Treasurer who shall
provide a suitable depository therefor. Such funds shall be used only for
the improvements for which they are deposited or improvements
serving the same purpose.
f. Redetermination of Assessment Upon Completion of Improvement.
Upon completion of the off-tract improvements required pursuant to
this section, the subdivider's or developer's liability hereunder shall be
recalculated in accordance with the actual, as compared with the
estimated, cost of improvements. To the extent that it shall decrease the
amount thereof, the Township shall forthwith refund the amount of such
decrease to the subdivider or developer. In cases where the
improvements are specially assessed against all benefited properties,
recalculation shall be made by the municipal assessing authority in the
course of the special assessment proceedings. In other cases, it shall be
made by the Township Engineer.
g. Council Approval Required. All estimates required to be made by the
Planning Board herein shall be reviewed and approved by the Township
Council prior to final action thereon.
a. The office of Zoning Officer of the Township of Sparta is hereby created.
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Pursuant thereto he shall investigate and inspect any alleged
violations of this chapter within his knowledge or coming to his
§ 18-6.11 SPARTA CODE § 18-7.1
A:408
§ 18-7.2. Penalties. [Ord. No. 636 A 702; Ord. No. 841 § LIII]
attention, sign complaints and use other lawful means to ensure
compliance and to cooperate with other Township officials in the
prosecution of violators.
b. Whenever any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered,
repaired, converted, used or maintained within the Township of Sparta,
it shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to ascertain that the same is
done in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and not in
violation thereof and that the use of any lands and/or construction
complies with the terms and conditions of any variance, subdivision, or
site plan approval and with the approved plans submitted in connection
therewith. If contrary thereto, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer
to proceed with the enforcement of this chapter in the manner herein
provided and as otherwise provided by law; and is hereby further
authorized and empowered to institute and maintain any further
statutory legal actions and proceedings for the enforcement hereof now
existing or heretofore or hereafter provided which may be available to
him.
c. Search Warrants. In the enforcement of this chapter, the Zoning Officer
may apply to the Judge of the Municipal Court of Sparta Township for a
warrant or warrants to search and inspect the properties and premises
upon which he has reason to believe a violation of the chapter has or is
taking place, and upon probable cause shown, the Judge may issue such
warrant or warrants in the manner authorized by law. The information
obtained pursuant thereto shall be admissible as evidence in a court of
competent jurisdiction for the purposes of proving any case brought for
violation of this chapter.
a. Penalty. Any owner, agent, person, or corporation who violates any of
the provisions of this chapter or who fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, raises, moves, extends, enlarges,
alters or demolishes any structure in violation of any detailed
statements or plans submitted hereunder or who puts into use any lot
or premises in violation of any detailed statements or plans submitted
hereunder or in violation of the terms and conditions of any variance,
site plan or subdivision approval and the approved plans submitted in
connection therewith or who refuses reasonable opportunity to inspect
premises, shall be liable to a fine of not more than $1,250 or to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or to both such fine and
imprisonment. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
b. Persons Liable. The owner of any structure, lot or land, or part thereof,
where anything in violation of this chapter is placed or exists, and any
architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in
connection therewith who assists in the commission of such violation
shall be guilty of a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall
§ 18-7.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-7.2
A:409
§ 18-8. FEES.
§ 18-8.1. Land Use Fees. [Ord. No. 01-24 § 1; Ord. No. 03-08 § 4;
Ord. No. 04-05 §§ 20, 21; Ord. No. 06-02 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2016-19
§ 4]
each be liable to the fine or imprisonment, or both specified in
Subsection a above.
a. Minor subdivision — lot line adjustment, application fee: $250.
b. Minor subdivision — two or three lots. Base fee: $300 plus $10 per lot.
c. Preliminary major subdivision plat — original submission. Base fee:
$750 plus $25 per lot.
d. Final subdivision plat. Base fee: $500 plus $25 per lot.
e. Site plans — preliminary. Base fee: $500 plus $25 per 1,000 square feet
gross floor area plus $10 per 1,000 square feet site disturbance. Final -
1/2 preliminary fee. Minor site plans $300. Conditional use $300. Site
plan waiver $50.
f. Appeals, interpretations and variances. For each application requesting
an appeal interpretation, or variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(a), (b), (c) and/or (d), the following application fees shall
apply:
1. Base Fees:
N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70
Subsection
Type
Single Family
Residential
Retail Prof.
Multi-Family Industrial
(a) $100 $100 $100
(b) $100 $100 $100
(c) $100 $200 $200
(d) $200 $500 $750
If the application requires more than one type of relief under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 (a, b, c, d) as listed in Subsection f, the
applicant shall apply the fee required for every and each type
variance requested.
g. Other base fees.
1. Construction of a single family residence on an undersized lot (in
addition to the foregoing) - $100.
2. Special meeting of either the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment - $1,000.
§ 18-7.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-8.1
A:410
§ 18-8.2. Assorted Fees. [Ord. No. 01-24 § 1; Ord. No. 02-11; Ord.
No. 03-08 § 4; Ord. No. 04-05 § 24; Ord. No. 06-02 § 3; Ord. No.
2015-13]
Comprehensive Land Management Code $35 per copy
Master Plan $35 per copy
Zoning Permit - Residential $30
Zoning Permit - Commercial $60
Site Plain Waiver Fee $50
Highlands Area Exemptions: Applicants for a municipal exemption shall pay
the following fees and escrow charges:
Highlands Exemption Determination Fee (without a
zoning permit)
$50
Highlands Exemption Determination Fee (with a
zoning permit)
$100
3. Request for extension of preliminary or final site plan or
subdivision approval - $500.
4. Request to Planning Board for zone change - $500.
h. Upon submission of a lot line adjustment (minor subdivision): Review
inspection escrow: $750.
i. Minor subdivision, including lot line adjustment, two or three lots;
Review inspection escrow: $1,200, plus $25 per lot for minor
subdivision other than lot line adjustment.
j. Upon submission of preliminary major subdivision: Review inspection
escrow: $2,500, plus $50 per lot.
k. Upon submission of final plat: Review inspection escrow: $2,000, plus
$50 per lot.
l. Preliminary - $500 plus $25 per 1,000 square feet floor area plus $10
per 1,000 square feet site disturbance. Final, if submitted separately -
1/2 of preliminary.
m. Applications involving residential properties, escrow fee - $500.
n. Applications involving commercial properties - $500.
o. Subdivision amendment: Application fee: $500: Review inspection
escrow: $1,200.
p. Site Plan Amendment: Application fee: $500: Review inspection escrow:
$1,200.
§ 18-8.1 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-8.2
A:411
Highlands Exemption Determination Escrow Deposit
for Professional Review (if needed)
$750
§ 18-8.3. Professional Personnel or Professional Services. [Ord. No.
01-24 § 2]
The term "professional personnel" or "professional services," as used
herein, shall include the services of a duly licensed engineer, surveyor,
planner, attorney, realtor, appraiser or other expert who would provide
professional services or advise to insure an application complies with the
standards set forth in this chapter and other experts whose testimony
is in an area testified to be any of the applicant's experts. "Professional
personnel" shall include personnel retained by the Township pursuant to
a professional services contract, as well as Township employees (i.e.,
personnel whose services are provided by a Township employee). The
charge shall not exceed 200% of the sum of the products resulting from
multiplying (1) the hourly base salary, which is established annually by
ordinance, of each of the professionals by (2) the number of hours spent by
the respective professionals upon review of the application or inspection of
the developer's improvements.
§ 18-8.4. Residential Development Fees for Low and Moderate
Income Housing. [Ord. No. 12-9-97 §§ I — X; Ord. No. 958 §§ 1, 2;
Ord. No. 05-05 § 1; Ord. No. 08-03 § 1; Ord. No. 08-08 § 1]
a. Purpose. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121
N.J. 550(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that
mandatory development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of
1985, N.J.S.A. 52:270-301 et seq., and the State Constitution subject to
Council on Affordable Housing developing rules. The purpose of this
subsection is to establish standards for the collection, maintenance and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's rules. Fees
collected pursuant to this subsection shall be used for the sole purpose
of providing low and moderate income housing. This subsection shall be
interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees.
b. Residential Development Fees. Residential development in the
Township of Sparta that includes less than four residential lots and/or
dwelling units shall pay a development fee of 1 1/2% of the equalized
assessed value of any eligible residential activity. The term developer
shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development including the
holder of an option to contract or purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land. Teardowns and
reconstruction of previously existing dwellings are subject to the
requirements of this section except existing housing units
reconstructed after being destroyed by a catastrophic event such as
fire, flood or other natural disaster.
c. Eligible Exaction, Ineligible Exaction and Exemptions.
§ 18-8.2 SPARTA CODE § 18-8.4
A:412
1. Inclusionary developments providing the requirements set-aside of
low and moderate income units shall be exempt from paying
development fees.
2. Expansion of existing residential structures shall be exempt.
3. Developers that have received preliminary or final approval prior to
the effective date of this subsection16 shall be exempt from paying a
development fee unless the developer seeks a substantial change in
the approval, or the plan is abandoned, approval lapses, or the
period of protection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52 expires without
extension.
4. Developers of any church, school, governmental facility, or public
utility shall be exempt from paying a development fee.
5. Developers of nonresidential development are exempt as to not
limit economic growth in appropriately zoned areas.
d. Collection of Fees.
1. Developers shall pay 50% of the calculated development fee to the
Township of Sparta at the issuance of building permits. The
developer shall submit to the Housing Officer an estimate of the
assessed value of the new construction and lot to be verified if
required by the Tax Assessor.
2. Developers shall pay the remaining fee to the Township of Sparta at
the issuance of certificates of occupancy. At the issuance of
certificates of occupancy, the Tax Assessor shall calculate the
equalized assessed value and the appropriate development fee. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference between
the fee calculated at certificate of occupancy and the amount paid
at building permit.
e. Housing Trust Fund.
1. There is hereby created an interest bearing Housing Trust Fund in
the name of Sparta Township for the purpose of receiving
development fees from residential developers. All development fees
paid by developers pursuant to this subsection shall be deposited in
this fund. No money shall be expended from the Housing Trust
Fund unless the expenditure conforms to a spending plan approved
by COAH.
2. If COAH determines that the Township of Sparta is not in
conformance with COAH's rules on development fees, COAH is
authorized to direct the manner in which all development fees
collected pursuant to this subsection shall be expended. Such
authorization is pursuant to this subsection; COAH's rules on
16.Editor's Note: This subsection was adopted by ordinance adopted 12-9-97.
§ 18-8.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-8.4
A:413
development fees; and the written authorization from the
Governing Body.
f. Use of Funds.
1. Money deposited in the Housing Trust Fund may be used for any
activity approved by COAH for addressing the Township of Sparta's
low and moderate income housing obligation. Such activities may
include, but are not necessarily limited to: housing rehabilitation,
new construction, regional contribution agreements, the purchase
of land for low and moderate income housing sites; assistance
designed to render units to be more affordable to low and moderate
income people, and administrative costs necessary to implement
the Township's housing element. The expenditure of all money shall
conform to a spending plan approved by COAH.
2. No more than 20% of the revenues shall be expended on
administrative costs necessary to develop, revise, or implement the
housing plan element of the Township Master Plan. Examples of
eligible administrative activities include personnel; consultant
services; space costs; consumable supplies; and rental or purchase
of equipment.
3. Development fees shall not be expended to reimburse the Township
of Sparta for housing activities that preceded substantive
certification.
g. Monitoring. The Township shall complete and return to COAH all
monitoring forms related to the collection of development fees,
expenditures of revenues and implementation of the spending plan
certified by COAH. Quarterly financial reports and annual program
implementation and auditing reports shall be completed by the
Township on forms designed by COAH.
h. Penalties.
1. In the event that any of the conditions set forth below occur, COAH
shall be authorized, on behalf of the Township, to direct the manner
in which all development fees collected pursuant to this subsection
shall be expended. Should any such condition occur, such revenues
shall immediately become available for expenditure at the direction
of COAH upon the Township Clerk's receipt of written notification
from COAH that such a condition has occurred. In furtherance of
the foregoing, the Township shall, in establishing a bank account
pursuant to Subsection e of this subsection, ensure that the
Township has provided whatever express written authorization
which may be required by the bank to permit COAH to direct
disbursement of such revenues from the account following the
delivery to the bank of the aforementioned written notification
provided by COAH to the Township Clerk.
§ 18-8.4 SPARTA CODE § 18-8.4
A:414
§ 18-8.5. Incentive Zoning and Mandatory Set-Asides. [Ord. No.
08-03 § 1; Ord. No. 08-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-20 § 3]
2. Occurrence of the following may result in COAH taking an action
pursuant to Subsection h1 above.
(a) Failure to submit a spending plan within the time limits
imposed by COAH;
(b) Failure to meet deadlines for information required by COAH in
its review of this subsection, the Township's housing element
or spending plan;
(c) Failure to address COAH's conditions for approval of a plan to
spend development fees within the deadlines imposed by
COAH;
(d) Failure to address COAH's condition for substantive
certification within the deadlines imposed by COAH;
(e) Failure to submit accurate monitoring reports within the time
limits imposed by COAH;
(f) Failure to implement the spending plan for development fees
within the time limits imposed by COAH, or within reasonable
extensions granted by COAH;
(g) Expenditure of development fees on activities not permitted by
COAH;
(h) Revocation of the Township's substantive certification;
(i) Other good cause demonstrating that the revenues are not
being used for the intended purpose.
i. Expiration of Subsection. This subsection shall expire if:
1. COAH dismisses or denies Sparta's petition for substantive
certification.
2. COAH revokes substantive certification or its certificate of this
subsection.
3. Substantive certification expires prior to Sparta's filing an adopted
housing element with COAH, petitioning for substantive
certification or receiving COAH's approval of this subsection.
j. Effective Date. This subsection shall take effect after publication and
passage according to law.
a. Applicability. The requirements contained in this subsection shall be
applied in Sparta Township to all residential construction in all zones,
mixed use residential and nonresidential construction, in the TCC Town
Center Commercial Zone, TCPB Town Center Professional Business
§ 18-8.4 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-8.5
A:415
Zone, TCCO Town Center Commercial Office Zone, TCLC Town Center
Limited Commercial Zone, C-2 Commercial Office and Service Zone,
R-4, and C-1 Community Commercial Zone and all nonresidential zones
and developments.
Responsibility for constructing affordable housing units shall be as
provided for under this subsection. Developers that have received
preliminary or final approval(s) prior to March 8, 2008 shall be exempt
from complying with the provisions of this subsection, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in approval, or the plan is
abandoned, approval lapses, or the period of protection pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52 expires without extension. The triggering
mechanism for incentive zoning and mandatory set-aside responsibility
shall be the issuance of a building permit for new construction issued
after adoption of this subsection.17
b. Affordable Units Required for Residential Developments. Except for
residential "inclusionary" developments which are otherwise required
to have a set-aside of "very low," "low" and "moderate" income units as
set forth in Subsection 18-4.2, any applicant for a residential
development in Sparta Township that includes four or more residential
lots and/or dwelling units shall be required to provide the number of
affordable housing units equivalent to 20% of the total number of
market rate units (15% if rental affordable are committed) which will
result from the proposed development, with any decimal amount
rounded to the next highest whole number.
As incentives to internally subsidize the required affordable housing
units, a developer may utilize the following incentives.
1. For residential developments constructing the incentive zoning
affordable housing units on site, the developer may build one
additional market-rate unit for each affordable unit constructed on
site. The affordable units may be built on a lot of 1/2 or more acres
in size, and may be single-family, duplex, triplex or quadraplex
units. The density increases granted to allow the incentive one
market-rate unit per affordable unit(s), the affordable units, and
the alternate structure and use type for affordable units shall not
require a "c" or "d" variance.
2. For residential developments that make payments to the Township
of Sparta in lieu of constructing affordable units, the developer may
build up to 1/2 of a market-rate unit for each full contribution
toward an affordable unit's costs. The affordable units may be built
on a lot of 1/2 or more acres in size, and may be single-family
duplex, triplex or quadraplex units. The density increases granted
to allow the incentive 1/2 market-rate unit per affordable unit, the
17.Editor's Note: Subsection 18-8.5 was amended in entirety by Ordinance No. 2016-20,
adopted December 13, 2016.
§ 18-8.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-8.5
A:416
affordable unit(s), and the alternate structure and use type for
affordable units shall not require a "c" or "d" variance.
c. Affordable Unit Optional Incentives for Nonresidential and Mixed Use
(Residential and Commercial) Developments. At the option of the
applicant for development, nonresidential or mixed use (residential and
commercial) development shall be permitted in Sparta Township in
zones that permit commercial and mixes uses. An applicant for a
nonresidential or mixed use (residential and commercial) development
in Sparta Township that elects these optional incentives shall provide
an affordable unit on site or off site in Sparta Township for each 5,000
square feet of additional commercial square footage.
As incentives to internally subsidize the required affordable housing
units in nonresidential and mixed use developments, developers shall
be permitted to include a 10% additional impervious coverage amount
over and above the permitted impervious coverage in any commercial
or mixed use site plan. As a second incentive such developers shall
be permitted to construct affordable residential units above or beside
retail, office and mixed uses. As a third incentive to nonresidential
developers that construct affordable housing on site, they shall be
permitted to demonstrate shared parking for mixed use building
projects and reduce the parking requirements for the affordable
housing portion of the project by 50%.
d. "Very Low," "Low" and "Moderate" Income Split. 50% of the affordable
housing units required to be produced in accordance with Subsections
b and c hereinabove shall be available to "very low" and "low" income
households and 50% shall be available to "moderate" income
households, provided that any single remaining unit shall be available
to a "low" income household. 13% of the total affordable housing units
shall be affordable to "very low income" households.
e. Compliance with COAH and UHAC Rules and this Ordinance. All
affordable housing units shall fully comply with all applicable
"Substantive Rules" and policies of COAH and UHAC and this
Ordinance No. 2016-20 including, but not limited to, bedroom
distribution, controls on affordability, household income qualification
and eligibility, range of affordability, affirmative marketing and the
construction phasing of the market-rate versus the affordable housing
units. 13% of the total affordable housing units shall be affordable to
"very low income" households.
f. Payments in Lieu. For residential development which proposes more
than four residential units, the developer shall be required to provide
on-site production of affordable housing, and for any fractional or
partial obligation remaining after the production of the mandated
affordable housing units, shall pay the pro rata contribution for each
new housing unit in an amount agreed to by the applicant and the
Township of Sparta.
§ 18-8.5 FEE SCHEDULE § 18-8.5
A:417
g. Alternative Methods of Compliance. Except for major subdivision or site
plan approvals involving four or more units or 10,000 square feet of
commercial space pursuant to the optional incentives authorized in
Subsection c above, and further provided the developer obtains
advanced written permission from the Sparta Township Council, the
developer may choose to satisfy its affordable housing obligation
calculated in accordance with Subsections 2 and 3, in compliance with
one or more of the following alternatives as permitted by COAH's
"Substantive Rules" as set forth below:
1. On-site production affordable housing units;
2. The purchase of an existing market rate dwelling unit within the
municipality and its conversion to an affordably priced and
affordably deed-restricted unit;
3. The purchase of an existing market rate dwelling unit within the
municipality and its conversion to a "supportive and special needs
housing" facility (i.e., group home); and/or
4. Participation in gut rehabilitation and/or buy down/write down or
buy-down/rent down programs; and/or
5. Payment in accordance with Subsection f.
Developers shall obtain written permission from the Township Council
endorsing the developer's plan for satisfying the affordable housing
obligation created by the proposed development which shall be submitted
to the Township Planning Board or Zoning Board at the time the application
for development is submitted for review and approval and shall be
considered a condition for the application being determined "complete."
h. Other Design Considerations.
1. More than one affordable unit may be on a building lot. Affordable
single-family, duplex, triplex and quadraplex structures are hereby
permitted in Sparta Township.
2. The affordable housing structures shall be consistent in size and
architectural features with the neighborhood or as approved by the
Township Planning Board and/or Zoning Board.
3. Septic systems for the affordable housing units on the same lot
(other than in the Sparta Town Center, which shall be connected to
the sewer system) may only share the leach field and shall be
maintained with an annual maintenance fee from each unit. Each
owner shall maintain other septic system components. Any septic
system arrangement under this provision is subject to the Board of
Health approval.
4. Affordable housing must comply with the accessibility and
adaptability requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:94-3.14.
§ 18-8.5 SPARTA CODE § 18-8.5
A:418
Chapter LMDL
LAND MANAGEMENT DISPOSITION LIST
§ LMDL-1. ORDINANCE LIST, COMPREHENSIVE LAND
MANAGEMENT.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Title
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
11-05
5-24-2011 7
Ord. No.
11-19
1-24-2012 8
i. Construction of Affordable Units. Residential units shall be constructed
on a schedule in accordance with the COAH regulations:
Percentage of Market Rate
Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Very
Low, Low and Moderate
Income Units Completed
25 0
25 plus 1 unit 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
Nonresidential development shall be constructed based upon the same
percentages above by substituting nonresidential development for
market rate units.
j. Housing Permitted. Incentive zoning affordable housing is a permitted
use in every residential and nonresidential zoning district to the extent
that production of affordable housing units is mandated or allowed by
this subsection.
k. Appeals. Developers subject to this inclusionary incentive zoning and
mandatory set asides ordinance may appeal to the reviewing Board
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-c(1) hardship standards to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Board that the increased density or intensity and/
or reduced costs do not provide an appropriate level of compensation
commensurate with the amount of affordable housing required. The
reviewing Board may grant relief including, but not limited to,
additional incentives or reductions in the affordable units required or
any combination thereof deemed appropriate by the Board to eliminate
the "hardship" and provide sufficient incentives.
§ 18-8.5 FEE SCHEDULE § LMDL-1
A:419
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Title
Supp.
No.
Ord. No.
12-01
3-15-2012 8
Ord. No.
12-02
3-15-2012 8
Ord. No.
12-04
4-10-2012 8
Ord. No.
13-03
5-14-2013 9
Ord. No.
13-04
5-14-2013 9
Ord. No.
13-13
11-12-2013 10
Volume II, Comprehensive Land Management Code (Chapter
18) is now current through August 11, 2015.
11
2015-12 10-27-2015 Amends Ch. 18, Comprehensive
Land Management; creates
18-3.4k, Highlands Preservation
Area Checklists and Procedures
12
2015-13 10-27-2015 Amends Ch. 18, Comprehensive
Land Management; creates
18-3.4l, Highlands Area
Exemption Ordinance, adopts
Highlands Preservation Area
Map, Appendix A, Appendix B;
amends 18-8.2 Assorted Fees;
amends Code Appendix A Fees,
A-18.2
12
2016-09 4-12-2016 Amends Ch. 18, amends
Comprehensive Land
Management; amends 18-4.2q.2.
Affordable Housing Provisions,
Violations and Penalties
12
§ LMDL-1 SPARTA CODE § LMDL-1
A:420
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Title
Supp.
No.
2016-19 12-13-2016 Amends Ch. 5 Animal Control;
5-2.3, 5-2.8, 5-12.8, 5-20.4;
Amends Ch. 11 Health
Regulations; 11-2.7 Fees, adds
Farmer's Market License;
Amends Ch. 12 Building and
Housing; 12-1.3 Construction
Code Fees; Amends Ch. 16 Fire
Protection and Prevention,
16-1.8, 16-1.9 Fees; Amends Ch.
18, Comprehensive Land
Management, 18-8.1 Land Use
Fees; Appendix A Fees, A-5.1,
A-5.2, A-5.3, A-11.1, A-12.1,
A-16.1, A-18.1
12
2016-20 12-13-2016 Amends Ch. 18 Comprehensive
Land Management, amends
18-4.2q.1. Affordable Housing
Provisions; amends 18-4.33
Town Center Commercial and
Age-Restricted Housing
(TCCAH), amends 18-8.5 Growth
Share revised to Incentive
Zoning and Mandatory Set-Aside
12
2016-21 12-13-2016 Amends Ch. 18 Comprehensive
Land Management, amends 18-2
Definitions; 18-4.8a. Districts to
add Town Center Main Street
Business Zone (TCMSB); 18-4.8b
Zoning Map to refer to zone map
dated December 2016; 18-4.24
Town Center Commercial Zone;
adds 18-4.37 Town Center Main
Street Business Zone (TCMSB)
12
2018-12 4-25-2018 Amends Ch. 18 Comprehensive
Land Use; Adds Planned
Commercial Economic
Development (PCED Zone;
18-4.8 Boundaries of Districts;
Zoning Map; Schedule;
Interpretation; adds 18-4.31 A
Planned Commercial Economic
Development (PCED) Zone
13
§ LMDL-1 FEE SCHEDULE § LMDL-1
A:421
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Disposition
Supp.
No.
19-17 10-22-2019 Design Standards, Amendment
(§ 18-5.3)
14
19-19 11-12-2019 Town Center Commercial Zone
(TCC) Amendment (§ 18-4.24)
14
19-20 11-12-2019 General Provisions Amendment
(§ 18-4.2)
14
§ LMDL-1 SPARTA CODE § LMDL-1
A:422